       Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Roadmap - 2014
                                                                               89023 v1




Government of Karnataka - Public Financial
 Management Reform Action Plan - 2014




FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT UNIT - INDIA COUNTRY OFFICE - THE WORLD BANK
                                       May 1, 2014
                       Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


                                                                     CONTENTS

Structure of the Report...................................................................................................................................3
Executive Summary ......................................................................................................................................5
Chapter 1:           Background, Scope and Methodology.................................................................................. 18
Chapter 2:           Overview of State Finances.................................................................................................. 22
Chapter 3:           Accomplishments of 2004 Public Financial Management and Accountability Action Plan .. 27
Chapter 4:           Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014 ..................................................................... 34
Chapter 5:           Way Forward ...................................................................................................................... 43
Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014 .................................................................................. 45
Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status ................................................ 55




                                                                                                             | Structure of the Report        2
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014



                                      STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT
1.   The Main Report comprises the following chapters:
        a. Executive Summary provides the overall view of the reform action plan.
        b. Chapter 1 outlines the background, scope and methodology for the study
        c. Chapter 2 outlines the overview of the state finances
        d. Chapter 3 describe the accomplishments made against the 2004 agreed PFMA action plan
        e. Chapter 4 provides an overview of the analysis, gaps and recommendations made in the study
        f. Chapter 5 describes the way forward for implementation of the action plan.
        g. Annex 1: PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014 contains a thematic-wise plan outlining the actions to be
           taken, the responsible department for the actions, and the expected timeframe for completing the
           actions. The detailed analysis of the issues and the logic for the action plan are provided in the
           respective sections of the Appendix.
        h. Annex 2: 2004 PFMA Action Plan - outlines the current status of action taken on 2004 PFMA Action
           Plan: This contains the action plan as proposed in the 2004 report, updated with the current status of
           actions in the identified areas. In case where the actions have been taken and completed by the
           Government of Karnataka, the impact has been documented.

2. The appendix comprises the following sections:
      a. Section 1: Theme One: Strengthening PFM Legal And Institutional Framework
      b. Section 2: Theme Two : Enhancing Comprehensiveness and Credibility of the Budget
      c. Section 3: Theme Three: Strengthening Accounting, Reporting, Controls, and Transparency
      d. Section 4: Theme Four: Improving Fiscal Assets and Liability Management System
      e. Section 5: Theme Five: Strengthening Audit and Legislative Oversight
      f. Section 6: Theme Six: Improving PFM in Local Self Governments
      g. Section 7: Theme Six: Improving PFM in Public Sector Undertakings (State Owned)
          Each section describes the various areas of public financial management in the Government of
          Karnataka grouped into thematic reform areas. Each proposed reform area has a discussion of the
          background, the reform actions proposed in the 2004 PFMA Action Plan, the progress of reforms
          over the last decade, the issues presently identified, and the rationale for the reform actions proposed.
      h. Section 8: 2014 Action plan: This section describes the action plan with next steps to be followed
          under each activity of the action plan.




                                                                                 | Structure of the Report   3
              Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


ACRONYMS
AG      Accountant General (Accounts and Entitlement)   KFC      Karnataka Financial Code
(A&E)
ALMC    Asset Liability Management Cell                 KFRA     Karnataka Fiscal Responsibility Act
AMS     Audit Monitoring System                         KII      Khajane II
C&AG    Comptroller and Auditor General (India's        KIPA     Karnataka Institute of Public Auditors
        Supreme Audit Institution)
CCO     Chief Controlling Officer                       KLAC     Karnataka Legislative Assembly Council
CoLB    Committee on Local Bodies and Panchayati Raj    KSAD     Karnataka State Accounts Department
        Institutions
CoPA    Committee on Public Accounts                    KTTP     Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement
                                                                 Act
CSS     Centrally sponsored schemes                     LFAFRA   Local Fund Authorities Fiscal Responsibility
                                                                 Act
CTD     Commercial Taxes Department                     MIS      Management Information Systems
                                                        MPAS     Model Panchayat Accounting System
DCB     Demand Collection Balance                       MTFP     Medium Term Fiscal Plan
DDO     Drawing and Disbursing Office                   NLTA     Non-Lending Technical Assistance
DMA     Directorate of Municipal Administration         OBB      Off Budget Borrowings
DoFP    Delegation of Financial Powers                  PAC      Public Accounts Committee
DPAR    Department of Personnel & Administrative        PEFA     Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
        Reforms
DPE     Department of Public Enterprises                PMS      Project Management Software
DOT     Directorate of Treasuries                       PRI      Panchayat Raj Institutions (Rural Local
                                                                 Governments)
DRSC    Departmentally Related Standing Committees      PSU      Public Sector Undertakings
DMTFP   Departmental Medium Term Fiscal Plan            PWD      Public Works Department
DSA     Debt Sustainability Analysis                    RBI      Reserve Bank of India
EIU     Economic Intelligence Unit                      RDPR     Department of Rural Development and
                                                                 Panchayati Raj
FD      Finance Department of GOK                       RE       Revised estimates
FMRC    Fiscal Management Review Committee              SOE      State Owned Enterprises
FY      Financial Year                                  PFMA     State Finance Accountability Assessment
GoI     Government of India                             SPV      Special Purpose Vehicles
GOK     Government of Karnataka                         TP       Taluk Panchayats (Block level Rural Local
                                                                 Government)
GP      Gram Panchayats (Village-level Rural Local      UC       Utilization Certificates
        Government)
HRMS    Human Resource Management System                UDD      Urban Development Department
IFA     Internal financial advisors                     ULB      Urban Local Bodies (Urban Local Governments)
IFMIS   Integrated Financial Management Information     WRD      Water Resources Department
        System
IGAS    Indian Government Accounting Standards          ZP       Zilla Panchayats (District-level Rural Local
                                                                 Government)
KBM     Karnataka Budget Manual




                                                                             | Structure of the Report    4
                     Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014



                                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
BACKGROUND


1.       The Government of Karnataka (GOK) is a reform-oriented state and proactive in undertaking
several initiatives to improve governance, accountability, and transparency through a mix of reforms in
administration, service delivery, and public financial management (PFM). GOK has implemented various
reforms like Sakala (Karnataka Guarantee of Services to Citizen Act 2011) for ensuring timely service delivery to
citizens; has adopted a results framework as a tool to measure the outcomes of the funds used by the State; has
implemented the Karnataka Fiscal Responsibility Act (KFRA) 2003 for fiscal consolidation and better fiscal
management; and has ushered in transparency in procurement through implementation of the Karnataka
Transparency in Public Procurement Act, 1999 and e-procurement system across the state. GOK has carried out e-
governance initiatives in Commercial Taxes, Excise, Stamps and Registrations, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), and
Gram Panchayats (GPs) besides automating the Treasury and human resource functions to provide faster and
hassle-free service to the end users and also to strengthen PFM systems. The objectives of the above reforms and
e-governance initiatives are not only to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery to the
citizens, but also to increase transparency in the process, reduce paperwork and time taken for responses, and to
eliminate discretionary actions that can be carried out in a manual environment. The reforms undertaken by GOK
have been recognized at various fora for their effectiveness in improving service delivery.

2.       GOK has been carrying out fiscal reforms and PFM modernization since 2001, which is one of the
strategic core elements of the overall GOK reform strategy1 — to improve transparency and service delivery in
the state. The action plan 2 developed as part of the Public Financial Management and Accountability Study
(Karnataka, February 2004),3 carried out by the World Bank in active collaboration with GOK, provided the
necessary impetus for GOK to initiate PFM reforms. While GOK carried out reforms in many of the strategic
areas highlighted in the 2004 study, there are areas in which significant challenges remain unaddressed.

3.        GoK intends to address these challenges and further strengthen the PFM systems and enhance the
accountability mechanism in the State. To achieve this objective several reforms are underway such as : (a)
development and roll out of an upgraded Integrated Financial Management Information System across the state
(Khazane II); (b) implementing an e-payment system to ensure quick and transparent disbursements; (c)
upgrading its human resource management system; (d) strengthening financial reporting to make them real time
and support decision making; (e) computerizing pension payment systems; (f) strengthening the State Accounts
Department; (g) strengthening Internal Financial Advisor system; and (h) providing training and capacity building
to all finance and accounts officers of the State. In this context, the GoK requested the Bank’s support to prepare
a holistic PFM Reform Action Plan which it can implement in the medium term. Bank agreed to support this
initiative through non-lending technical assistance (NLTA). The Bank along with the GOK took stock of the 2004
reform action plan and developed a PFM reform action plan, taking into account the various actions and
initiatives currently under implementation. The output of the NLTA is the PFM Reform Action plan 2014.

1
  Karnataka State Planning Board, Karnataka: A Vision for Development , December 2008.
2
  Action Plan to Improve Public Financial Management and Accountability assessed the nature and degree of PFM risk, and the key
actions to be taken to mitigate such risks.
3
  This study examined Karnataka’s PFM system and covered the following key areas: (a) budget development, budget execution and
monitoring; (b) fiscal transparency; (c) accounting; (d) financial reporting; (e) internal controls; and (f) external controls including
auditing and legislative oversight.

                                                                                                        | Executive Summary        5
                    Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014




OVERVIEW OF STATE FINANCES

4.      The GOK state finances have experienced a noticeable improvement since introduction of the
Karnataka Fiscal Responsibility Act (KFRA). The KFRA has set fiscal targets (numerical rules) which have
been achieved by GOK within the stipulated time frame and continues to maintain these targets over the years
(Table 1).
                      Table 1: Numerical Rules in Karnataka Fiscal Responsibility Act and status of compliance

Numerical                              Target/Limit                                                      Remarks
  Rule
 Deficit        Revenue Deficit4 to be nil by 2006                              Revenue surplus achieved since 2004/05
  Rules         Reduce Fiscal Deficit5 to be no more than 3 percent of          Fiscal Deficit maintained below 3 percent except
                GSDP                                                            during 2009/10 (with legislative approval), but
                                                                                reverted back to less than 3 percent in 2010/116
Debt Rules      Guarantees not to exceed 80 percent of Revenue                  Limit achieved since 2000
                Receipts of second previous year
                Reduce Total Liabilities7 as a percentage of GSDP and           Achieved since 2010/11
                bring it to no more than 25 percent of GSDP by 2015

5.      In the recent past, the state government has improved its capabilities of estimation of expenditure and
revenue, and the revenue and expenditure outturns have improved over the years. The variance has been less than
5 percent in two years on the expenditure side and less than 10 percent on the revenue side (Table 2).
                                               Table 2: Expenditure and Revenue out-turns

Particulars/Year                                                                             2012-13          2011-12          2010-11
Actual Expenditure Deviation (as a percent of budget estimates)                                   93.7%           101.5%           104.1%
Actual Revenue (Tax revenue and non-tax revenue) as a percent of budget                            105%             106%             107%
estimates

6.       GOK’s fiscal position is largely influenced by the revenue side as two-thirds of the state’s revenue is from
own sources. Simplification and rationalization of tax structure, along with simplification of process of filing tax
returns and extensive use of technology, has ensured effective mobilization of resources from various taxes,
which have helped GOK to maintain a better fiscal position. Though tax revenues have been consistently
growing, GOK has not improved revenues on the non-tax front, which continues to decline. The state’s Fiscal
Management Reform Committee has recognized this issue and suggested departments to be more proactive in
identifying and collecting their non-tax revenue.




4
  Defined as difference between revenue expenditure and revenue receipts
5
  Defined as total disbursements from the Consolidated Fund (excluding debt repayment) over total receipts into the Consolidated Fund
(excluding debt receipts)
6
  The Legislature permitted the numerical rule in respect of fiscal deficit to be exceeded during three consecutive years 2008/09 to 2010/11
following amendments made to the KFRA. However, GoK actually exceeded the statutory rule only in one year 2009/10
7
  Defined as the sum of liabilities under the Consolidated Fund and the Public Account of the state

                                                                                                      | Executive Summary        6
                    Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


7.       In terms of expenditure, generally the revenue expenditure has been below the revenue receipts
leading to revenue surplus, which was used as one of the sources to fund capital expenditure. Over the years,
revenue expenditure has been increasing mainly due to subsidies, which reduced the revenue surplus, and affected
the outlay available for capital expenditure. Subsidies have increased from Rs.3,399 crore in 2008-09 (8 percent
of the revenue receipts) to Rs.16,661 crore, which is 18 percent of the revenue receipts in the 2013-14 (revised
estimate). The revenue surplus for the corresponding period declined from Rs.1,635 crore (which is 3.8 percent of
revenue receipts) in 2008-09 to Rs.64 crore in 2013-14 (revised estimate), which is 0.1 percent of the revenue
receipts. With the increasing coverage of subsidies, there are demands beyond the provisions made in the budget;
most often these have to be
accommodated through supplementary                      Subsidies, Revenue surplus and Fiscal Deficit
estimates. GOK’s Medium-Term Fiscal
                                              20,000
Plan (MTFP) 2014/18 recognizes that
the challenge lies in ensuring that these     10,000
subsidies do not become a permanent
source of additional support and                   -
                                                        2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
thereby deter sectors from undertaking       (10,000)                                                     (RE)
reforms.     GOK acknowledges that
expenditure on subsidies needs to be         (20,000)
moderated in the medium-to-long term                  Explicit Subsidies   Revenue Surplus        Fiscal Deficit
to make them fiscally sustainable
through improving systemic efficiencies in sectors like energy, rationalize cross-subsidization of costs, providing
incentives to sectors to perform rather than increasing their dependence on subsidies, and also effective
identification and targeting of beneficiaries. 8Moreover, most of the revenue expenditure is in the nature of
committed revenue expenditure like salaries, pensions, interest, subsidies, etc., which affects the
maneuverability of the state to prioritize expenditure in this space. The state Fiscal Management Review
Committee has advised GOK to re-evaluate expenditure commitments as well as relook at the subsidies and work
on providing more target-based subsidy.

8.       GOK has to create fiscal space for public investment spending (capital expenditures) 9 through the
budgetary processes but within overall fiscal constraints which include - (a) budget envelope available after
meeting revenue expenditure; (b) limits to fiscal deficits mandated by the KFRA; and (c) restrictions on gross
public debt. Increasing revenue expenditure, reducing revenue surplus, and statutory limitations on borrowings
affects the fiscal outlay available to the GOK for carrying out capital expenditure. The Fiscal Management
Review Committee suggested that all approvals for new initiatives and works requiring implementation over
multiple years should be based on fiscal sustainability of the total expenditure and its overall impact on the fiscal
position of the state and that GOK should ideally move to medium-term (3 to 5 years) appraisal and approval
cycle for the schemes. Going forward, GOK needs to prioritize capital expenditure to achieve their fiscal targets
as well as manage their public investment funding more systematically by adopting the above suggested
approach.




8
  During 2013-14 (revised estimate), 94 percent of the receipts are expected to fund committed revenue expenditure and only 6 percent is
left for the GOK to fund other revenue expenditures.
9
  GOK Capital spending has been about 40% of total government spending, and as compared to other states is relatively higher

                                                                                                    | Executive Summary        7
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


ACCOMPLISHMENT OF 2004 ACTION PLAN

9.       A Public Financial Management and Accountability Assessment (PFMA) was carried out by the World
         Bank in active collaboration of the Government of Karnataka (GoK) in 2004. Drawing on the analysis
         and recommendations presented in the PFMA, GoK and the Bank jointly developed an Action Plan to
         improve PFMA (referred to as the 2004 PFMA Action Plan) to continue and deepen GOKs Public
         Financial Management (PFM) improvement program with the objective to improve PFM and
         Accountability for making government more effective, accountable and responsive ). The PFMA Action
         Plan was categorized into six strategic segments – Budget preparation and implementation, financial
         computerization and MIS, Accounting, Audit/PAC responsiveness and follow up, PFM in other Public
         Sector Agencies and Institutional Arrangements and Capacity Building – with several actions under each
         to achieve the objectives. The work done by GoK in terms of preparing the vision for the reforms, the
         strategy for planning and implementing the reforms is commendable. GoK accepted and addressed
         majority of the actions outlined in the action plan. The major areas of accomplishment which emanated
         from the 2004 report are summarized below:
        Improved fiscal discipline and budget outturns;
        Improved fiscal transparency in terms of availability of budget and other financial documents to public;
        Implemented Computerized Treasury across the State which improved the overall decision making and
         control environment on the budget, cash flow and treasury management leading to better cash
         management and reducing the short term loans by the State.
        Implemented e-governance initiatives in commercial taxes which have helped in improving revenue
         collections as well as to provide faster service to the users.
        Implemented Human Resource Management System (HRMS) which has helped in timely payment of
         salaries and better control over this expenditure
        Implemented e-procurement across the state which has improved competition as well as increased saving
         to the government;
        Improved timelines in completion of accounts and audit reports
        Improved recording and reporting of fiscal assets and liabilities of the government and
        Implemented Fund based computerized accounting system in ULBs and Double entry based computerized
         accrual accounting system in Gram Panchayats (GPs) to improve local self-governments maintenance of
         accounts and completion of audits.
        GoK has issued new cadre and recruitment rules for KSAD staff covering both entry-level qualifications
         and mandatory training for promotions which in the medium term will provide qualified staff at all levels
         and a training curriculum has been developed for accounting, financial and auditing training, currently
         under implementation.
        Liberalized delegation of financial powers for release of funds to prioritize the funds release and usage
        Phased out LOC payments and have made Treasury payments compulsory for all Departments

10.      GOK has been a pioneer in the area of PFM reforms and has been pushing the boundaries to the next level
in most of the PFM areas. GoK embraced reforms that included the 2004 PFMA Reform Action, as part of its
strategy to improve PFM and accountability and gradually introduced necessary changes in systems and
procedures to achieve its objective. They continue to improve PFM by strengthening their systems which includes
policies, process, and people and are embarking on upgrading its PFM computerized systems (such as Khajane
and HRMS) and GOK recognizes that still there are challenges in its pursuit for a strengthened PFM. These have

                                                                                   | Executive Summary   8
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


brought in significant changes, but this was not accompanied with a comprehensive review of the PFM and
accountability framework and its actual working to ascertain the current situation. An assessment of
implementation of the 2004 PFMA Reform Action Plan (ibid) indicates accomplishments in some areas while
calling for a need for further efforts in implementing reforms in others.. GoK, therefore, intends to build up an
updated reform action plan to further strengthen PFM and accountability. For this purpose, a detailed
understanding of the current PFM structures and the accompanying strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and
threats (SWOT) has been done as part of this study (description, findings and analysis are detailed in the
Appendix to this report). The assessment has been conducted at two levels: one, at the policy level and two, at the
implementation level. The SWOT analysis was used as the base line for developing a new PFM reform action
plan by GoK. The ongoing reforms, challenges, and opportunities have been duly recognized in the 2014 PFM
reform action plan which is outlined below.


SWOT ANALYSIS

11. The GOK PFM system presents both strength and weakness. The PFM framework can be examined at
two broad levels: one at the policy level and another at the implementation level. On the assessment of the
framework at both the levels, there are strengths and areas of improvement which are summarized below.

12. The PFM Framework in the state is guided by a set of acts, manuals, rules, and procedures
supplemented through Government Orders issued from time to time . These manuals and handbooks are
outdated; and with the imminent introduction of the modernized integrated financial management information
system (IFMIS), Khajane II (KII), all the manuals and codes, including certain acts, need to be aligned with the
revised business processes as planned in Khajane II. This is an opportune moment for GOK to update and revise
its financial manuals taking into account the requirements of the state.

13. Capacity constraints in the finance cadre of the state inhibit implementation of the PFM framework.
Internal Financial Advisors (IFA) were envisaged to play a major role in implementing the PFM framework in the
state and supporting the departments (particularly large spending departments) in carrying out PFM tasks –
however they are not being effectively utilized due to capacity constraints. The Karnataka State Accounts
Department (KSAD), which is a key PFM institutional pillar at the state level and supports state accounting
function to a large extent, is also affected with capacity constraints that influence the state’s overall PFM
implementation. KSAD, therefore, needs to be strengthened as part of the reform strategy for improving the PFM
framework. Recruitment of IFAs can preferably be from KSAD, and suitable officers have to be identified,
trained, and groomed for this purpose. An extensive human resource and skills mapping exercise in KSAD
should be carried out to identify skill gaps and develop strategy for enhancing competencies for taking up
challenging tasks; organizational structure of KSAD has to be reviewed particular in terms of staffing and skill
sets to carry out the accounts and audit function both timely and efficiently and staff to be identified and skilled to
carry out the functions of PFM practitioners in the Finance Department.

14. The well-established budget preparation and approval processes still need to be strengthened. GOK
presents the budget before the start of the year, but obtains approval on a Vote on Account for the first four
months; the full budget is passed well within the fiscal year. GOK should aim to pass the entire budget before the
beginning of the fiscal year as a good practice and to enhance predictability of availability of funds.


                                                                                      | Executive Summary    9
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


15. The budget outturn for revenue and expenditure has significantly improved over the years, but there
are substantial compositional variances and large savings in budget allocations due to significant
adjustments through supplementary budgets. There are multiple in-year adjustments by way of three
supplementary budgets and re-appropriation of significant amounts. Supplementary budgets are not “fiscally
neutral? as required by the KFRA; and commitments of significant amounts are included as a part of these
estimates, which affects the budget-execution process. Too many supplementary budgets could affect fiscal
discipline as over-reliance is placed on the supplementary budget rather than the original budget. GOK should aim
to reduce the number of supplementary estimates passed through the year to ideally one and also have enhanced
control over increasing re-appropriations. There is therefore a need to improve budget credibility in these areas.
Predictability in availability of funds has improved by way of enhanced delegation of powers in respect of
providing sanctions at the departmental level, and release of funds without repeated recourse to the finance
department with good success in improving pace of spending and some reduction in rush of expenditure at the
year end.

16. Budgeting could be further improved by a review of the manner in which provisions are made for
certain items such as salaries, capital commitments and public investment funding. GOK should move
toward providing budget only for filled posts and planned additional recruitment, which could release unnecessary
budget provision of around Rs.1,000 crore, which can be utilized to budget for other productive purposes in the
original budget itself thus avoiding in-year adjustments. GOK needs to have better control on the capital
commitments since internal control in this area is weak and leads to unfunded commitments and unpaid bills that
affect the fiscal situation of the state. Budget priority should be made for payment of arrears, then for completion
of ongoing works, and lastly for adding new works. During the past two years, the Public Works Department
(PWD) has accumulated more than Rs.1,000 crore (~US$200 million) of unpaid bills. Full provision for payment
arrears if made could adversely affect the fiscal indicators of GOK. Over-commitment without adequate budget
leads to arrears, which is not in line with the KFRA. PWD also required significant supplementary provisions,
about 40 percent of original budget estimates during 2010/11 and 2011/12 and 80 percent during 2012/13. GOK
needs to develop a strategy to clear the outstanding arrears of payment and control them in future through better
monitoring of commitments for capital works. In case of capital commitments, GOK needs to follow the
recommendation of Fiscal Management Review Committee for moving to medium-term (3 to 5 years) appraisal
and approval cycle for the schemes and prioritize capital expenditure based on fiscal sustainability of such
schemes. GOK needs to ensure that no new capital commitments or ad hoc arrears payments are proposed in the
supplementary budget, except in case of natural disasters; as such additions distort the fiscal management of the
state. It would be prudent if MTEF (rolling forecast) was introduced in PWD and a proper scheduling of works is
carried out to work out the budget requirements. Going forward, GOK has to link the budget process with the
procurement plans, monthly programme implementation calendar and also move towards performance based
budgeting/results based budgeting and align the budgeting process with the results framework document.

17. There exists appropriate controls on transaction-level expenditure, which are largely exercised. Most of
these controls are documented in the various manuals and handbooks, updated and supplemented through
Government Orders as required by the GOK from time to time, and also automated through the Treasury system.
The GOK accounting and reporting systems primarily revolve around the framework applicable nationally, and
automation of the Treasury function has strengthened the accounting, reporting, and control framework over the
years. Yet, there are weak areas such as reconciliation, compliance with controls, and accounting treatment that
need mitigation. While the details are available from treasury on a timely basis, reconciliation is not being timely.

                                                                                     | Executive Summary   10
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


These systemic issues are also highlighted in the audit findings that need to be followed up and addressed so that
the system in these areas can be improved. Accounting issues such as reversal of earlier year expenditure as well
as reversal of amounts from public deposit (to the consolidated fund) need to be addressed. The GOK in
consultation with Accountant General (AG) needs to develop the policy and procedures for such reversals.

18. The recent change in fund flow mechanism of centrally sponsored schemes through the state budget as
to various implementing agencies would require changes and strengthening to the state accounting and
reporting requirements. GOK needs to rework the fund flow arrangement with GOI and envisage using state
treasury system/public deposit accounts in place of the bank accounts being used by the implementing agencies
which would provide enhanced control and better cash management for the state.

19. GOK has implemented HRMS integrated services register and pay bill software which has improved
the payroll process and system in the state. GOK is now upgrading the Payroll system to HRMS II within the
next two years. GOK needs to ensure that data validation of all the records is completed and payroll audit is
carried out across the state, before the data is migrated to HRMS II. In case of procurement, GOK has
successfully implemented KTTP across the state as well as the e-procurement function has been rolled out in
more than 200 departments across the state. In case of e-procurement, though the functions have been automated
though there are issues in the underlying control mechanisms and data validation; these need to be addressed. The
key actions for strengthening e-procurement are (a) CAG IT audit of the e-procurement software and (b)
implementation of contract management module.

20. GOK is in an advanced stage of implementing an integrated financial management information system
Khajane II (KII). KII is planned to be implemented in two phases: phase 1 covering 12 core treasury modules, and
phase 2 covering functionalities of other departments. Piloting of the core treasury modules is expected to be
completed by September 2014, all modules are expected to go live from FY15 and rolled out across the state. Key
features include budget preparation through the system, electronic payments as a default mode, computerization
of the functions of the Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDO) and bill processing through the system, control
over works commitment and payment, accounting for other state owned entities which are not using treasury
systems and complete accounting hitherto done on the systems of the Accountant General. Of significant note, the
Accountant General is an internal stakeholder and will have access rights to KII. As a system KII is expected to
address several of the state’s current reconciliation and accounting issues. In case of way forward a data
migration strategy, change management strategy, HR strategy, training plan, and rollout plan has to be developed
and implemented by GOK. A GO outlining the timelines and the transition process has to be issued by GOK.
Uncoordinated development of various applications across departments using a fragmented approach has
proliferated, and there is a need to integrate these to K II so that these are mainstreamed and used for decision-
making process.

21. There are improvements in the asset and liability management by GOK with setting up of the dedicated
Asset Liability Management Cell (ALMC) for collecting, collating, and maintaining data on guarantees,
investments, and loans, and advances The ALMC, however, has staffing, capacity and data constraints that
affect its functions. Appointing core finance professionals or staff from Finance Department and training to
existing staff would strengthen this cell handling a significant portfolio. A stronger linkage with and more
frequent reporting to the Finance Department would ensure that issues are discussed and resolved more
frequently. There are serious reconciliation and data integrity issues in investment in public companies and loans

                                                                                  | Executive Summary   11
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


and advances provided by GOK – an amount of Rs. 21,287 crore is yet to be reconciled between the records
maintained by the state and its agencies and the finance accounts published by the Accountant General. This
could affect the overall asset portfolio of the Government and needs to be resolved on a priority basis – a strategy
to address these could include: constituting dedicated teams for working on the reconciliation exercise, and
focusing on the “big ticket? items starting with the latest accounts and going back to earlier years. As a part of the
asset-liability management, GOK needs to setup a dedicated integrated office to for cash and debt management
functions of the state. The level of unencashed cheques have been increasing, and has reached Rs. 6,820 crore
(March 2013); accumulation of such cheques adversely impacts the adequacy of internal controls and is open for
potential misappropriation. GOK needs to review and clear the public account as well as work out a strategy to
address the issue of unencashed cheques.

22. Controls in the area of loans and advances are weak. This is characterized by loans made without
finalizing terms and conditions; further loans given despite default in repayment of old loans; and, in most cases,
the data on loans and advances are not readily available. A policy decision is needed for addressing loans to
government entities that have neither repaid the loans nor the interest on such loans and where the possibility of
recovery of such amounts is very limited due to the precarious financial situation of such entities. The GOK needs
to decide on a case-to-case basis if such loans should be allowed to exist in the books or should be converted
either into equity or grant.

23. The well-established system of external audit of the state’s accounts and local self-governments and
legislative scrutiny can be made more effective through enhanced responsiveness and compliance of audit
findings. External audit by the Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) is now more comprehensive and regular with a
good proportion of performance and IT audits. Reports are now also available on a timely basis - the audit report
for FY 2012/13 has been published and submitted to the Legislature by February 2014. On the other hand, the
audits for local bodies (ULBs and Gram Panchayats, the third tier of rural local bodies) are delayed due to,
capacity constraints of Karnataka State Accounts Department (KSAD) as well as non-submission of accounts by
GPs. The effectiveness of audit is undermined due to weak follow up on the audit reports and legislative
committee reports by the auditee who more often fail to provide responses on a timely manner. An Audit
Monitoring System has been established for the external audit reports of the SAI, but its use is limited taking into
consideration that it has only quantitative details; qualitative/systemic details are not captured; and data,
particularly with respect to action taken, are not regularly updated. GOK needs to strengthen the audit compliance
mechanism and also enhance the Audit Monitoring System to capture data for all audits and systematic data so as
to analyze and take actions on them. Going forward, GOK needs to work with State AG to facilitate them to carry
out audit of the state accounts through KII system and issue audit reports through the system.

24. Legislative scrutiny of audit reports has seen significant enhancement. External audit reports are tabled in
the state Legislature and are subject to scrutiny by the separate legislative committees on state accounts (including
departments), public sector entities and local bodies. The committees are well functioning and have adopted the
approach of taking up the latest reports first and simultaneously clearing the backlog of the department taken up
for hearings. Audit findings taken up for examination are selected on basis of materiality, contemporary relevance
and systemic issue. However, noncompliance to the recommendations by the departments undermines the
efficiency of this review process.




                                                                                     | Executive Summary    12
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


25. KSAD’s role as auditor needs to be strengthened to improve its efficiency and effectiveness. Audit
practices followed by KSAD are not modern and the audit institution suffers from staff capacity. KSAD should
implement modern audit practices including risk based audit, co-sourcing, along with implementation of the audit
software to improve the timeliness and quality of the audit. KSAD needs to be strengthened through continuous
training and capacity building measures to perform the role of auditor in a faster and efficient way. KSAD audit
capacity has to be augmented by recruiting staff, continuous training, IT implementation, and outsourcing in the
short run to address arrears of audit.

26. Internal audit mechanism in the state is highly dispersed, lacks leadership and its effectiveness is
virtually absent. The function is woefully short of staff (in particular skilled staff) and uses antiquated audit
techniques not conducive for audit in a highly automated environment in Karnataka. A ray of hope is the system
of IT and risk-based review mechanism instituted in the Commercial Tax Department as an example of “proxy
internal audit? - its principles could be replicated in other departments. There is, therefore, a need for a formal
modern Internal Audit system, at least in the high revenue-earning and high spending departments, to promote
effective internal controls contributing to improved level of compliance and better expenditure management.

27. Local Self Governments every year handle around Rs.22500 crores, making it imperative that these
institutions have strong PFM systems – but assessments often find gaps in PFM framework and
compliance. The respective legislation underlying these institutions and accompanying manuals define the PFM
environment. Significant efforts have been directed towards strengthening PFM in local self-governments
(particularly accounting reforms) for ULBs and GPs, and a similar strategy is needed for ZPs and TPs. Delayed
completion of audits; low revenue collection ratio; a not-so-strong system of internal controls, including internal
audit; and low capacity and shortage of finance staff are key areas that need immediate attention. Own source
revenue can be improved by encouraging e-payments and collection through banks to improve controls and
collection efficiency as well as preparing Demand Collection Balance and carrying out timely reconciliation.
Effective and adequate internal controls, including internal audit and timely audit compliance are areas that must
be part of an improvement agenda and these must be institutionalized in these organizations. While ULB’s have
up to date accounts, audits are pending due to capacity constraints of the auditors – KSAD which needs to be
addressed at the earliest. ZPs and TPs have up to date accounts as well as audits have been completed by the
CAG. GPs suffer from backlog of accounts and audits, though the situation can be controlled with concerted
effort, and the priority area therefore is clearance of backlog of accounts and audits for GPs. Accounting reforms
in local self-governments are underway, which needs to be completed and mainstreamed into the overall system.
GOK has to review the accounts and finance staffing in these institutions both in terms of staff numbers and skill
sets and has to develop a strategy for recruiting them.

28. State Owned Enterprises contribute to 7.2% of the GSDP and GOK investments in them are Rs.69,810
crores and the budgetary support for the FY 12-13 was Rs.15,059 crores. The SOEs handle substantial public
funds by way of share capital, loans and grants/subsidies besides the GoK providing guarantees for borrowings of
these SOEs. Hence, these SOEs should have a strong PFM system to account for and report on the use of public
funds but assessments often find gaps in PFM framework and compliance. While the scenario has improved in
comparison to 2004, the following issues are persistent: (a) delay in completion of accounts and audits; (b) lack of
effective internal audit; (c) lack of response to systemic audit issues and reconciliation problems; (d) non adoption
of a corporate governance framework; and (e) absence of a nodal office to monitor and support the SOEs. A
stronger corporate governance framework for government companies and corporations must be established - the

                                                                                     | Executive Summary   13
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


model code of corporate governance prescribed for central public sector undertakings could be adopted. Effective
and adequate internal controls, including internal audit and timely audit compliance are areas that must be part of
an improvement agenda and these must be institutionalized in these organizations. Another priority area is to have
a concentrated effort for clearance of backlog of accounts and audits which can be achieved within a short
timeframe with external technical assistance as well as consider accounting reforms for entities which are yet to
move to computerized accounting. Institutionalizing a stronger nodal agency would benefit the GOK to support
and monitor the SOEs.



PFM REFORM ACTION PLAN - 2014

29. The overall objective of the 2014 PFM Reform Action Plan is to improve and strengthen public
financial management so that it efficiently and effectively promotes accountability and transparency and
thereby improves service delivery. This Action Plan would support GOK to further accelerate reforms in the
PFM arena in order to improve and enhance transparency and accountability. The Reform Action Plan recognizes
the fact that Karnataka is not in the early stages of reform process but has over the past decade undertaken a range
of reforms.

30. The Action Plan revolves around a thematic approach. Six themes have been identified as priorities for
PFM reforms over the next five years. These themes and their elements relate to legal and institutional
framework, budgeting, accounting and reporting, management of financial assets and liabilities, auditing and
legislative oversight besides reforms in the government enterprises and local self-governments (Figure 1). All
these themes are interlinked and the benefits of change in one theme would support better performance in another
theme, leading to overall improvement in the PFM of the state.

                           Figure 1: Thematic Approach to PFM Reforms in Karnataka




                                                                                    | Executive Summary   14
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


31. Each reform area that is proposed has been discussed in the Analysis Report (Part II) . The Analysis
Report provides the background, the reform actions proposed in the 2004 Action Plan, the progress of reforms
over the last decade, the issues presently identified, and the rationale for the reform actions proposed. For the
purpose of comparison of the status of the various PFM areas, the status in GOK has been (broadly) benchmarked
against the good practices under the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment tool
and good practices followed by GOI and other Indian states. The Action Plan takes cognizance of the ongoing
reforms and, their linkages and dependencies with the proposed reform actions. For each reform area, the
priorities of the proposed action points and the responsible department/agency that will spearhead and implement
the reform/s have been suggested. It is also suggested that the reforms be mainstreamed with GOK’s own work
processes so as to ensure sustainability.

32. Client engagement and ownership: GoK constituted a high level committee headed by the Principal
Secretary (Finance) to oversee this study and has appointed nodal officer to support this activity. The counterpart
team was fully involved in the study and they supported the Bank team in all aspects of the study. Most of the
comments and suggestions from the study have emanated from various officers in GoK and the Bank team has
been acting a facilitator and sounding board to discuss and deliberate these suggestions and finalize them in as the
reform action plan.

    KEY ACTIONS

33. The detailed action plan is provided in the following section of this report. Some of the key actions proposed
for GOK are outlined below.

34. Short-term action. Immediate action to be completed within one year:
     Pass full budget before fiscal year and make budget provision for only filled posts;
     Carry out one time exercise to resolve reconciliation issues, clean public account, clear unencashed
       cheques, and reconcile investments, loans and advances, and debt;
     Develop a rollout plan for Khajane II, including data migration, change management, switchover to
       computerized accounting, and training plan;
     Develop strategy to clear unpaid bills;
     Move toward e-receipts/collection through banks for local self-governments;
     Clear the backlog of accounts and audits in various sectors;
     Develop disclosure guidelines for amounts devolved and utilized by the local self-governments.
     Initiate special audit in the area of loans and advances maintained by the department to review the
       controls and compliance mechanisms; and
     Develop guidelines for accounting and disclosing amounts received, transferred and spent on centrally
       sponsored schemes.


35. Medium-term actions to be completed within next three years:
     Enhance internal financial advisor, KSAD, and ALMC capacity through recruitment and training;
     Improve budget realism by reducing compositional variance and reducing number of supplementary
       budgets, including the quantum of additional budget sought;


                                                                                    | Executive Summary   15
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


       Review subsidies and introduce targeting of subsidies through mechanisms for specific identification of
        beneficiaries and a system of tracking and monitoring to provide fiduciary assurance;
       Move to medium-term appraisal and approval cycle for the schemes/capital works and prepare rolling
        forecast of the works for budgeting purpose;
       Develop and implement medium-term expenditure projections in large departments like Public Works
        Department.
       Implement Khajane II and carry out the switchover to computerized accounting across the state;
       Develop and implement contract management module across the state;
       Develop and implement a guarantee policy for the state;
       Set up a combined debt and cash management office for the state;
       Develop and institutionalize internal audit for high-spending departments to improve the quality of
        spending;
       Capacitate KSAD to provide internal financial advisor and PFM professionals in the future;
       Conduct study on corporate governance and consider application of the framework for state-owned
        enterprises; and
       Switchover to computerized accounting in urban local bodies and Gram Panchayats (village-level rural
        local government).

36. The GOK has already started taking action on some suggestions along with the progress of the study. A
couple of key actions already taken by GOK are:
     Disclosing additional information on the Finance Department Website;
     Withdrawing provision for unfilled posts in urban local bodies;
     Approved audit cell creation in DMA;
     Approved a central audit monitoring cell in KSAD;
     Reviewing the need for vacant post provisioning for the state; and
     Reviewing of fund flow differences in urban local bodies and Panchayat Raj Institutions..

    INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PFM REFORM ACTION P LAN

37. The next step would be to have stakeholder consultations to agree on the action plan, sequencing the reform,
and institutionalizing the Reform Action Plan.

38. The 2014 Action Plan needs to be approved by the GOK and included in the Medium-Term Fiscal Plan
of the Government. This will provide the necessary mandate for implementation and the instrument for
disseminating the Plan, as well as review of the implementation on an on-going basis.

39. A high-level committee needs to be formed at the level of Principal Secretary (Finance) so that reforms
can be reviewed on a regular basis and coordination across departments can be achieved. The prioritization
of the actions and the timelines needs to be reviewed on a holistic basis by GOK and the sequencing of reforms
needs to be worked out as most of the reforms are interlinked and benefits would accrue if related reforms are
addressed simultaneously. A quarterly progress report on the achievements made and challenges faced should be
presented to the committee for their monitoring and advice. Considering the magnitude of the reform actions, a



                                                                                 | Executive Summary   16
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


system of continuous monitoring is essential to ensure that the implementation goes as planned and course
corrections are identified, approved, and applied in a timely manner.

40. A dedicated 2014 Reform Action Management Cell needs to be constituted by the GOK to implement
these reforms. The cell would be headed by Principal Secretary (Finance) with his team of Secretary (B&R),
Secretary (Expenditure), and Secretary (FR) and secretaries from the respective Administrative departments. The
office of the Secretary (Fiscal Reforms) can be nominated to co-ordinate and follow up on agreed action points.
This office needs to be strengthened with adequate resources – human, financial, and IT as well as provided with
sufficient powers to monitor the reform.

41. The Finance Department needs to exercise strong leadership in implementing the PFM reform . This is
especially pertinent for activities relating to budget formulation and execution, accounting, financial reporting,
auditing, and internal controls. PFM reforms needs to be led by the Finance Department, but it involves all
departments like the Public Works Department (PWD), Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department
(RDPR), Urban Development Department (UDD), Water Resource Department (WRD), the Directorate of
Municipal Administration (DMA), and the Department of Public Enterprises Reform and Disinvestment (DPE).
All departments will need to cooperate for PFM modernization to happen. As a part of further actions, GOK can
consider institutional review of key departments (PWD, RDPR, WRD, and UDD) and support them in
strengthening their institutional framework, which would help improving the overall PFM framework of
the state to a large extent.

42. Once the report is accepted by the GOK, based on the requirements of the GOK, a technical assistance project
to support the dissemination and implementation can be developed. As a part of further dialogue, the possibility to
carry out assessments like PEFA review, Public Expenditure Review, and other detailed economic assessments
can be discussed with GOK.

43. In conclusion, Karnataka’s performance compares favorably to that of other Indian states and indeed
scores well on the international PEFA measurement framework. This is due to the continued PFM reforms
carried out by GOK during the last decade and other initiatives which are under progress. Karnataka is fortunate
to have a strong bureaucracy, a reforming political leadership, and a demanding civil society. Continued progress
on the PFM agenda will pay rich dividends for Karnataka by making the government in the state more effective,
accountable, transparent, and responsive.




                                                                                   | Executive Summary   17
                       Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014



                  Chapter 1:                 BACKGROUND, SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY


                                                         1.1       BACKGROUND

1. The Government of Karnataka (GoK) is reform oriented, and has been actively engaged in Public Financial
Management (PFM) modernization from 2001 in co-ordination with donor agencies. The GoK and the Bank in
2004 jointly prepared the State Financial Accountability Assessment (PFMA) report and a comprehensive PFM
action plan10. This report and action plan paved the way for many reforms in Karnataka. Most reform actions
outlined in the PFM action plan have been implemented or are underway. GoK intends to further strengthen PFM
and accountability of the State and to achieve this objective has initiated various reforms. Reforms in governance
and PFM have been at the forefront in Karnataka and some of the key reforms undertaken are outlined below:
    a. Implemented Sakala (Karnataka Guarantee of Services to Citizens) Act, 2011 for ensuring timely service
        delivery to its citizens.
    b. Enacted and implemented the Karnataka Fiscal Responsibility Act, 2003, and that heralded a rule-based
        system which GoK has been following it for fiscal consolidation and better fiscal management.
    c. Ushered in transparency in procurement through enactment and implantation of The Karnataka
        Transparency in Public Procurement Act, 1999 which enabled implementation of e-procurement system
        across the state presently covering 227 departments/agencies handling procurement worth Rs.1,61,300
        crore cumulatively ($ 27 billion). GoK has made it mandatory for all its departments and organizations to
        procure goods and services exceeding Rs.5 lakhs in each case on the e-procurement portal.
    d. Implemented e-governance initiatives in commercial taxes (e-administration of the underlying
        legislation) across the state which has helped in improving revenue collections as well as to provide faster
        service to the users. Vendors can register and pay their taxes online and also file their returns online with
        the Department.
    e. Implemented Khazane I (Computerized Treasury) across the State: The state treasuries have been
        computerized and treasuries now handle all Budget allocation, Treasury bill processing and payments,
        issue of cheque, e-payments, budget control and reallocation. Treasuries are rendering monthly compiled
        accounts to the State’s Accountant General, as well as provide monthly reports to the officers responsible
        for financial accountability and reconciliation. Khajane improved the overall control environment on the
        budget, cash flow and treasury management.
    f. Implemented electronic receipts of government dues for major revenues including commercial taxes and
        excise. For specified payments, this mechanism has been made mandatory.
    g. Implemented Human Resource Management System (HRMS): HRMS a centralized web based
        application has been implemented across the state which covers all employees of the state government.
        Service Registers of all employees are now available in electronic form and pay bill is generated by the
        system. E-payments of salaries have been implemented in 15 districts.
    h. Improved audit compliance through institutionalizing and maintaining a transparent web based Audit
        Monitoring System
    i. Improved fiscal discipline and budget outturns: The budgeting process has improved in line with the
        2004 report and the GoK has achieved good budget outturns in the recent years. The revenue receipts are
        generally more than the budgeted amount while expenditure has been around the budgeted amount.

10
     The study assessed the nature and degree of PFM risk, and the key actions to be taken to mitigate such risks

                                                                                    | Background, Scope and Methodology   18
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


    j.   Adopted RFD (Results Framework Document) as a tool to measure the outcomes of the funds used by
         the State.
    k.   Improved timelines in completion of accounts and audit reports: With Khajane I, the accounting and
         reporting timelines to AG have improved which has resulted in faster completion of accounts by AG
         (A&E) and completion of audit by the AG (Audit). The audit reports are normally placed before the
         Legislature around 9 months from the end of the financial year (FY).
    l.   Phased out LOC payments and have made Treasury payments compulsory for all Departments.
    m.   Liberalized delegation of financial powers for release of funds to the Principal Secretaries\Secretaries of
         the administrative department which would help the departments to prioritize the funds release and usage.
    n.   Implemented Fund based computerized accounting system in ULBs and Double entry based
         computerized accrual accounting system in Gram Panchayats (GPs) to improve local self-governments
         maintenance of accounts and completion of audits.
    o.   Regularized expenditure aggregating of Rs. 9565 crore in excess of the budget approved by the state
         Legislature through Public Accounts Committee (PAC) which is considered a significant achievement
         compared to other states.

2. GoK intends to further strengthen the PFM systems and enhance the accountability mechanism in the
State. To achieve this objective several reforms are underway such as : (a) development and roll out of an
upgraded Integrated Financial Management Information System across the state (Khazane II); (b) implementing
an e-payment system to ensure quick and transparent disbursements; (c) upgrading its human resource
management system; (d) strengthening financial reporting to make them real time and support decision making;
(e) computerizing pension payment systems; (f) strengthening the State Accounts Department; (g) strengthening
Internal Financial Advisor system; and (h) providing training and capacity building to all finance and accounts
officers of the State. In this context, the GoK requested the Bank’s support to prepare a holistic PFM Reform
Action Plan which it can implement in the medium term. Bank agreed to support this initiative through this
NLTA.


                                      1.2    SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY


3. The scope of the NLTA was to review the core state government PFM functions such as (a) budget
development and execution, (b) budget and accounts related fiscal transparency, (c) financial reporting and
accounting, (d) treasury systems, (e) internal controls, (f) external auditing, (g) legislative review of budget
execution, and (h) procurement. The next step was to suggest a suitable medium-term PFM reform action plan
for the state. The components of the PFM system examined for developing the PFM Reform Action Plan are
depicted in Figure 2: Public Financial Management System.




                                                                    | Background, Scope and Methodology   19
                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


                                        Figure 2: Public Financial Management System




4. The methodology for developing the Medium term PFM Reform Action Plan (Figure 2) is as follows:

a. Current situation analysis was carried out through fieldwork (discussions/interviews, data collection); and
   desk reviews of materials.11 The information collected was validated with the key stakeholders.
b. Review of 2004 reforms. Details of reforms carried out by the state were collected through discussion with
   key stakeholders, which were compared with the recommendations of 2004 PFMA report. These reforms
   were assessed against the actions taken, sustainability, continuation, and quality. The reforms were
   categorized into following areas and were used as the baseline for the 2014 action plan:
             i. Reforms which have been successfully implemented and continuing in the field;
            ii. Reforms which have been implemented but have been discontinued; and
           iii. Reforms which have never been taken up and the relevance of these reforms in the present PFM
                context.
c. Benchmarking, gap analysis and suggested actions. For the purpose of comparison of the status of the
   various PFM areas, the status in GOK was (broadly) benchmarked against the good practices under the Public
   Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment tool and good practices followed by the
   Government of India (GOI) and other Indian states. Based on the above review, the issues identified both at
   policy level and at implementation level were discussed and deliberated with stakeholders and suitable actions
   to address the gaps were developed in coordination with the stakeholders.




11
 Reports of the CAG, State Budget, and MTEF; various Government financial manuals such as Financial Rules, Treasury Codes, Budget
Manual, Account Code, Acts; Accounts and Audit Reports; and existing Government studies.

                                                                            | Background, Scope and Methodology        20
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


d. Develop PFM action plan. Based on the above, an action plan for each area of discussion was developed,
   which was later grouped into themes so that the inter-linkages and benefits across the various PFM areas
   could be understood and harnessed. The individual actions were prioritized and integrated into a medium-
   term action plan, with clear roles of responsibility and timelines.

                           Figure 3: Methodology for developing PFM Reform action plan




                                                                                             Develop
                                                                            Suggest
     Current          Review of        Benchmark         Carry out                          integrated
                                                                           Actions to
    Situation           2004           with Good            Gap                                 PFM
                                                                            address
    Analysis           reforms          practices         analysis                            reforms
                                                                             Gaps
                                                                                            action Plan




5. Client engagement and ownership: This study emanated from GoK since they were moving to IFMIS and
they wanted this study to complement their reform agenda. GoK constituted a high level committee headed by the
Principal Secretary (Finance) to oversee this study and has appointed nodal officer to support this activity. The
counterpart team was fully involved in the study and they supported the Bank team in all aspects of the study.
Most of the comments and suggestions from the study have emanated from various officers in GoK and the Bank
team has been acting a facilitator and sounding board to discuss and deliberate these suggestions and finalize them
in as the reform action plan. GoK has been continuously apprised of the study and notes and findings have been
constantly shared with the client. Some of the reforms mentioned in the report have already been initiated by the
GoK. Once the report is accepted by GOK, they would make it a formal document by adopting the reform action
plan as a part of the MTFP.




                                                                   | Background, Scope and Methodology    21
                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014



                        Chapter 2:                OVERVIEW OF STATE FINANCES

6. The state government has been on the fiscal consolidation path since passing of Fiscal Responsibility
Legislation such as the Karnataka Ceiling on Government Guarantee Act, 1999 and the Karnataka Fiscal
Responsibility Act 2002 (KFRA). KFRA mandates the State to gradually eliminate the revenue deficit and limit
the Fiscal deficit to the extent of 3 percent of GSDP while the guarantee act mandates limiting of contingent
liabilities such guarantees to 80 percent of Revenue Receipts of the previous year and ensuring that the
government places the details of Contingent liabilities and Statement of Public Debt in the Legislature for
scrutiny. KFRA provides for a mandatory Medium Term Fiscal Plan (MTFP), which sets forth the fiscal policy of
the state government for at least next three years.

7. Karnataka state finances have experienced a noticeable improvement consequential up on introduction of rule
based Fiscal Correction Mechanism by the state government. The fiscal targets, fiscal and revenue deficits have
been achieved well within the stipulated time frame. The global slowdown has not spared Karnataka and the
economy has experienced a slight slowdown in the real estate market and registration of vehicles. However the
state has experienced satisfactory fiscal recovery. The summary overview of state finances is outlined in Table 3
and Table 4 which follow.

                     Table 3: Summary Overview of State Government Finances: Flows (Rs. in crores)
                            Particulars                             2012/13            2011/12                2010/11

RECEIPTS

 Own tax revenues                                                         53,754             46,476                  38,473
 Own non-tax revenues                                                      3,966              4,087                   3,358
 Share of central government taxes                                        12,647             11,075                   9,506
 Grants from central government                                            7,809              8,168                   6,869

 Net borrowings (excluding off-budget borrowings)                          9,738              6,038                   3,907

             TOTAL RECEIPTS                                               87,914             75,844                  62,113

DISBURSEMENTS

 Revenue expenditure
                                                                          76,293             65,115                  54,034
(including interest Rs. 6,833 cr, Rs. 6,062 cr, Rs. 5,641 cr)

 Capital expenditure (net of receipts)                                    15,445             15,417                  13,283

 Loans and advances (net of repayments)                                       944             1,576                   1,577

             TOTAL DISBURSEMENTS                                          92,682             82,108                  68,894
Revenue (current) surplus                                                  1,883              4,521                   4,172

Fiscal deficit (excludes impact of off-budget borrowings)              (-) 14.506         (-) 12,302            (-) 10,688

Source: Government of Karnataka, Finance Accounts


                                                                               | Overview of State Finances     22
                  Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


                   Table 4: Summary Overview of State Government Finances: Stocks (Rs. in crores)
                                                                              As of          As of             As of
                                Particulars
                                                                            31-Mar-13      31-Mar-12         31-Mar-11

BORROWINGS (on-budget)

Borrowings from GoI and financial institutions                                  75,052          65,315             59,277

Borrowing from employees’ Provident and Insurance Funds                         15,914          14,182             12,784

Borrowings from other Public Account                                            36,270          32,299             25,550

FINANCIAL ASSETS

Cash and Bank                                                                   10,511           9,609              7,667

Capital Expenditure and Investments in government companies/corporations,
                                                                               119,513        104,035              88,525
other companies, and Cooperative Societies and Banks

Loans made by the State Government                                              12,143          11,198              9,623
DEBT GUARANTEES PROVIDED (to government companies
/corporations, urban local governments, Co-operative Banks and Societies,        6,688           6,515              6,618
other companies, Boards/Authorities and universities)


8. Karnataka has been a revenue surplus state for a considerable period due to adherence of KFRA, buoyancy in
revenues particularly in VAT, and prudent fiscal management. Fiscal deficit of Karnataka has been continuously
below 3 percent of GSDP for the last five years except for the year 2009-10. Though it has been a revenue surplus
state, the revenue surplus has reduced from 1.39 percent of GSDP to 1.08 percent of GSDP between 2007-08 and
2011-12. Decline in revenue surplus and tab of 3% on fiscal deficit has limited the capital expenditure to around
3.5 percent of GSDP. The global crisis though affected the state of Karnataka as well; the impact was limited only
to one year (2008-09). The state started recovering from a dip in its fiscal indicators in 2008-09. The crisis
affected its revenues to decline from 15.17% of GSDP in 2007-08 to 14.33% in 2008-09 to marginally recover in
2009-10 to 14.64%. The finances came back to original position of 2007-08 in 2010-11. Improvement in finances
of Karnataka in 2009-10 was mainly due to increase in revenues from the federal government than its own
revenues.




                                                                              | Overview of State Finances    23
                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


                         Table 5: Finances of GoK based on Accounts (as a percentage of GSDP)
                                      2007-08         2008-09         2009-10           2010-11           2011-12
Revenue Receipts                              15.17            14.33           14.64              15.28             16.07
 Own Revenues                                 10.82            10.20           10.10              10.98             11.64
    Tax Revenue                                 9.58            9.15            9.11              10.10             10.70
     Non tax Revenue                            1.24            1.05            0.99               0.88              0.94
 Shared Revenues                                4.35            4.13            4.54               4.30              4.43
  Tax Devolution                                2.50            2.37            2.19               2.50              2.55
  Grants In Aid                                 1.85            1.76            2.35               1.80              1.88
Revenue Expenditure                           13.78            13.79           14.16              14.19             14.99
  Interest Payments                             1.66            1.50            1.55               1.48              1.40
Capital Outlay                                  3.19            3.27            3.61               3.51              3.57
Net Lending                                     0.26            0.22            0.13               0.41              0.36
   Gross                                        0.28            0.24            0.29               0.46              0.42
   Recoveries                                   0.02            0.02            0.17               0.04              0.06
Total Expenditure                             17.23            17.28           17.90              18.11             18.93
Revenue Surplus/ Deficit                        1.39            0.54            0.48               1.10              1.08
Fiscal Deficit                                 -2.06           -2.95            -3.26             -2.82             -2.85
Primary Deficit                                -0.40           -1.45            -1.71             -1.34             -1.46
GSDP (Rs. Million)                          2712460         3021460         3357470          3808710           4342700
Source: Budget Documents, GoK, Study of State Budgets, RBI and MTFP statements of GoK (various Years).


9. The GOK fiscal position is largely influenced by the revenue side. Two-thirds of the state’s revenue is from
own sources. Simplification and rationalization of tax structure, along with simplification of process of filing tax
returns and extensive use of technology, has ensured an effective mobilization of resources from various taxes,
which have helped the GOK to maintain a better fiscal position. Though tax revenues have been consistently
growing, GOK has not improved revenues on the non-tax front, which continues to decline. The state’s Fiscal
Management Reform Committee has recognized this issue and suggested departments to be more proactive in
identifying and collecting their non-tax revenue.

10. In terms of expenditure, generally the revenue expenditure has been below the revenue receipts leading
to revenue surplus, which was used as one of the sources to fund capital expenditure. Over the years, revenue
expenditure has been increasing mainly due to subsidies, which reduced the revenue surplus, and affected the
outlay available for capital expenditure (Figure 3). Subsidies have increased from Rs.3,399 crore in 2008-09 (8
percent of the revenue receipts) to Rs.16,661 crore, which is 18 percent of the revenue receipts in the 2013-14
(revised estimate). The revenue surplus for the corresponding period declined from Rs.1,635 crore (which is 3.8
percent of revenue receipts) in 2008-09 to Rs.64 crore in 2013-14 (revised estimate), which is 0.1 percent of the
revenue receipts. With the increasing coverage of subsidies, there are demands beyond the provisions made in the
budget; most often these have to be accommodated through supplementary estimates. The GoK Medium-Term
Fiscal Plan (MTFP) 2014/18 recognizes that the challenge lies in ensuring that these subsidies do not become a
permanent source of additional support and thereby deter sectors from undertaking reforms. GoK acknowledges
that expenditure on subsidies needs to be moderated in the medium-to-long term to make them fiscally sustainable

                                                                               | Overview of State Finances   24
                               Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


through improving systemic efficiencies in sectors like energy, rationalize cross-subsidization of costs, providing
incentives to sectors to perform rather than increasing their dependence on subsidies, and also effective
identification and targeting of beneficiaries.

                                                Figure 4: Revenue surplus, subsidies and fiscal deficit

                                   20,000
                                   15,000
                                   10,000
           Rs. in crores




                                     5,000
                                            -
                                    (5,000)
                                  (10,000)
                                  (15,000)
                                  (20,000)
                                                                                                                  2013-14
                                                2008-09     2009-10      2010-11       2011-12       2012-13
                                                                                                                    (RE)
                           Explicit Subsidies    3,399       4,118         6,303        7,390         10,709      16,661
                           Revenue Surplus       1,635       1,629         4,172        4,691         1,883          64
                           Fiscal Deficit       (8,732)     (10,875)     (10,688)      (12,300)      (14,507)     (17,959)
                           Primary Deficit      (4,200)      (5,662)      (5,047)      (5,696)       (7,053)      (10,159)


11. Moreover, most of the revenue expenditure is in the nature of committed revenue expenditure like
salaries, pensions, interest, subsidies, etc., which affects the maneuverability of the state to prioritize
expenditure in this space. During 2013-14 (revised estimate), 94 percent of the receipts are expected to fund
committed revenue expenditure and only 6 percent is left for the GOK to fund other revenue expenditures. The
state Fiscal Management Review Committee has advised GOK to re-evaluate expenditure commitments as well as
relook at the subsidies and work on providing more target-based subsidy.

12. The public investment spending (capital expenditures) 12 are ones that have sustainable impact on growth and
income generation provided they are made effectively. GOK has to create fiscal space for public investment
spending through the budgetary processes but within overall fiscal constraints which include - (a) budget envelope
available after meeting revenue expenditure; (b) limits to fiscal deficits mandated by the KFRA; and (c)
restrictions on gross public debt. Increasing revenue expenditure, reducing revenue surplus, and statutory
limitations on borrowings affects the fiscal outlay available to the GOK for carrying out capital expenditure. The
GOK needs to prioritize the capital expenditure requirements of the state and ensure that the capital expenditure
proposals are reviewed and approved with a view on their overall impact on the fiscal position of the state. The
Fiscal Management Review Committee suggested that all approvals for new initiatives and works requiring
implementation over multiple years should be based on fiscal sustainability of the total expenditure and that GOK
should ideally move to medium-term (3 to 5 years) appraisal and approval cycle for the schemes. Going forward,

12
     GOK Capital spending has been about 40% of total government spending, and as compared to other states is relatively higher

                                                                                                  | Overview of State Finances    25
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


GOK needs to prioritize capital expenditure to achieve their fiscal targets as well as manage their public
investment funding more systematically.

13. Fiscal Marksmanship: Fiscal Marksmanship essentially reflects the degree of accuracy between the estimate
and actual expenditure of the budget data. It is desirable that the finance department has good fiscal
marksmanship while forecasting the revenues and expenditures for the next fiscal year. The state government has
improved in recent past in their estimation of expenditure and revenue. Many times the revenues and expenditures
realized are closer to the estimated ones. The expenditures have overshot the estimates sometimes marginally due
to allocations in supplementary budgets which are not included in the budget estimates. Increases in expenditures
are mainly due to including large expenditure commitments, subsidy payments and payments of arrears in
supplementary budgets which are not included in the original budget. FMRC has advised the GoK not to
encourage new capital commitments in the supplementary except in case of natural calamities; as such additions
distort the fiscal management of the state. The budget outturn for revenue and expenditure has significantly
improved over the years, yet there are substantial compositional variances and large savings in budget allocations
indicating the need to improve “budget realism?. Good buoyancy in tax revenues and central transfers has ensured
that the macro aggregates such as revenue deficit and fiscal deficit are closer to the estimated one.

14. Fiscal scenario in Karnataka reveals that, the state finances have improved particularly due to implementation
of KFRA. Though major indicators are sound, the state has to balance the requirement of providing adequate
funds to critical sectors of the economy while adhering to fiscal targets. GoK needs to give more emphasis on
reducing less productive expenditures and prioritizing capital expenditure.




                                                                            | Overview of State Finances   26
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014



        Chapter 3: ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF 2004 PUBLIC FINANCIAL
             MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACTION PLAN
15. Karnataka had a foundation for a satisfactory basic PFMA system substantially built on centralized,
detailed, input-based controls. This system was working reasonably well and derived its strengths from a well-
established and sound legal framework for PFMA, a robust fiscal policy framework for aggregate fiscal
management, tight control over departmental spending through the annual budget, an independent auditor and
well-established framework of legislative approval of budget execution.

16. The state had initiated several important improvements to strengthen its PFMA system - yet significant
challenges remained. In this environment, a Public Financial Management and Accountability Assessment
(PFMA) was carried out by the World Bank in active collaboration of the Government of Karnataka (GoK) in
2004. Drawing on the analysis and recommendations presented in the PFMA, GoK and the Bank jointly
developed an Action Plan to improve PFMA (referred to as the 2004 PFMA Action Plan) to continue and deepen
GOKs Public Financial Management (PFM) improvement program with the objective to improve PFM and
Accountability for making government more effective, accountable and responsive).

17. The 2004 PFMA Action Plan was developed in the backdrop of: a not so impressive record of budget
implementation; low predictability of flows to department with cash rationing and economy drives being
common; a cash management system constrained by limited cash flow smoothing options and lumpiness in
inflows from the central government; significant off-budget borrowings; lack of timely and reliable information
from the accounting system to facilitate fiscal monitoring and transparency, cash management, and departmental
budget monitoring; there was a need for strengthening budgetary and internal controls and enhancing
effectiveness of audit and legislative review through enhanced follow up of audit reports and legislative reviews.

18. The 2004 PFMA Action Plan was categorized into six strategic segments – Budget preparation and
implementation, financial computerization and MIS, Accounting, Audit/PAC responsiveness and follow up,
PFM in other Public Sector Agencies and Institutional Arrangements and Capacity Building – with several
actions under each to achieve the objectives. The PFMA and the 2004 Action Plan were officially recognized
by GoK in the Medium Term Fiscal Plan of 2006-2010.

19. There was, however, no review of the implementation of the 2004 PFMA Action Plan. The current study
endeavors to take stock of the progress of implementation of these measures during the last decade since 2004 and
its impact on PFMA largely based on the situation during the 3-4 most recent years. The status of implementation
of each of the activity included in the 2004 PFMA Action Plan is briefed in Section 10 of the Appendix. A
summary of reforms implemented and continuing, reforms implemented but could not be sustained and reforms
not carried out though remaining relevant as of today are outlined below.

20. Budget preparation and implementation: The key reform actions envisaged in this segment were: ensuring
budget passage at start of fiscal year, phasing out off-budget borrowings, improving budgetary realism,
introducing departmental budgeting for more accountability and flexibility, strengthening performance orientation
of departments, improving budgetary expenditure allocation and screening process, simplification of budget
implementation and improving cash flow, strengthening internal controls and increasing fiscal transparency.


                    | Accomplishments of 2004 Public Financial Management and Accountability Action Plan   27
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


21. Significant achievements were made in implementing many of the reform activities for strengthening
budget preparation and implementation.

           a. GoK’s record of implementing the budget has shown significant progress since the 2004 PFMA –
              wide variations from budget estimates in both revenues and expenditures at that time has now
              largely been contained – revenue and expenditure outturn has been within 5-7% variation in the
              recent years.
           b. Significant sophistication has been built in the framework of revenue forecasting which has
              helped in cash planning providing greater predictability during budget execution. To achieve
              more efficiency in revenue forecasting and realization, the Commercial Tax Department is
              presently in the process of setting up an Economic Intelligence Unit, akin to a Fiscal Intelligence
              Unit in Finance Department as suggested in the 2004 Action Plan. Efforts, however, are still
              needed to enhance non-tax revenues.
           c. GoK has curtailed its Off Budget Borrowings and has been successful in reducing the outstanding
              and interest costs (to Rs. 1,455 crore and Rs. 166 crore, respectively by 2013) – the 2004 Action
              Plan targeted eliminating this item at the earliest opportunity – but still, this is a significant
              achievement. Also, approval of borrowings and issue of guarantees have now been centralized
              with the Finance Department.
           d. Significant progress has been made to enhance individual clearance limits and delegation of
              powers both (a) for release of funds without recourse to the Finance Department and (b) internal
              delegation to HoDs – this was to strengthen predictability of availability of funds, avoiding year-
              end rush of expenditure and improving quality of expenditure. These have been gradually
              enhanced and GoK departments can release funds for the first three quarters, subject to some
              restrictions. Contribution was also made through revision of re-appropriation powers. Actual
              expenditure data indicates more increased expenditure outturn (pace of expenditure) during the
              first two quarters of the financial year, and significant decline in rush of expenditure during the
              last month of the financial year from 26% in 2002 to 19% in 2014 (including in Plan
              expenditure), although expenditure during last quarter at 1/3rd of total can be further evenly
              spaced.
           e. Fiscal transparency has improved. Budget documentation continues to be comprehensive
              disclosing significant information and full set is made available to the public as compared to only
              Overview of the Budget and Budget Speech earlier. Monthly accounts and fiscal indicators are
              now available more timely, a half-year review of state finances is published and available in
              public domain (done up to September 2013), audit findings and responses are available on the
              web (though not up to date and full reports of the Legislative Committees are yet to be placed on
              the web), year-end financial statements are now tabled in Legislature immediately in the next
              session from receipt and are more easily available to the public and stock of pending bills for on-
              going works is available in the Finance Accounts.

22. Some actions were taken up but could not be sustained or are still underway and further efforts are needed
to implement them.
           a. GoK was the first state to introduce Departmental Medium Term Fiscal Plans and in 2002/03.
               This was implemented in 20 departments and continued with this exercise till 2009/10. But due to



                    | Accomplishments of 2004 Public Financial Management and Accountability Action Plan   28
                      Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


                    various reasons, this could not be sustained and was discontinued and presently just one
                    department prepares the medium term fiscal plan.
                 b. In 2003, GoK endeavored to reduce the number of schemes and budget detailed codes and some
                    success in rationalization was achieved at the time. The PFMA suggested enhanced budget
                    flexibility to departments for better performance through reduced dependency on overly detailed
                    line budgeting and large number of schemes and budget heads restricting moving towards this
                    goal. The number of schemes, however, showed increase over the years and a system of periodic
                    review was not instituted – as on date there are over 1800 active schemes (out of total over
                    15000).

                 c. In respect of management of public funding of investments (as detailed through an Appendix E),
                    the 2004 PFMA Action Plan made two recommendations – (a) give priority in budgeting to
                    payment of arrears, then for completion of ongoing works and lastly for adding new works and
                    (b) computerization of such works and tracking committed liabilities for better budget control
                    and implementation. The situation as of now is by and large the same as prevailing at the time of
                    the 2004 assessment and the recommendations remain relevant today. Though GoK has put in
                    place these instructions, yet compliance is wanting resulting in payment arrears which is not
                    strictly in line with the fiscal responsibility legislation which requires timely payment of current
                    dues and a formal and clear definition of payment arrears is required as suggested in the PFMA.
                    Timeliness and adequacy of Appendix E still falls short of expectations and action point for
                    computerization of Appendix E remains to be taken up.

                 d. The PFMA suggested basing expenditure projects on realistic scenarios particularly in case of
                    budgeting for salaries13. It suggested that each department should project salaries in line with
                    recruitment rules and plans, instead of budgeting for vacant posts which are unlikely to be filled.
                    This practice continues and budget includes substantial lump sum provision for the entire
                    sanctioned staff strength though not all of these posts would have been planned for recruitment
                    during the year – which is also not in accordance with the Budget Manual. This not only resulted
                    in substantial savings, but also required a supplementary budget for transferring required budget
                    to the concerned demand for grants. Most importantly, such hidden provisions not utilized
                    restricted provision for developmental expenditure. While GoK has discontinued this practice in
                    urban local bodies, it continues to pursue this for the government sector.

23. And there is unfinished agenda that needs to be pursued.
           a. GoK continues to obtain Vote on Account although a full budget is present in the Legislature in
                February/March, and the situation remains as in 2004. The full budget is passed only during
                June/July when the Legislature meets again. If GoK ensures passing of budget before start of the
                year, it will be at par with over 20 other states that have achieved this.

                 b. Reliance on supplementary budgets is maintained and the number of supplementary budgets
                    presented continues to be three every year, like in 2004. The quantum of supplementary estimates
                    has increased from about 8% at the time of 2004 report to 18% now, and is higher compared to
                    many other Indian states. Many schemes and expenditure are introduced in-year outside the
13
     This, however, was not included in the 2004 PFMA Action Plan.

                          | Accomplishments of 2004 Public Financial Management and Accountability Action Plan   29
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


               budget cycle. This coupled with the situation that the unutilized budget (“savings? i. e. actual
               expenditure falling short of revised budget) being more than the supplementary undermines the
               budget realism in GoK. The supplementary budgets are also not fiscally neutral and significant
               supplementary estimates remain unfunded. Large supplementary budgets also affects the original
               expenditure composition.

           c. Not much progress is visible in legislative scrutiny of the budget. The Committee of Estimates
              continues to be inactive and the Subject Committees constituted to examine budget proposals are
              no longer in existence. The Legislature spends less time on discussions and voting.

           d. 2004 Action Plan recommended revision of the core PFM documents (the budget manual,
              treasury code and financial rules). A revised Treasury Code was prepared along with the
              implementation of Khajane (computerized treasury system). However, it was not formally
              adopted and notified by the GoK – the aim now is to re-revise the KTC incorporating the changes
              warranted due to implementation of upgraded Khajane. Although the Local Fund Authorities
              Fiscal Responsibility Act was passed in 2003, it had to be operationalized and this was an action
              in the 2004 PFMA Action Plan which is to be pursued and hence the objective of prudent PFM in
              a number of ways in the local bodies is yet to be realized.

24. Financial Computerization and MIS: Treasury computerization (Khajane), Capital Works Control
(Appendix E) computerization, Payroll computerization, computerization of Drawing and Disbursing Officers
(DDO), and accelerating Monthly Accounts preparation schedule were the key reforms envisaged under this
segment. This segment has exhibited marked progress and many of the reform actions were implemented while
others are underway /planned.
            a. Treasury computerization (Khajane) was achieved in 2004 and core functions of GoK were
               computerized, all Treasuries networked and non-bank treasuries were also phased out. This led to
               improvement in overall controls, reduced delay in submission of periodic reports to the
               Departments and the Accountant General, availability of daily fund position and expenditure
               reports and introducing passing of bills on first-in first-out principle. Following the action
               included in the 2004 Plan, GoK phased out the Letter of Credit system and brought all public
               works departments within the direct purview of the Treasury and the latter is now single payment
               point. GoK is now upgrading Khajane to include computerization of the office of the Drawing
               and Disbursing officers and the function of capital works, actions included in the 2004 PFMA
               Action Plan. Risk audit of Khajane has been conducted providing inputs for upgrading process of
               Khajane.

           b. A significant achievement of GoK is full automation of its payroll (integrating service register
              and pay bill) - a centralized web based application (the Human Resource Management System
              HRMS) has been successfully implemented and covers nearly all employees of the state
              government (almost 26% of state’s revenue expenditure excluding debt servicing) thereby
              strengthening controls in this area. GoK is now pursuing upgrading this application to the next
              level HRMS II and also integration with Khajane.




                    | Accomplishments of 2004 Public Financial Management and Accountability Action Plan   30
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


            c. Although not part of the 2004 Action Plan, it is pertinent to note that the initial implementation of
               the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement Act, 1999 that enabled e-Procurement was
               further expanded across all government departments and organizations and now barring some
               exceptions, all goods and services are under the ambit of e-Procurement – this is a progressive
               step and e-procurement platform is being further strengthened.


25. Accounting: Two key reforms were planned: Public Account clean up and Reconciliations against the
backdrop of arrears in reconciliation, non-adherence to accounting controls, weaknesses in systems for recording,
reporting and monitoring of fiscal assets and liabilities, and reporting of transfers of other public sector entities.
Many of these are relevant for implementation even today, not because GoK did not take steps to implement
them, but because these items have built-up over time in terms of volume and there is basic shortcoming in
compliance and inadequate reconciliation process. Some major achievements and areas that remain a challenge
follow – many of these are expected to be addressed with the planned rollout of the next level of Khajane.

       While GoK has achieved more than 90% in terms of reconciliation of revenue figures, achievement in
        terms of reconciliation of expenditure is only 58% and there is slippage over the last few years –
        implementation of Khajane II is likely to address this issue.

       The quantum of outstanding Abstract Contingent Bills has been contained at a reasonable level and
        showing a decreasing trend over the years in both outstanding as well as fresh drawls during the year.
        Similar achievement has been made in reducing backlog of obtaining Utilization Certificates and
        submission of those currently due and suspense accounts have been significantly cleaned up – the
        challenge is to sustain these achievements.

       Control over personal deposit accounts requires another round of tightening of controls - significant
        balances are carried forward, nearly half of the accounts are inoperative while some have adverse
        balances and reconciliation of balances with the Treasury and the Accountant General is in backlog.
        Similarly, control over reserve funds and booking of large amounts under miscellaneous heads of account
        still requires particular attention.
       The PFMA identified that reliable information on the amount of unencashed cheques was not available (at
        that time) as bank accounts were not reconciled regularly and full information was not available. GoK
        targeted to reconciled these and do one-time clean up and included this as an actionable point in the 2004
        Action Plan. This is a challenge that remains to be addressed – the level of unencashed cheques has not
        only increased substantially (outstanding as of March 2013 was Rs. 6,820 core as compared to Rs. 1,160
        crore in 2001/02), but there are significant information gaps and the process of reversing such cheques is
        not pursued.
       There has been good progress since 2004 in recording and reporting of fiscal assets and liabilities
        covering loans and advances, guarantees and investments in government entities, as well as debt. For the
        first three items, a dedicated cell has been formalized under Finance Department for data collection,
        collation, reconciliation and reporting. Yet, significant challenges remain in loans and advances and
        investments in terms of reconciliation issues (this is work in progress) and accounting and reporting
        controls have not kept pace with the significant increase in the portfolio. Accounts of loans and advances



                     | Accomplishments of 2004 Public Financial Management and Accountability Action Plan   31
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


        maintained at departmental level are inadequate and there are differences in investments between Finance
        Accounts and investee records.

       The PFMA concluded that practically there was no internal audit system in GoK (including local
        governments) barring internal audit wings (IAW) in some revenue earning departments. Introducing a
        small, focused internal audit function to improve the effectiveness of the system was suggested. GoK has
        not travelled far in strengthening the internal audit arrangements in government and no significant reform
        interventions are visible in this vital function. Other than the Commercial Tax Department, no other
        department has shown any visible initiative to establish or strengthen this function.

26. Audit and PAC responsiveness and follow up: The PFMA expressed concern over lack of responsiveness to
external audit reports and legislative reviews and identified it as the single biggest problem undermining the
effectiveness and impact of audit and legislative review. This continues to be an area of challenge for GoK as
progress has not been very satisfactory – this is still categorized by inadequate and delayed response by the
auditees – the executive needs to effectively implement the audit recommendations. The online Audit
Management System has been established, but data updating is in backlog and the system is yet to be
institutionalized. A significant achievement since 2004 has been regularization of expenditure in excess of
Legislative approval that had been pending since 1989-90 aggregating over Rs. 9,000 crore. Implementation of
measures to improve the effectiveness of the Legislative committees has progressed well – there is much
improvement in the working of the Legislative committees with increased number of meetings and larger number
of reports taken up for review, and a change in approach by taking up recent reports first and selection of
observations for review on the basis of materiality and risk, contemporary relevance and systemic issues.

27. PFMA in Local self-government and Public sector entities: The 2004 PFMA Action Plan also had several
measures for public sector entities (other than department). Significant progress has been made so far as the local
bodies are concerned, but improvement in the PFM of government companies and corporations needs to be
pursued further.
     In respect of the rural local governments, accounting reforms and computerization were two key areas for
       reforms included in the 2004 action plan - there has been significant progress in these areas, yet
       challenges remain. Double entry accrual basis of accounting has been introduced in both Village
       Panchayats and urban local bodies and accounting is now done on computerized applications
       (Panchatantra for Panchayats and e-Gov Financials for urban bodies) supported by respective manuals.
       However these systems have not been mainstreamed and are being maintained parallel to the current
       manual system. The accounts and audit of the Zilla and Taluk Panchayats are now up to date (with some
       delay) and this is a significant improvement since 2004. Yet, accounts and audit of Village Panchayats are
       perennially in backlog. Computerization of ZP/TP has not happened over the years and the situation is the
       same as it existed at the time of 2004 PFMA. Payment and reconciliation of electricity dues still remains
       an area of concern.
     Progress in implementing recommendations made by the 2004 report on state owned enterprises to
       address major shortcomings has not been very effective and several of these remain relevant even as on
       date – the areas of concern included timely preparation and audit of annual financial statements,
       unreliable and inconsistent public sector data, inadequate responses and follow up of external audit
       reports and legislative Reports, weak monitoring and enforcement of PFM requirements and issue in
       governance.

                    | Accomplishments of 2004 Public Financial Management and Accountability Action Plan   32
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


28. Institutional Arrangements and Capacity Building: The 2004 PFMA Action Plan envisaged recruitment of
qualified Internal Financial Advisors (IFA) in equal numbers from the office of the Accountant General,
Karnataka State Accounts Department (KSAD) and the Secretariat – GoK has mandated this rule though in actual
practice, majority of the IFAs are from the Secretariat and some from KSAD. Also, IFAs have been deployed in
the major spending department. The quality of the skills set of the IFAs drawn from other than KSAD leaves
much to be desired and effective utilization of the IFAs has been hampered.

29. The PFMA identified strengthening the capacity of KSAD. In terms of capacity enhancements of KSAD staff,
GoK has issued new cadre and recruitment rules (2011) covering both entry-level qualifications and mandatory
training for promotions which in the medium term will provide qualified staff at all levels and a training
curriculum has been developed for accounting, financial and auditing training, currently under implementation.
Further, GoK has mandated computer literacy for all staff under a State Training Policy (2011) and Computer
Literacy Rules (2012). Fiscal Policy Institute has been nominated as a key training institute on PFM and frequent
trainings to staff of other departments have organized. These are recent steps and effect would be visible later.
However, it is important that capacity building measures are continued in the full PFM domain.

30. In conclusion, the current study factors in the achievements made in implementing the 2004 PFMA Action
Plan, and builds upon the reforms actions that are relevant today by taking forward the unfinished agenda. The
study also proposes reform actions that are needed to further GoK’s objective of strengthening PFM and
accountability. The details of achievement against 2004 PFM reform action plan is outlined in Annex 2.




                    | Accomplishments of 2004 Public Financial Management and Accountability Action Plan   33
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014



       Chapter 4:            ANALYSIS, GAPS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS - 2014
31. The overall objective of the 2014 PFM Reform Action Plan is to improve and strengthen public financial
management so that it efficiently and effectively promotes accountability and transparency and thereby improves
service delivery. This Action Plan would support GOK to further accelerate reforms in the PFM arena in order to
improve and enhance transparency and accountability. The Reform Action Plan recognizes the fact that Karnataka
is not in the early stages of reform process but has over the past decade undertaken a range of reforms.

32. The Action Plan revolves around a thematic approach. Six themes have been identified as priorities for PFM
reforms over the next five years. These themes and their elements relate to legal and institutional framework,
budgeting, management of financial assets and liabilities, accounting and reporting, auditing and legislative
oversight besides reforms in the government enterprises and local self-governments (Figure 4). All these themes
are interlinked and the benefits of change in one theme would support better performance in another theme,
leading to overall improvement in the PFM of the state.


                             Figure 4: Thematic Approach to PFM Reforms in Karnataka




44. Each reform area that is proposed has been discussed in the Analysis Report (Part II) . The Analysis
Report provides the background, the reform actions proposed in the 2004 Action Plan, the progress of reforms
over the last decade, the issues presently identified, and the rationale for the reform actions proposed. For the
purpose of comparison of the status of the various PFM areas, the status in GOK has been (broadly) benchmarked
against the good practices under the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment tool
and good practices followed by GOI and other Indian states. The Action Plan takes cognizance of the ongoing
reforms and, their linkages and dependencies with the proposed reform actions. For each reform area, the
priorities of the proposed action points and the responsible department/agency that will spearhead and implement
the reform/s have been suggested. It is also suggested that the reforms be mainstreamed with GOK’s own work

                                                          | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014   34
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


processes so as to ensure sustainability. The synopsis of each theme along with the key reform objectives and
actions are outlined below.


Theme 1: Strengthening PFM Legal and Institutional Framework
Overall Reform Objective: To ensure relevant and updated PFM legal framework supported by adequate
and effective institutional mechanisms to implement them.

33. The PFM framework is embodied in the state’s budget manual, treasury code and financial rules guided by
the principles embodied in the Constitution of India. These are supplemented by legislations such as the KFRA
and KTTP Act. An institutional framework to implement the PFM is also in place. This is a cross-cutting theme
that would impact the working of PFM across all stakeholders.

34. The major issues under this theme are: (a) compliance in certain areas that are not in line with the Acts, (b)
capacity constraints in the finance cadre of the state which inhibits implementation of the PFM framework, and
(c) updated PFM manuals and codes to reflect the changes in the PFM environment of the state.

35. The key actions proposed are:
           a. Revise PFM manuals and codes to make it contemporary particularly to take into account the
                changes in business processes brought about by major revamp of its financial information
                systems (for instance, treasury computerization, e-payments, and online HR management).
           b. Strengthen the capacity of the IFAs to provide leadership in public financial management, act as a
                support to the head of offices in discharging their fiduciary responsibilities at the departmental
                level, and providing expertise to the Finance Department in the discharge of functions at the state
                level.
           c. Strengthen the capacity of KSAD and ALMC cell to support the PFM functions of the state.
           d. Operationalize LFARA and improve compliance to meet the requirements of the fiscal law in
                areas such as for instance timely payment of current liabilities and minimizing fiscal risks in
                public sector undertakings.

36. It is envisioned that implementing the reform activities in this area would lead to achieving the following:
     Up to date and modernized PFM manuals and codes in place, and implemented, that would be
         contemporary incorporating the changed circumstances brought about by the automation of major PFM
         systems
     A stronger institution of IFAs with skills set that match the current and planned PFM environment and the
         enhanced responsibilities that are associated with sophisticated systems
     Meeting the requirements of the fiscal responsibility legislation in all material aspects (included in
         respective thematic area)

Theme 2: Enhancing Comprehensiveness and Credibility of the Budget
Overall Reform Objective: To ensure an efficient and effective budgeting formulation and execution
process, including system for in-year review and amendments, with effective and timely legislative scrutiny




                                                           | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014   35
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


37. GoK’s budget processes flow from its Budget Manual based on the principles in the Constitution of India
supplemented by annual budget circulars. Budget documentation is comprehensive. The fiscal responsibility
legislation binds GoK to budget within certain fiscal rules that GoK has followed and legislative approvals for
deviations have been obtained and status quo maintained after the event has passed. The budget outturn for
revenue and expenditure has significantly improved over the years. Predictability in availability of funds has
improved by way of enhanced delegation of powers in respect of providing sanctions at the departmental level,
and release of funds without repeated recourse to the finance department with good success in improving pace of
spending. The major issues under this theme are:
             a. GoK presents the budget before the start of the year, but obtains approval on a Vote on Account
                 for the first four months - the full budget is passed well within the fiscal year.
             b. There are multiple in-year adjustments by way of supplementary budgets and re-appropriation of
                 significant amounts.
             c. Supplementary budgets are not “fiscally neutral? as required by the fiscal responsibility
                 legislation.
             d. There are substantial compositional variances and large savings in budget allocations indicating
                 the need to improve “budget realism?.
             e. Budgeting could be further improved by a review of the manner in which provisions are made for
                 certain items such as salaries and capital commitments/public investment funding.
             f. Departmental budgeting commenced earlier but was discontinued and schemes rationalization has
                 not been carried out periodically.
             g. Legislative scrutiny is another area that needs strengthening.

38. The key actions proposed are:
           a. Pass the full budget before beginning of the financial year.
           b. Reduce the number of SEs presented to GoK every year from 3 to 2 (and to 1 in the long term).
           c. Supplementary Budgets should be Fiscally Neutral in accordance with the KFRA.
           d. Reduce expenditure composition variance from the present high level in phases.
           e. Integrate salary estimation with actual salaries as per HRMS and make budget provision for filled
                posts along with recruitments to be made during the year.
           f. Introduce capital commitments, MTEF, for large spending departments and ensure arrears are
                paid first, then existing works are budgeted, and finally new works are taken up in the budget.
           g. Introduce departmental budgeting with more flexible budgets in line items for larger departments
                to link it with the results framework document of the state.
           h. Implement Departmentally Related Standing Committee mechanism and legislature to devote
                more time on discussion and voting of grants.

39. It is envisioned that implementing the reform activities in this area would lead to achieving the following:
     Passing the budget before the start of the fiscal year
     Reducing the number of supplementary budgets and achieving more judicious supplementary and re-
         appropriation
     Ensuring fiscal neutrality in supplementary budgets
     Adopting analytical tools and strengthening capacity to achieve better budget estimation such as use of
         revenue forecasting and public works project management software, and following pre-defined principles
         particularly in case of salaries and capital commitments

                                                          | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014   36
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


       Introducing Departmental Budgeting/MTFP
       Enhancing the legislative scrutiny of the budget by strengthening the institution of sub-committees for
        budget scrutiny, and increased time devoted to discussions

Theme 3: Strengthening Implementation of Financial Rules in Accounting, Reporting and Controls and
Enhanced Transparency
Overall Reform Objective: To ensure accurate and timely accounting and reporting, compliance with and
strengthening related controls, including payroll and procurement controls, and to improve transparency
of fiscal information

40. The accounting and reporting systems in GoK primarily revolve around the framework applicable nationally,
based on the principles in the Constitution of India and guidelines issued by the Government of India. Around
these principles and guidelines, GoK has developed its systems with controls, checks and balances imbibed in its
PFM legal framework. Significant adoption of IT systems has strengthened the accounting, reporting and control
framework over the years, and GoK continuously strives to upgrade and modernize these applications. GOK can
consider taking over the responsibility of ownership of accounts gradually and also prepare consolidated
statements for all tiers of government. Going forward, GOK can decide to implement accrual accounting and
adopting new chart of accounts based on the recommendations of the GOI. There are weak areas such as
reconciliation, compliance with controls, and accounting treatment that need to be mitigated. These recurring
features also indicate the need for better compliance with the audit findings in these areas. Many of these issues
are expected to be addressed by KII after its implementation and hence these issues are transitory in nature and
needs to be attended in the short term. Payroll and procurement functions have been automated though there are
issues in the underlying control mechanisms and data validation, and these needs to be plugged. Uncoordinated
development of various financial applications using a fragmented approach has proliferated, and there is a need to
integrate these to the Khajane II so that these are mainstreamed and used for decision making process.

41. The key issues under this theme are as follows:
           a. Delay in timeliness of reconciliation of expenditure with the AG, submission and reconciliation
                of utilization certificates.
           b. Change in CSS funding mechanism which requires reworking budget, fund flow, accounting and
                disclosure requirements related to CSS and ULBs transfers, expenditure, and balance.
           c. Khajane II implementation would require data migration and change management strategy. Also
                standalone software’s needs to be integrated and mainstreamed with KII.
           d. A cash management and forecasting tool has not been developed and implemented.
           e. Issue in tracking and monitoring subsidies.
           f. Issues in HRMS data validation and audit paras to be addressed before migration to HRMS II.
           g. Non implementation of contract management module, non-availability of certain functionalities
                of e-procurement and its comprehensive IT evaluation.

42. The key activities under this theme are as follows:
           a. Designate a central nodal office for monitoring of utilization certificates and improve
                reconciliation of expenditure.
           b. Develop guidelines and disclosure norms for CSS projects along with change in the fund flow to
                manage funds through the treasury rather than bank accounts.

                                                           | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014   37
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


            c. Develop a data migration strategy, change management strategy, HR strategy, training plan, and
               rollout plan for implementation. A GO outlining the timelines and the transition process has to be
               issued by GOK. Also integrate all other software’s used by the government with KII.
            d. Carry out study on cash and debt management practices, develop a cash forecasting model for
               monitoring cash management and integrate with MPIC and KII.
            e. Create web based information system for tracking and monitoring of subsidies linked to KII.
            f. Ensure data validation of all the staff and payroll records is completed and payroll audit is carried
               out across the state, before the data is migrated to HRMS II.
            g. Develop and implement contract management module as part of KII and enhance the
               functionalities of e-procurement software. Carry out IT audit of the software through AG office.

43. This theme seeks to build upon reforms underway and address weaknesses in accounting and reporting and
strengthen internal controls. It is envisioned that implementing the reform activities in this area would result in a
stronger PFM environment and systems exhibiting the following characteristics:
     An effective system of identification of old outstanding balances and a regular system of reconciliation
        and adjustment of differences
     Enhanced compliance with the financial rules as for instance timely submission of utilization certificates,
        adjustment of advance bills, reversal of amounts in public account balances, management of reserve funds
     Proper classification of government transactions to reflect the correct fiscal position and indicators
     Strengthened controls in IT systems and integration of the multiple financial applications to the Khajane
        II to form one coherent eco-system
     Enhanced transparency and disclosure in the financial statements
     Enhance transparency and disclosure in procurement

Theme 4: Strengthening Fiscal Assets and Liabilities Management, Recording, Reconciliation and
Monitoring Systems
Overall Reform Objective: To strengthen the systems of management, recording, reconciliation and
monitoring of fiscal assets and liabilities

44. The theme envisages resolving the challenges associated with the present systems of management, recording,
reconciliation and monitoring of fiscal assets and liabilities, which have significant shortcomings and thereby
strengthen the institutional and staff capacity to improve efficiency, allow for correct reporting and remove
backlog. A related outcome would be better knowledge of and control over fiscal risks.

45. The key issues under the theme are:
           a. Non availability of a government guarantees policy.
           b. Reconciliation issues in case of Investments, Loans and advances and Debt data.
           c. Capacity constraints in the asset liability management cell handling this portfolio.
           d. Loans issued without prescribed terms and non-repayment of loans and interest taken by GOK
                entities.
           e. Issues in monitoring of arrears of payments.
           f. Reconciliation issues and backlog in case of unencashed cheques.

46. The following key activities are provided n this theme to significantly improve the systems:

                                                             | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014   38
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


    a. Develop policies and guidelines such as a Guarantee Policy and Operational Guidelines for Investments.
    b. Prioritize reconciliation efforts on big ticket items of investments, loans and advances, debt pertaining to
       recent years and carry out a focused reconciliation exercise with support from external consultants.
    c. Appoint core finance professionals or staff from Finance Department and train existing staff of the asset
       liability management cell.
    d. Develop a policy for addressing loans to government entities.
    e. Establish a Cash and Debt Management Office and deploy adequate resources in term of manpower
       support and IT systems.
    f. Establish of more formal and established procedures for monitoring and accounting arrears of payments.
    g. Initiate a special study to identify the causes for accumulation of unencashed cheques and carry out one
       time special exercise to clear the backlog of unencashed cheques.

47. It is envisioned that implementing the reform activities in this area would result in a PFM environment with
the following characteristics:
     Existence of formal and consolidated procedures for management, recording, reporting and monitoring of
         fiscal assets and liabilities
     A more robust and empowered institutional mechanism to carry out these functions
     Clearance of backlog of differences and reconciliation between memorandum records and state accounts
     Availability of updated and validated database of assets and liabilities
     Improved compliance with financial rules and the fiscal responsibility legislation

48. The benefits achieved under this theme will also accrue to Theme 3. GoK is currently upgrading its integrated
financial management system (Khajane to Khajane II) and this system can be effective only if the legacy data is
updated and clean and the level of compliance with financial rules is enhanced. Themes 3 and 4 are also expected
to contribute to the migration of data with high level of integrity to Khajane II and to ensure that the weaknesses
in the current system do not replicate in Khajane II.

Theme 5: Strengthening Audit Institutions and Systems, Enhancing Responsiveness to Audit Reports, and
Improving Effectiveness of Legislative Oversight
Overall Reform Objective: To ensure accountability and oversight of public resources through stronger
audit institutions, timely compliance and effective legislative oversight

49. External audit by the Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) is now more comprehensive and regular with a good
proportion of performance and IT audits. Reports are now also available on a timely basis - the audit report for FY
2012/13 has been published and submitted to the Legislature by February 2014. Legislative scrutiny of audit
reports has seen significant enhancement. External audit reports are tabled in the state Legislature and are subject
to scrutiny by the separate legislative committees on state accounts (including departments), public sector entities
and local bodies. The committees are well functioning and have adopted the approach of taking up the latest
reports first and simultaneously clearing the backlog of the department taken up for hearings. Audit findings taken
up for examination are selected on basis of materiality, contemporary relevance and systemic issue.

50. The effectiveness of audit is undermined due to weak follow up on the audit reports and legislative committee
reports by the auditee who more often fail to provide responses on a timely manner. An Audit Monitoring System
has been established for the external audit reports of the SAI, but its use is limited taking into consideration that it

                                                              | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014    39
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


has only quantitative details; qualitative/systemic details are not captured; and data, particularly with respect to
action taken, are not regularly updated. GOK needs to strengthen the audit compliance mechanism and also
enhance the Audit Monitoring System to capture data for all audits and systematic data so as to analyze and take
actions on them. Going forward, GOK needs to work with State AG to facilitate them to carry out audit of the
state accounts through KII system and issue audit reports through the system.

51. Audit practices followed by KSAD are not modern and the audit institution suffers from staff capacity. KSAD
should implement modern audit practices including risk based audit, co-sourcing, along with implementation of
the audit software to improve the timeliness and quality of the audit. The audits for local bodies (ULBs and Gram
Panchayats, the third tier of rural local bodies) are delayed due to, capacity constraints of Karnataka State
Accounts Department (KSAD) as well as non-submission of accounts by GPs.

52. Internal audit mechanism in the state is highly dispersed, lacks leadership and its effectiveness is virtually
absent. The function is woefully short of staff (in particular skilled staff) and uses antiquated audit techniques not
conducive for audit in a highly automated environment in Karnataka. There is a need for a formal modern Internal
Audit system, at least in the high revenue-earning and high spending departments, to promote effective internal
controls contributing to improved level of compliance and better expenditure management.

53. The key issues under this theme are:
           a. Internal audit is highly dispersed, lacks leadership and its effectiveness is virtually absent.
           b. Audit compliance is not timely to both the audit reports as well as the legislative scrutiny
           c. Audit monitoring system does not cover the qualitative issues and the entire process of audit
                settlement
           d. KSAD capacity constraints affects the PFM functions of the state and outdated audit
                methodology affects the timeliness of audit for the third tier of governments

54. The key focus of this thematic area will be on strengthening audit and oversight functions in the state through
           a. Conduct a situational analysis of the internal audit system, develop and implement risk based
               internal audit in high spending departments
           b. Improve effectiveness of audit via higher responsiveness and follow up on audit reports.
           c. Enhance the functionality of the audit monitoring systems to cover all audits, generate qualitative
               classification of audit, and capture the entire process of audit from inspection report to the final
               resolution of the audit by PAC.
           d. Strengthen KSAD through continuous training and capacity building measures, and augment
               capacity by recruiting staff, IT implementation, and outsourcing in the short run to address arrears
               of audit. Introduce modern audit practices like risk based audit, co-sourcing of audit, auditing
               through systems in KSAD to improve the overall audit timelines and quality.

55. It is envisioned that implementing the reform activities in this area would bring the following changes and
benefits to GoK:

       Establishment of a formal Internal Audit System, at least in the revenue and high spending departments,
        for promote effective internal controls.


                                                             | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014   40
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


       Increased level of responsiveness to audit reports particularly at the initial stages of audit (half margin or
        inspection reports), faster compliance to audit reports, including substantial clearance of arrears, and
        reduction in the stock of outstanding audit observations.
       Improved functionality and capability of the audit monitoring application including coverage of all audit
        reports and compliances and availability of updated audit database to improve the monitoring capability
        of the controlling officers.
       Emergence of a strengthened and modernized state auditing institution, KSAD with increased efficiency
        in its work and effectiveness of its function undertaking its activities in a more meaningful manner.
       High level of Legislative scrutiny of budget and audit reports to effectively undertake PFM oversight
        functions and enforce accountability.
       Overall improvement in transparency by placing audit reports and action taken in public domain.

Theme 6: Improving PFM systems in Government Enterprises and Local Self Governments
Overall Reform Objective: To improve PFM in government enterprises and local self-governments
through strengthening governance, improving internal controls including internal audit, and enhancing
timeliness of accounts and audit to manage fiscal risks arising from these bodies

56. Local Self Governments every year handle around Rs.22500 crores, making it imperative that these
institutions have strong PFM systems – but assessments often find gaps in PFM framework and
compliance. The respective legislation underlying these institutions and accompanying manuals define the PFM
environment. Significant efforts have been directed towards strengthening PFM in local self-governments
(particularly accounting reforms) for ULBs and GPs, and a similar strategy is needed for ZPs and TPs. The key
issues under this area are:
             a. Low revenue collection ratio and weak control over own source revenue;
             b. Backlog of accounts in GPs and audits in ULBs and GPs
             c. A not-so-strong system of internal controls, including internal audit; and
             d. Low capacity and shortage of finance staff are key areas that need immediate attention.
57. The key activities proposed under this area are:
             a. Improve Own source revenue by encouraging e-payments and collection through banks to
                 improve controls and collection efficiency as well as preparing Demand Collection Balance and
                 carrying out timely reconciliation.
             b. Develop and implement strategy to clear backlog of accounts and ensure full migration from
                 manual systems of accounting to computerized systems.
             c. Design and implement effective and adequate internal controls, including internal audit.
             d. Review the accounts and finance staffing in these institutions both in terms of staff numbers and
                 skills sets and develop a strategy for recruiting them.


58. State Owned Enterprises contribute to 7.2% of the GSDP and GOK investments in them are Rs.69,810
crores and the budgetary support for the FY 12-13 was Rs.15,059 crores. The SOEs handle substantial public
funds by way of share capital, loans and grants/subsidies besides the GoK providing guarantees for borrowings of
these SOEs. Hence, these SOEs should have a strong PFM system to account for and report on the use of public
funds but assessments often find gaps in PFM framework and compliance. While the scenario has improved in
comparison to 2004, the following issues are persistent:

                                                             | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014   41
                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


            a. Delay in completion of accounts and audits;
            b. Lack of effective internal audit, Lack of response to systemic audit issues and reconciliation
               problems;
            c. Non adoption of a corporate governance framework; and
            d. Absence of a nodal office to monitor and support the SOEs.

59. The key activities proposed under this area are:
           a. Conduct specific studies on corporate governance and establish a stronger corporate governance
                framework for government companies and corporations - the model code of corporate governance
                prescribed for central public sector undertakings could be adopted.
           b. Clear backlog of accounts and audits through external technical assistance as well as consider
                accounting reforms for entities which are yet to move to computerized accounting.
           c. Review external audit findings, including functioning of internal audit and audit committee
           d. Institutionalize a stronger nodal agency would benefit the GOK to support and monitor the SOEs.


60. It is envisioned that implementing the reform activities in this area would result in a strengthened PFM
environment:
     A stronger corporate governance in case of companies and corporations
     Clearance of backlog of accounts, and a system in place to ensure timely preparation of accounts
     A system of effective and adequate internal controls including internal audit in place
     Clearance of backlog of audits, and a system in place to ensure that accounts are rendered timely for audit
     A system for timely follow up of audit compliance.

61. The detailed PFM reform action plan for 2014 is outlined in the annex 1.




                                                           | Analysis, Gaps, and Recommendations - 2014   42
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014



                                  Chapter 5:             WAY FORWARD
62. GOK has been a pioneer in the area of PFM reforms and has been pushing the boundaries to the next level in
most of the PFM areas and continue to improve PFM by strengthening their systems which includes policies,
process, and people and are embarking on upgrading its PFM computerized systems (such as Khajane II and
HRMS). Implementing the PFM reforms will require substantial commitment and sustained effort. Karnataka’s
strength is that it has already embarked on a major fiscal and governance reform process, and has initiated several
PFM improvements. It has the potential to go a long way, and become a pioneer in this field for India. This
section outlines critical factors that are equally important for implementing the PFM reform action plan.

63. The 2014 Action Plan needs to be approved by the GOK and included in the Medium-Term Fiscal Plan
of the Government. This will provide the necessary mandate for implementation and the instrument for
disseminating the Plan, as well as review of the implementation on an on-going basis.

64. A high-level committee needs to be formed at the level of Principal Secretary (Finance) so that reforms
can be reviewed on a regular basis and coordination across departments can be achieved. The prioritization
of the actions and the timelines needs to be reviewed on a holistic basis by GOK and the sequencing of reforms
needs to be worked out as most of the reforms are interlinked and benefits would accrue if related reforms are
addressed simultaneously. A quarterly progress report on the achievements made and challenges faced should be
presented to the committee for their monitoring and advice. Considering the magnitude of the reform actions, a
system of continuous monitoring is essential to ensure that the implementation goes as planned and course
corrections are identified, approved, and applied in a timely manner.

65. A dedicated 2014 Reform Action Management Cell needs to be constituted by the GOK to implement
these reforms. The cell could be headed by Principal Secretary (Finance) with his team of Secretary (B&R),
Secretary (Expenditure), and Secretary (FR) and secretaries from the respective Administrative departments. The
office of the Secretary (Fiscal Reforms) can be nominated to co-ordinate and follow up on agreed action points.
This office needs to be strengthened with adequate resources – human, financial, and IT as well as provided with
sufficient powers to monitor the reform.

66. The Finance Department needs to exercise strong leadership in implementing the PFM reform. This is
especially pertinent for activities relating to budget formulation and execution, accounting, financial reporting,
auditing, and internal controls. PFM reforms needs to be led by the Finance Department, but it involves all
departments like the Public Works Department (PWD), Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department
(RDPR), Urban Development Department (UDD), Water Resource Department (WRD), the Directorate of
Municipal Administration (DMA), and the Department of Public Enterprises Reform and Disinvestment (DPE).
All departments will need to cooperate for PFM modernization to happen. As a part of further actions, GOK can
consider institutional review of key departments (PWD, RDPR, WRD, and UDD) and support them in
strengthening their institutional framework, which would help improving the overall PFM framework of
the state to a large extent.

67. Capacity is limited and needs to be developed. The capacity of the Finance Department needs to be
developed both to manage the PFM system and to support departments implement their own PFM-strengthening
activities. This includes the capacity of all parts of Finance dealing with budget development, implementation

                                                                                         | Way Forward   43
                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014


and monitoring, the Controller (Accounts Management)’s office, KSAD, and the Treasury. Capacity in other
departments also needs to be enhanced. Attention needs to be paid to meet the capacity constraints through the
use of existing staff, hiring new staff, or the retention of consultants. Training, study tours, exposure visits, and
the recruitment of finance, accounting and economics professionals will all help to develop capacity.

68. Technical assistance will likely be required to help in implementing this agenda. A “process consultancy?
arrangement may be useful, i.e., a small team of specialists could be engaged to provide continuous support to the
Finance Department. This team could prepare the necessary detailed technical papers and documents, carry out
the necessary background work for the improvements, and help to progressively move the improvement agenda
forward. The Bank could partner and potentially help in this regard.

69. Partnerships. Establishing a close working relationship with various national and state-level institutions is
important. Many of the reforms may have to be led at the national level; others may involve coordination or
consultation with national-level institutions. Such institutions include the CAG’s office, the Controller General of
Accounts (CGA) of the Central Government, the Government Accounting Standards Advisory Board, and the
Legislative Secretariat and Legislative Committees of the State Government. Partnerships with various agencies
or organizations outside Government would be helpful in moving the reform agenda forward. They could include
organizations such as the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, National Institute of Public Finance and
Policy, National Institute Financial Management, Institute for Financial Management Reforms and Institute of
Public Enterprises. The specific areas of partnership could be worked out in consultation with these
organizations. These partnerships will also help promote the demand for good PFM.

70. Learning from the Government of India’s practices and experiences and reforms in other states, in addition to
other countries, is particularly important. Peer to peer learning workshops between state and study tours would
help and support the process of PFM improvements. Several other states are implementing improvements in
various aspects of the PFM agenda, which is outlined in the relevant sections. More advanced countries (e.g.,
South Africa’s public financial accountability reforms, Brazil’s model of consolidation and disclosure practices,
Korea’s IFMIS implementation and open budget data, Russia IFMIS implementation and data disclosure) offer a
variety of models of PFMA reforms and practices and also offer lessons and ideas. At the same time Karnataka
has much to offer to other states. The various initiatives that Karnataka has taken are good examples to be shared
with other Indian states.

71. Annual plans indicating the initiatives that would be implemented during each year should also be prepared,
and performance targets and indicators to monitor the implementation of the agenda developed. Such an action
plan should cover both the technical and institutional improvements (as discussed in previous sections) and the
aspects previously discussed in this section. Ideally, it would be integrated into the Medium Term Fiscal Plan
published by GoK and updated every year.




                                                                                           | Way Forward   44
                                  Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Roadmap - 2014


                               ANNEX 1: PROPOSED PFM REFORM ACTION PLAN - 2014

This section contains the thematic-wise PFM Reform Action Plan, proposing the actions to be taken, the responsible department for the actions,
and the expected timeframe for completing the actions. The detailed analysis of the issues and the logic for action plan are provided in the
respective sections in the Appendix to this Report. Based on this, GoK may decide the actions to be implemented and their sequencing.


  Priority area/
                                                    Strategy                                  Priority    Timeframe            Responsibility        Target
    objective
                                    Theme 1: Strengthening PFM Legal and Institutional Framework (Section 1 of the Appendix)
                     Strengthen implementation of fiscal responsibility legislation          High        March 2015     Finance Department
                      Create awareness and ownership amongst all departments towards                                   (FD)
                         Karnataka Fiscal Responsibility Act (KFRA)                          High        March 2015     FD                       LFAFRA
Strengthen fiscal
                      Operationalize the Local Fund Authorities Fiscal Responsibility Act                              Urban Development        operationalized
  responsibility
                         (LFAFRA)                                                                                       Department (UDD)
 legislation and
                                                                                                                         Rural Development and
update core PFM
                                                                                                                        Panchayati Raj
   documents
                                                                                                                        Department (RDPR)
                     Revise and update core PFM Manuals and implement them                   High        March 2016     FD                       KBM, KFC,
                      Revise Karnataka Budget Manual (KBM), Karnataka Financial Code                                                            KTC and MCE
                         (KFC), Karnataka Treasury Code (KTC), Manual on Contingent                                                              revised/updated
                         Expenditure                                                                                                             and approved
                     Provide Legal Mandate                                                   High        March 2016     FD                       Roles and
                      Include IFA and ALMC roles and responsibilities in the KFC and                                                            responsibilities
                         KBM so that Departments recognize their roles                                                                           included in the
                                                                                                                                                 updated KFC
    Strengthen                                                                                                                                   and KBM
   institutional
                     Appoint skilled staff                                                   High        Ongoing        FD                       Majority of
   capacity of
                      Recruit IFAs from KSAD                                                                                                    IFAs deputed
Internal Financial
 Advisors (IFA)       Address resource constraints in ALMC through training and                                                                 from KSAD in
                        appointing finance personnel from FD                                                                                     all major
     and Asset
                                                                                                                                                 departments
     Liability
                                                                                                                                                 and IFAs
Management Cell
                                                                                                                                                 providing high-
                                                                                                                                                 level PFM
                                                                                                                                                 services in FD
                     Provide capacity building to staff                                      Medium      Ongoing        FD
                      Provide extensive training to IFAs and ALMC including computer
                         skills
                                  Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

  Priority area/
                                                       Strategy                                      Priority    Timeframe         Responsibility            Target
    objective
                        Provide staff and IT support to IFA and ALMC
                        Monitor work of IFA and ALMC and provide time to time guidance
                                  Theme 2: Enhancing Comprehensiveness and Credibility of the Budget (Section 2 of the Appendix)

                     Pass the full budget before beginning of the financial year.                   High        Budget Year   FD and State legislature   Full budget
                                                                                                                15-16                                    passed before
                                                                                                                                                         start of year
                     Reduce the number of Supplementary Budgets to at least two (from the           Medium      Budget year   FD                         Supplementary
                     present three) and to one in the long term                                                 2015-16                                  budgets
                                                                                                                                                         reduced to two
                     Enhance Budget Credibility                                                     Medium      Budget year   FD                         Expenditure
                      Reduce the expenditure composition variance, from the present high                       2016-17       Commercial Tax Dept.       composition
Strengthen Budget
                        level, in phases say over a two-year period to bring it close to original                             (CTD).                     variance
     Process
                        approved budget                                                                                       Excise Dept. (ED)          reduced to less
                      Establish Economic Intelligence Unit in major revenue departments                                                                 than 10% in
                        and Implement a Revenue Forecasting Tool in Finance Department                                                                   phase 1 and to
                                                                                                                                                         less than 5% in
                                                                                                                                                         phase 2
                     Strengthen supplementary process through enhanced disclosure                   Medium      Budget year   FD                         No unfunded
                      Prepare Supplementary Budgets which are Fiscally Neutral and in                          2015-16                                  expenditure in
                         accordance with the KFRA and present Fiscal Neutrality table                                                                    supplementary
                      Provide details of actual expenditure and surrenders per demand in the                                                            budgets
                         Supplementary Budgets
                     Rationalize re-appropriation process                                           High        March 2015    FD                         Re-
                      Identify reasons for high level of re-appropriation orders (including                                                             appropriation
                         injudicious and defective) and develop strategy to control the rising                                                           orders
                         trend                                                                                                                           gradually
                      Review and revise re-appropriation delegation to more contemporary                                                                reduced to half
    Improve              levels                                                                                                                          of 2013 level
 predictability of   Provide capacity building to staff                                             High        Annual        FD
  availability of     Organize workshops to disseminate rules and procedures of re-
      funds              appropriations and Delegation of Financial Powers (DoFP) on fund
                         releases
                     Enact DoFP as rules                                                            High        March 2015    FD                         Provision
                      Issue DoFP as rules on the lines followed by GOI and some states                                                                  included in
                      Consider rush of expenditure as breach of financial propriety and                                                                 KFC
                         include provision in KFC
 Estimate budget     Improve budget process for salaries estimation                                 Medium      Budget year   HRMS Cell                  Appendix B
                                                          | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014     46
                                      Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

      Priority area/
                                                            Strategy                                         Priority       Timeframe              Responsibility              Target
        objective
       provision of        Integrate Appendix B 14 preparation with the Human Resource                                   2015-16            FD                           generated from
        salaries on         Management System                                                                                                                             HRMS
      realistic basis    Estimate salary for actual filled posts based on HRMS and posts
                            expected to be recruited during the year
                        Strengthen commitment controls by management of capital works                      Medium         Budget year        FD, Public Works             Commitment
                         Prepare Appendix E15 timely, fully and submit along with budget for                             2015-16            Department (PWD)             control
                            legislative approval and include all works covering all major heads                                              Water Resources              established
                         Prepare Appendix E on a rolling forecast model for 3 years                                                         Department (WRD)             Full Appendix
                         Introduce MTEF in major spending departments (e.g. PWD)                                                                                         E generated
  Improve budget                                                                                                                                                          and tabled in
    process and                                                                                                                                                           Legislature
   controls over                                                                                                                                                          along with
   capital works                                                                                                                                                          budget
                        Implement Project management software in works departments                         High           Budget year        FD, PWD, KII team            Appendix E
                         Develop capability in project management software (PMS) to prepare                              2015-16 KII                                     generated from
                            Appendix E                                                                                    implementation                                  PMS
                         Mainstream PMS and integrate with upgraded Khajane (KII)                                        plan
  Institute system      Review the process of schemes, merge schemes and weed out nonexistent              High                              FD
    for periodic        scheme heads on a regular basis                                                                                      Administrative
 rationalization of                                                                                                                          departments
      Schemes
     Implement          Implement DMTFP and results based budgeting in larger departments         Desirable
   Departmental          Adopt DMTFP in larger departments like PWD
       MTFP              Provide departments with more flexible budgets
                         Link budgets to RFD and desired results
     Enhance            Strengthen legislative scrutiny of budget                                 Medium    Budget         Finance Department/                            DRSCs
    Legislative          Implement Departmentally Related Standing Committee (DRSC)                        2016/17        Karnataka Legislative                          constituted and
scrutiny of budget          mechanism                                                                                      Secretariat                                    functioning
                         Build capacity of the Legislative Committee on Estimates and provide
                            adequate technical support
                         Legislature to devote more time on discussion and voting of grants
                                 Theme 3: Strengthening Accounting, Reporting, Controls and Transparency (Section 3 of the Appendix)
       Strengthen       Provide Capacity building to staff                                        High      Ongoing        FD
     Accounting and      Reiterate the requirements and rules of KFC for areas identified in the

14
  Appendix B is the budget document that contains full details of sanctioned, filled and vacant posts and estimation of salaries
15
  Appendix E is the budget document that contains details of ongoing works and those planned during the year by the Irrigation and Public Works Departments. Only works that
are administratively approved are included
                                                               | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014           47
                                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

  Priority area/
                                                       Strategy                                      Priority    Timeframe        Responsibility       Target
    objective
  Reporting for            report
 enhanced PFM             Provide regular training to accounts staff on requirements of the acts
   compliance              and rules
                      Strengthen monitoring and reconciliation of utilization certificates          High        Ongoing      FD
                       Designate a nodal office with adequate staff to collate and monitor
                           compliance of submission of Utilization Certificates (UC) with the
                           concerned departments and agencies
                       Plan one-time exercise to clear and clean up the backlog of
                           reconciliation of expenditure, and UCs
                       Reduce the periodicity of submission of UCs
                      Strengthen accounting process and disclosure requirements for CSS             High        March 2016   FD
                       Clarify roles and reporting requirements of GOI, GOK and
                           Implementing agencies in respect of CSS funds routed through the
                           state budget
                       Disclose transfers and actual expenditure of each centrally sponsored
                           scheme
                       Move CSS projects funds to Public Deposit accounts instead of Bank
                           accounts (in consultation with GoI)
                      Strengthen accounting process and disclosure requirements for ULBs            High        March 2016   Finance Department
                      and PRIs                                                                                               DMA
                       Constitute MIS cell to collect financial data                                                        RDPR
                       Disclose grants released to and expenditure incurred by urban and
                           rural local bodies (ULB/PRI) and PSUs
                       Take policy decision on fund II balance treatment for Zilla and Taluk
                           Panchayats (ZP/TP)
                       Prepare link documents using uniform object codes
                      Implement recommendations of the Central Finance Commissions on               Desirable                Finance Department
                      disclosure as outlined in the report
                      Adopt accrual based accounting system                                         Desirable                Finance Department
                      Develop a roadmap for transition from cash based accounting to accrual
                      accounting
                      Include all public sector entities in fiscal reports as sub-sectors of GoK    Desirable                Finance Department
Enhance Treasury      Implement Khajane II (KII) with full computerization at the level of          Ongoing                                        K II rolled out
processes, controls   Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDO)
   and reports        Develop implementation plan for KII                                           High        March 2015   KII team
     through           Develop a roll out plan for KII and cutoff date for completing the
implementation of          switchover and withdrawal of manual books
   Khajane II          Develop and implement a data migration strategy to capture legacy
                                                          | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014     48
                                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

  Priority area/
                                                     Strategy                                     Priority     Timeframe           Responsibility           Target
    objective
                        data in key areas
                       Develop a HR staffing plan, change management strategy and training
                        plan for all DDOs, Chief Controlling Officers and Treasury officials
                    Build capability in Khajane II to                                            High        As per KII
                     Integrate/link the software’s outlined in the report                                   implementation
                     Develop modules outlined in the report                                                 plan
  Improve cash       Carry out a study on cash management practices and debt scheduling.        High        As per KII        Finance Department       Cash
  management         Develop a cash forecasting model for monitoring cash management                        implementation                             forecasting
                        and integrate with KII.                                                              plan                                       module
                     Integrate cash balance and forecasting mechanism with debt                                                                        developed and
                        scheduling decision                                                                                                             implemented
                     Link cash management projections with the Monthly Programme
                        Implementation Calendar and procurement plans
Enhance controls    Create web-based information system for tracking and monitoring of           High        As per KII        KII
 over Subsidies     subsidies and interlink to KII                                                           implementation    team/FD/Administrative
                                                                                                             plan              departments
Enhance interface   Upgrade HRMS to advanced version of HRMS II                                              Ongoing           HRMS Cell                HRMS II rolled
   capability,                                                                                                                                          out
 scalability, and   Address systemic audit issues and initiate payroll audit                     High        Before roll out   HRMS Cell                Payroll audit
 integrity of the    Analyze C&AG audit report on HRMS and prepare mitigation plan                          of HRMS II                                 conducted
Human Resource       Initiate a comprehensive payroll audit for validating the database prior
  Management            to migration to and roll out of HRMS II
     System         Roll out e-payment of salaries across all districts.                         High        March 2015        HRMS Cell                100% e-
   application                                                                                                                 FD                       payment of
                                                                                                                                                        salaries
                    Provide capacity building to departments on KTTP and e-procurement
                     Conduct capacity building programs, trainings and workshops for staff
                        across departments                                                       Medium      March 2016
                     Provide user guidance manual and share with the procuring entities
                        working on KTTP and e-procurement                                                                      E-procurement Cell
                    Address systemic audit issues and conduct IT audit                                                         (DPAR)
  Strengthen e-
  Procurement        Analyze C&AG audit report on procurement and prepare mitigation                                          FD
                                                                                                   High       March 2015       E-procurement Cell
     systems            plan for issues noted in case of violation of KTTP/e-procurement
                     Initiate audit of the e-procurement software by C&AG                                                     (DPAR)
                    Enhance functionalities of e-procurement software Include:
                                                                                                                                                        Functionalities
                     Online Bid Evaluation Process                                              Medium       March 2016                                included in the
                     Issue of work order in the system (or this function needs to be
                                                                                                                                                        software

                                                       | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014      49
                                  Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

  Priority area/
                                                     Strategy                                     Priority    Timeframe           Responsibility       Target
    objective
                         captured in KII)
                      Provisions for Expression of Interest
                      Contract Management Module
 Enhance Fiscal      Disclose information on all major contracts awarded on the e-Procurement                                                      Major
 Transparency        website.                                                                                                                      Contracts
                                                                                                   High       March 2015                           awarded, as
                                                                                                                                                   defined, in
                                                                                                                                                   public domain
                                   Theme 4: Improving Fiscal Assets and Liability Management System (Section 4 of the Appendix)

                     Strengthen Controls over Issuance, Recording and Reporting of               High        March 2016    ALMC/FD                 Guarantee
                     Guarantees                                                                                                                    Policy issued
Enhance controls      Develop Government Guarantee Policy
over Guarantees       Operationalize Guarantee Redemption Fund
                      Strengthen guarantee database and reconciliation efforts
                      Establish system for tracking, recording and reporting
                     Further enhance controls over Off-Budget Borrowings                         High        Annual        FD                      Off-budget
                      Ensure that budgetary funds directed towards debt servicing are                                                             borrowings
  Phase out Off           utilized for the intended purposes by the PSU/SPV. This will ensure                                                      gradually
     Budget               better cash management                                                                                                   phased out
   Borrowings         Make adequate disclosure of OBB on account of ULBs in the Budget
                          document and MTFP, include the amount outstanding for the
                          computation of Total liabilities
                      Phase out Off-budget borrowings
Strengthen system    Government’s Investment Portfolio is reconciled to reflect correct          Immediate   March 2015    Asset Liability         Differences up
  of Recording,      position                                                                                              Management Cell         to March 2013
  Consolidation,      Develop Operational Guidelines, in consultation with the AG to                                      (ALMC)                  gradually
Reconciliation and        provide clear norms for determination, timing of accounting and                                  FD                      reconciled and
 Reporting of the         reporting of investments                                                                                                 no current
   Investment         Issue clear-cut Government orders indicating intent when authorizing                                                        reconciliation
     Portfolio            investment                                                                                                               issues are
                      Strengthen efforts for identification and reconciliation of differences                                                     allowed to
                          between state accounts and investee-company accounts                                                                     accumulate
 Institutionalize    Institutionalize the function of debt management, strengthen debt data      High        March 2015    FD                      Integrated Cash
       Debt          recording and reporting                                                                                                       and Debt
  Management,         Set up a combined Cash and Debt Management Office for cash and                                                              Management
 Recording and            debt management recording and reporting.                                                                                 office

                                                        | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014    50
                                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

  Priority area/
                                                       Strategy                                     Priority    Timeframe           Responsibility            Target
    objective
    Reporting            Reconcile debt data with the AG on priority                                                                                     functional
    functions            Disclose debt data and DSA on the website of the Finance
                          Department.

Strengthen system     Strengthen system of Recording, Consolidation and Reporting                  High        March 2016      CCO/ALMC                   Differences up
  of Recording,        Initiate special audit of detailed records of loans and advances                                                                  to March 2013
  Consolidation,          maintained departmentally                                                                                                       gradually
reconciliation and     Strengthen efforts for identification and reconciliation of differences                                                           reconciled and
   Reporting of           between state accounts and balance maintained by GOK                                                                            no current
    Loans and          Develop strategy to address significant arrears in repayment of loans                                                             reconciliation
    Advances           Disseminate rules governing sanction and monitoring of loans and                                                                  issues are
                          advances and ensure compliance                                                                                                  allowed to
                                                                                                                                                          accumulate
Decline in stock of   Strengthen system of Recording, Consolidation and Reporting and              High        March 2016      FD                         Arrears,       as
   Arrears of         Monitoring                                                                                                                          defined,
    Payment            Develop a strategy for clearance of arrears as on a cut-off date                                                                  reduced to not
                       Provide a formal definition of payment arrears for its due recognition                                                            more than 2%
                       Institute a system for recording and reporting arrears across GOK                                                                 of          total
                       Disclose expenditure payments outstanding in the mid-year report and                                                              expenditure
                           budget documents.
   Strengthen         Institute measures to clear backlog and avoid recurrence                     High        September       Finance Department/        Unencashed
internal controls,     Initiate a special study to identify the underpinning causes                           2016            Directorate of             cheques as of
   accounting,         Formulate and implement a strategy to clear backlog                                                    Treasuries                 March      2013
  reporting and        Commence monthly reporting of lapsed cheque to AG and finalize                                                                    reverted    and
adjustments over           accounting treatment of cancelled cheques                                                                                      no       current
   Unencashed          Reduce the periodicity of cancellation of unencashed cheques to 3                                                                 build up are
    Cheques                months                                                                                                                         allowed       to
                                                                                                                                                          accumulate

                                          Theme 5: Strengthening Audit and Legislative Oversight (Section 5 of the Appendix)

 Institutionalize     Strengthen and modernize internal audit to improve internal controls         High        March 2016      Finance Department         Strategy for
Internal Audit in      Conduct a situational analysis of current internal audit arrangements in                               with support from select   internal audit
      GOK                 GOK departments                                                                                      high spending revenue      function
                       Develop risk-based strategy for implementing internal audit function                                   and spending               developed
                          in the State;                                                                                        departments
                       Carry out categorization of departments and initiate internal audit in
                          high spending departments and implement gradually

                                                          | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014    51
                                Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

  Priority area/
                                                   Strategy                                   Priority    Timeframe        Responsibility       Target
    objective
                     Develop and implement Internal Audit Manual
    Improve         Strengthen mechanisms for follow up of external audit findings and       High        March 2016   FD                    Outstanding
Responsiveness to   recommendations                                                                                                         replies to
 External Audit      Re-iterate the seriousness of non-compliance with audit paras and                                                     Inspection
                        prescribe action for continuous failure to take action                                                              Reports and
                     Strengthen the institution of Ad Hoc committee at department level                                                    Audit Paras as
                        and Apex Committees at state level                                                                                  of March 2013
                     Clarify and enhance role of the IFA in follow up of audit reports                                                     submitted
                     Take measures to ensure expeditious recovery of revenue at least in
                        cases accepted by the Department
                    Enhance functionality of the Audit Monitoring System for effective       High        March 2015   Controller Accounts   AMS data,
                    monitoring of compliance                                                                          Management            including
                     Mandate data input in the Audit Monitoring System as compulsory                                                       responses, up
                        and Controller to monitor on a frequent basis                                                                       to December
                     Integrate Audit Monitoring System with database maintained by                                                         2014 updated
                        CoPA                                                                                                                by March 2015
                     Include KSAD audit reports and response in the system
                     Include qualitative aspects to assess systemic issues
                    Develop strategy and carry out one time reduction of audit arrears       High        March 2015   KSAD                  Audit of FY
                                                                                                                                            2013/14
                                                                                                                                            completed by
                                                                                                                                            March 2015
                    Enhance staffing and improve skill sets through capacity building        High        Ongoing      KSAD                  Number of
                     Increase cadre strength of KSAD                                                                                       staff deputed to
                     Organize training for KSAD staff on commercial accounting and                                                         IFA, Finance
                       modern audit practices                                                                                               Department for
Strengthen KSAD      Identify train and groom core group of KSAD staff to take up role of                                                  PFM services
 to improve PFM        IFAs and enhance their PFM capabilities to take up enhanced role to
      services         support FD
                    Enablers for improving audit effectiveness and efficiency                High        March 2016   KSAD                  Audit Act and
                     Enact KSAD Audit Act to provide a legal status to KSAD                                          FD                    Manual
                     Develop and implement a comprehensive audit manual                                                                    implemented
                     Monitor and improve compliance through a Centralized Audit
                       monitoring cell
                    Implement modern audit practices to improve efficiency                   High        March 2016   KSAD
                     Risk based audit
                     Co-sourcing

                                                     | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014   52
                               Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

 Priority area/
                                                   Strategy                                  Priority     Timeframe        Responsibility           Target
   objective
                   Financial Attest Audit
                   Audit Management software
                   Audit of ULBs and GPs through their computerized systems
                  Strengthen effectiveness of Legislative Committee                         High         March 2016   FD                        Action Taken
 Strengthen        Prescribe strict timelines for response to reports of the Legislative                             AG                        Reports
 Legislative          Committee by the departments, and action for delayed or non-                                    Legislative Secretariat   outstanding as
 Scrutiny of          compliance                                                                                                                of March 2013
External Audit     Increase the technical human resources at the disposal of the                                                               submitted
   Reports            Committee on Public Accounts (CoPA)
                   Place the Action Taken Reports in public domain after they are laid
                      before the State Legislature
                               Theme 6: Improving PFM in Local Self Governments and PSUs (Section 6 and 7 of the Appendix)

                  Enhance controls to increase Own Source Revenue                           High         March 2015   UDD and DMA               Progressive
                   Update Demand Collection Balance Register to monitor and reconcile                                RDPR                      increase in own
                     own source revenue                                                                               GPs                       tax collections
                   Move towards e-receipts and collections through banks for all taxes                               ULBs                      by a specified
                                                                                                                                                % each year
                                                                                                                                                Increase in e-
                                                                                                                                                collections
                  Improve timeliness of accounts in ULBs and GPs                            High         March 2016   UDD and DMA               All     accounts
                   Develop and implement strategy to clear backlog of accounts                                       RDPR                      for FY 2015/16
                   Ensure full migration from manual systems of accounting to                                        GPs                       submitted for
                     computerized systems                                                                             ULBs                      audit by Jun
Improve PFM in                                                                                                                                  2016
  Local Self                                                                                                                                    All ULBs and
 Governments                                                                                                                                    GPs fully
                                                                                                                                                migrated to
                                                                                                                                                computerized
                                                                                                                                                accounting
                  Enhance integrity of accounts in ZPs and TPs                              High         March 2016   RDPR
                   Carry out one time cleanup of old balances and suspense account,                                  FD
                     bank accounts and closure of inactive accounts
                   Include MPAS reports and reports on banking transactions in the
                     financial statements through amendment in Municipal Financial Rules
                  Improve timeliness and responsiveness of audits in ULBs and GPs           High         March 2016   KSAD                      All audits up to
                   Develop and implement strategy to clear the backlog of pending audits                             UDD and DMA               FY 2015/16
                     in ULBs and GPs                                                                                  RDPR                      completed by

                                                     | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014   53
                               Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

 Priority area/
                                                  Strategy                                     Priority    Timeframe       Responsibility         Target
   objective
                      Constitute Audit Cell in DMA and RDPR for audit follow up and                                                          September
                       management                                                                                                             2016
                  Institute internal audit to strengthen internal controls                    High        March 2015   UDD and DMA            Audit Wings
                   Set up an internal audit wing with mandate and staff                                               RDPR                   established
                   Finalize and establish Internal Audit structure in TPs (based on study                             FD                     within
                       already completed)                                                                                                     UDD/DMA
                                                                                                                                              and RDPR
                  Enhance accounting and auditing                                             High        March 2015   Department of Public   Clear all
                   Develop and implement strategy to clear the backlog of accounts                                    Enterprises            backlog of all
                   Review external audit findings, including functioning of internal audit                            Concerned              accounts by FY
                      and audit committee                                                                              Administrative         2015.
Strengthen PFM    Establish effective nodal agency for SOEs                                   High        March 2015   Departments            DPE
 and Corporate     Enhance the role of the DPE as an effective nodal agency for State                                 State Owned            designated as
 Governance in        Owned Enterprises                                                                                Enterprises (SOE)      nodal agency
  State Owned                                                                                                                                 for SOEs
   Enterprises    Enhance corporate governance framework                                      High                                            Central Model
                   Conduct a SWOT analysis of existing corporate governance practices                                                        Code of
                     in GOK and develop strategy for improving corporate governance                                                           Corporate
                     considering the extant framework applicable to central PSUs                                                              Governance
                                                                                                                                              implemented in
                                                                                                                                              10 major
                                                                                                                                              companies




                                                     | Annex 1: Proposed PFM Reform Action Plan - 2014    54
                                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014

           ANNEX 2: 2004 - PFMA ACTION PLAN ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND CURRENT STATUS
This section contains the action plan as proposed in 2004 report, updated with the current status of actions in the identified areas. In case where the
action have been taken and completed by the GoK, the impact has been documented. The 2004 baseline and the reforms carried out are
documented in the Analysis Report under respective sections.

                                                  2004 Action Plan – Accomplishment and Current Status
           2004 Reform Plan                           Agreed Action                   Accomplishment/Current Status                               Impact
I. Budget preparation and implementation
(a) Ensure budget passage at start of fiscal year
Present budget in early Feb so that it can Issue revised budget calendar            The budget is presented by March of the           The full budget is passed in
be passed by end-March.                                                             previous year, but only a Vote on Account is      June/July during the second phase
                                                                                    passed before the start of the Financial Year     of the budget session that is 3-4
                                                                                    (FY).                                             months into the FY. This action
                                                                                                                                      needs to be implemented by GoK.
                                        Revise MTFP production schedule to          MTFP is presented along with the budget
                                        finalize by time of budget passage          (since 2008). Instructions to provide inputs to
                                        (2004-05) or presentation (2005/06).        the MTFP are detailed in the budget calendar.
                                        Include MTFP production in revised
                                        budget calendar.
(b) Phase out off-budget borrowing (OBB)
Reduce off-budget borrowing every year, Reduce to Rs 1,140 crore in 2004-05         There were no fresh OBBs during 2008/09 to        The total fiscal liabilities,
and eliminate at earliest opportunity   and Rs 720 crore in 05/06, as per           2010/11 and fresh OBBs raised during              including OBB, are within the
                                        MTFP. Eliminate in 06/07.                   2011/12 and 2012/13 were less than the            limits prescribed by the XIIIth
                                                                                    repayments. The outstanding OBB as at the         Central Finance Commission.
                                                                                    close of FY 2012/13 was Rs. 1,455 crore
                                                                                    reduced from Rs. 5,582 in 2008/09.
(c) Improve budget realism
Improve tax forecasting                    Prepare pro forma for tax forecasts to   The budget circulars require Estimating
                                           quantify impact of growth and reform     Officers to present a 3-year forward estimate
                                           for all tax departments                  revenue and assumptions made. The circulars
                                                                                    provide guidance on estimating revenues.
                                           Publish pro forma tax forecasts with     Tax forecasts for the next three years are
                                           budget                                   outlined in the MTFP.
                                           Fiscal intelligence cell to be            The Commercial Tax Department (CTD), the         This recommendations needs to
                                           established in FD.                       biggest revenue department has floated            be followed by GoK

                                    | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status        55
                                  Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
          2004 Reform Plan                             Agreed Action                       Accomplishment/Current Status                              Impact
                                                                                      consultancy tender for setting up an Economic
                                                                                      Intelligence Unit to improve inter alia the
                                                                                      analytical capabilities of CTD
Base budget    on   realistic   resource   Start budget process with updating         This practice is being followed during budget
envelope.                                  and agreement on total resource            preparation. However, there are significant in-
                                           envelope     (realistic   revenue     &    year budget amendments.
                                           affordable borrowing) for the budget,
                                           approved by Government, and stick to
                                           this.
Base budget on realistic expenditure       Line Departments and Finance to            Arrears of payments including electricity are     This recommendations needs to
estimates                                  prioritize and fully-fund existing         not being budgeted fully while drawing up the     be followed by GoK
                                           commitments         (e.g.    electricity   budget and the outstanding is increasing over
                                           payments, retained schemes) over new       the years. Data on arrears are partially
                                           programs during budget preparation.        available. There are also incomplete projects.
                                           Ensure schemes announced in the            In respect of schemes, the Finance
                                           Budget are properly screened and           Department has issued guidelines for their
                                           fully budgeted.                            approval and for making budgetary
                                                                                      provisions.
Limit Supplementary Budgets and            Develop     Pro   forma      for   all     Pro forma for collecting the revised estimates
schemes introduced outside the budget      supplementary budget requests and          for supplementary is issued along with the
cycle                                      new policy initiatives coming to           budget circular, which is followed.
                                           Cabinet to indicate off-setting fiscal
                                           measures as per FRA
                                           From next supplementary budget on,         The position in respect of SEs remains the        The impact on the fiscal
                                           include “fiscal neutrality? table          same as was the situation in 2004. The            indicators is not stated in the SE.
                                           showing, per grant, amount funded          percentage of aggregate SEs to original           This is not strictly in line with the
                                           through tied grants, adjustments,          estimates has increased from 8-10% then to        KFRA Act.
                                           expenditure cuts, revenue increases        between 14-18% now. Fiscal neutrality table
                                           etc.                                       is not explicitly shown per grant and it is
                                                                                      displayed at an aggregate level. Though the
                                                                                      SEs provides overall sources of financing, this
                                                                                      includes “cash outgo? and the impact of the
                                                                                      SEs is not offset through reduction of
                                                                                      expenditure or revenue augmentation. This is
                                                                                      apparent as such details are not provided in

                                   | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status           56
                                  Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
          2004 Reform Plan                            Agreed Action                       Accomplishment/Current Status                        Impact
                                                                                   the SE document. Some of the departments
                                                                                   show      significant      requirements of
                                                                                   supplementary demands.
                                           Reduce number of supplementary          Each year three SEs are prepared and           A       heavy      reliance      on
                                           budgets                                 presented to the State Legislature.            supplementary               budgets
                                           to 1                                                                                   undermines the discipline and
                                                                                                                                  sanctity of the budget process.
                                                                                                                                  Even now these estimates come
                                                                                                                                  without     offsets     in    other
                                                                                                                                  expenditures to ensure that deficit
                                                                                                                                  targets were met.
(d) Introduce Departmental budgeting for more accountability and flexibility
Consolidate Plan and non-Plan budget Finance and Plan to agree on                  Plan and non-plan ceilings are worked out by   GoK should target implementing
allocations into Departmental resource Departmental ceilings (both Plan and        Finance and Plan and agreed, DMTFP are         DMTFP at least in high spending
envelopes.                               non-Plan) to be issued for each           presently not being developed to guide the     departments like PWD, WRD and
                                         Department at start of budgetary          discussion.                                    RDPR so that budgeting and
                                         process (to be included in new budget                                                    MTFP can be drawn more
                                         calendar).                                                                               realistically and departmental
                                         DMTFP ceilings to be used as starting                                                    ceilings can be fixed by the FD.
                                         point for next year’s budget
                                         negotiations
Reduce number of line-items (schemes, Further reduction in schemes in 2003-        While object heads has been reduced, the       FD should review the number of
and object heads) in budget              04                                        numbers of schemes have not reduced –there     schemes with each administrative
                                                                                   are still some 1600 schemes presently.         department and reduce the
                                                                                                                                  number of schemes. This exercise
                                                                                                                                  should be carried out at least once
                                                                                                                                  in every three years. Department
                                                                                                                                  of Agriculture carried out such an
                                                                                                                                  exercise and significantly reduced
                                                                                                                                  the number of schemes.
Budget by broad departmental programs      Prepare dummy budget along program      Such an exercise has presently not been
(groups of related individual schemes)     lines for 2003-04, and then prepare     adopted.
and by broad expenditure categories        and present 04-05 budgets along these
(groups of related object heads).          lines.
Treasury MIS to report to Departments by   Reporting by grants                     Such     a   reporting   system   has   been

                                   | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status       57
                                    Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
           2004 Reform Plan                             Agreed Action                       Accomplishment/Current Status                             Impact
Grants and Program                        Reporting by programs                       implemented.
(e) Strengthen performance orientation of Departments
Evaluate performance of department Hold              workshops      to    evaluate    Departments commenced preparation of the
against agreed output/outcome targets     departmental        performance     with    DMTFPs but have since been discontinued
                                          DMTFPs as basis.
                                          DMTFPs to be produced with budget
                                          and submitted to Subject Committees
Incentivize Departments to raise revenue Introduce performance against non-tax
(non-tax revenues, and CSS expenditures) revenue and CSS expenditure targets
                                          as performance criteria for DMTFPs,
                                          with monthly monitoring using
                                          Treasury data.
                                          Reward Departments with good
                                          revenue         performance      through
                                          increased allocation.
(f) Improve budgetary expenditure allocation and screening process
For civil works departments, prioritize Include full maintenance requirements         Guidelines on such lines are provided in the        GoK needs to give priority in
non-salary spending in order of: (i) as committed expenditure in the                  budget circular. However, in actual practice        budget to arrears and ongoing
arrears; (ii) maintenance; (iii) existing budget.                                     this is not being strictly followed in view of      projects over new projects
capital projects (in order of degree of For capital projects, give priority in        significant arrears of payments. This issue is
completion); (iv) new capital projects    budget       to arrears and ongoing         still relevant and the practice has broadly
                                          projects over new projects                  remained the same as assessed in 2004.
Avoid spreading capital funds thinly      Budget only to include only capital         Instructions have been issued by GoK on             GoK to ensure Appendix E is
                                          projects which are (i) fully funded; (ii)   these lines and norms for budget provisions         submitted to the Legislature with
                                          have passed cost-benefit analysis; and      have also been determined. However the delay        the budget and only those works
                                          (iii) have received administrative          in preparation and clearance of Appendix E          approved by the Legislature is
                                          approval.                                   (list of works) is negating the benefits of these   executed and paid
                                          No projects in Appendix E with token        changes.
                                          provision. Include in Appendix E
                                          expected completion dates.
Avoid introduction of new schemes Budget only to include new schemes                  As above. This issue is still relevant and the
unless well-justified and fully-funded.   which (i) have been approved by             practice has not changed.
                                          Expenditure Review Committee and
                                          (ii) are fully funded.
(g) Simplify budget implementation and improve cash flow
                                     | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status          58
                                    Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
           2004 Reform Plan                             Agreed Action                      Accomplishment/Current Status                             Impact
Reduce financial clearances required post-   FD to further enhance individual         Individual clearance limits (powers for           There      is     a    perceptible
Budget approval                              clearance limits.                        financial sanction and also release of funds)     improvement in the pace of
                                             Departments to enhance delegation of     have been continuously enhanced since 2006        expenditure, and decline in rush
                                             financial powers of Heads of             and departments now have more flexibility in      of expenditure during the last
                                             Departments (HODs)                       terms of release of funds without recourse to     quarter/month thus improving the
                                                                                      the Finance Department and more clarity on        quality of public expenditure.
                                                                                      different types of funds flow. Powers at the
                                                                                      level of HoDs and below have also been
                                                                                      enhanced and codified and power to re-
                                                                                      appropriate at the level of HoD has also been
                                                                                      enhanced.
Improve cash flow management to avoid        Budget cuts, if required, to be issued   There have been no significant budget cuts
payment delays.                              early.                                   during the last few years.
                                             Review recommendations of Box 6 of
                                             PFMA report on cash flow
                                             requirements
(h) Strengthen internal controls
Strengthen budgetary controls        over    Treasury to provide and Departments      Treasury provided monthly statements to the
outlays and commitments                      to use monthly receipts and payments     departments which can be used for monitoring
                                             MIS to monitor budgets. Quarterly        budget. However the issue is that departments
                                             review of expenditure vis-à-vis budget   don’t do reconciliation on a regular basis.
                                             by Expenditure Committee. IFAs to
                                             be strengthened to support budget
                                             monitoring and internal controls (see
                                             VI).
                                             Strengthen control over capital works    LoC system has been withdrawn and all             Computerization of Appendix E is
                                             by    capital   works     (App.     E)   payments are being made through treasury.         a suggestion which is relevant
                                             computerization, and extension of        Appendix E computerization has not been           even today and GoK needs to
                                             Treasury computerization to include      done. PWD has started implementing works          develop and implement software
                                             LoC.                                     software from last year and the results are yet   in this regard.
                                                                                      to be seen.
                                             Computerization of DDOs (see II d) to    This is planned under the upgraded Khajane
                                             enable commitment controls.              (KII) new IFMIS system under development
Remove open-ended obligation in power        Implementation of purchaser-provider
sector.                                      model.

                                     | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status         59
                                    Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
           2004 Reform Plan                             Agreed Action                    Accomplishment/Current Status                             Impact
Revision of Treasury Code, Financial         Revise Financial Code.                 This action is yet to be done
Code, Budget Manual and related
Codes/Manuals    to modernize, and           Revise other Codes and Manuals         This action is yet to be done
simplify
Strengthen borrowing and guarantee           All Departments to refer all           All debt is now raised centrally by the FD.
controls                                     borrowings to FD for prior approval.   Debt is now raised with the approval of the
                                                                                    FD and monitored. Individual departments do
                                                                                    not have the power to negotiate loans directly.
                                             Strengthen guarantee controls          GoK has centralized the maintenance of the        A database of Guarantees is
                                                                                    data in respect of Guarantees with DSS in         available with GoK The process
                                                                                    2005. The DSS collects annual information on      of recording and reconciliation of
                                                                                    guarantees from the respective institutions on    Guarantees         has        been
                                                                                    whose behalf the guarantee was issued in          institutionalized and reporting of
                                                                                    prescribed form and updates its database that     Guarantees has been formalized.
                                                                                    is presently maintained on spreadsheets.
                                             FD to sign guarantee issuance to       FD issues the concurrence for giving of           This action is deemed complete as
                                             enable control over guarantees.        Guarantees through a GO and authorizes the        the authority to sign the guarantee
                                                                                    Principal Secretary/ Secretary of the             has been formalized.
                                                                                    concerned Administrative Department to sign
                                                                                    the guarantee document.
(i) Increase fiscal transparency
Make more fiscal data available to public.   Table Finance Accounts in Assembly     During the last three years (2009-2012) the       Timely scrutiny of the finance
                                             session following their receipt from   audited Finance Accounts were placed before       accounts by the PAC, leading to
                                             AG.                                    the Legislature within 2-3 months (the next       faster     action    and     faster
                                                                                    session of the Legislature) as compared to one    availability of information to the
                                                                                    year in 2004.                                     public.
                                                                                                                                      Reduction of time lag by 9
                                                                                                                                      months.
                                             Place Finance Accounts and Accounts    Finance Accounts is available on the website
                                             at a Glance on the Web and make        of AG Karnataka after they are tabled in
                                             available in electronic form (CD) .    Legislature
                                             Publish full budget on Web and in      Full set of budget documents are available on
                                             electronic form (CD).                  the website of Finance Department after they
                                                                                    are presented in the State Legislature


                                     | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status          60
                                        Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
              2004 Reform Plan                               Agreed Action                         Accomplishment/Current Status                         Impact
                                                 Ensure monthly data on Web up to           Monthly Accounts at Glance and Monthly
                                                 date.                                      Civil Accounts are available on the website of
                                                                                            AG Karnataka The monthly reports are
                                                                                            available within 1-2 months.
Publish half-yearly review as per FRA            Prepare review for April-September         The mid-year review is done regularly and
                                                 03 and table in Assembly                   tabled in the Legislature and available in
                                                                                            public domain within 2 months from the close
                                                                                            of the half-year.
Treasury to establish Web with MIS               Underway.                                  This action has been completed. Treasury
                                                                                            provides all the MIS reports
Publish data on stock of pending bills.          Publish on FD website stock of             This is presently not being done.
                                                 pending Treasury bills on monthly
                                                 basis.
Ensure bills paid on first-in, first-out         Monitor queue jumping in Loc bills by      These actions have been completed by GoK
(FIFO) principle                                 publishing individual pending and
                                                 paid bills on Finance Website in dated
                                                 order.
                                                 Extend Treasury computerization to
                                                 include LoC payments
Put audit reports and responses on the           Place PAC reports on the Web               Full reports of the Legislative oversight        This action is relevant now also
Web                                              Consider placing audit responses on        committees 16 are not placed on the Web.         and GoK needs to put the reports
                                                 the Web                                    However, parts of the reports in respect of      and response in the Web.
                                                                                            which an Action Taken Report is required
                                                                                            from a department, are available on the Audit
                                                                                            Monitoring System.
II. Financial Computerization and MIS
(a) Treasury computerization (Khajane)
Use Treasury computerization to develop          Review and improve         MIS reports     All these reports are available with treasury
Treasury as single-point payment agency,         (e.g.,    Departmental      expenditure    and departments.
and to develop financial MIS.                    monitoring      reports,    exceptions/
Phase out LoC system                             variance reports)
                                                 Introduce computerized      receipt for
                                                 bills (tokens).

16
     Committee on Public Accounts, Committee on Public Enterprises and Committee on Local Bodies
                                         | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status          61
                                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
           2004 Reform Plan                           Agreed Action                      Accomplishment/Current Status                          Impact
                                           Develop service standards for bill       This has been implemented. The treasury is
                                           payment by Treasury                      required to make payments on FIFO basis
                                                                                    within 5 days of the entry of the bill in the
                                                                                    system.
                                           Eliminate non-Bank treasuries, and       This action has been completed
                                           reliance on RBI as agency bank.
                                           Carry out risk audit of Khajane.         Risk and IT audit has been completed in 2009
                                                                                    and on the        recommendations, KII an
                                                                                    advanced IFMIS is being implemented
                                         Computerize civil service payments:        Pension computerization is under progress.
                                         Develop      computerized      database,
                                         compute pension amounts through the
                                         computerized system, and make direct
                                         payments to the Bank accounts of
                                         individual civil pensioners
                                         Extend computerized Treasury to            Except Appendix E all other action have been
                                         include all LoC payments, and extend       completed.
                                         Treasury payment budgetary control
                                         module to cover Appendix E projects
                                         and non-plan civil works. Obtain and
                                         include information on non-treasury
                                         flows (e.g., direct transactions at RBI
                                         Nagpur, inter-governmental and other
                                         adjustments in AG’s Office) in
                                         computerized system. Generate daily
                                         information on State Government’s
                                         Bank balance from the Treasury
                                         system.
(b) Capital Works Control (Appendix E) computerization
Computerization to enable better control Develop       implementation       plan;   There is delay in preparation of Appendix E     This action is relevant and needs
of budgeting and implementation of complete software development and                and is presently not presented in Legislature   to be carried out by GoK
capital or civil works for Appendix E hardware procurement.                         along with the budget. Appendix E is also
Departments (PWD, MI, WRD) with link 2003-04 Appendix E of budget                   incomplete as not all works under all major
to the Treasury payment system.          produced using computerized system.        heads are being included. This budget
                                                                                    document is not tabled in the State

                                    | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status       62
                                            Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
               2004 Reform Plan                                    Agreed Action                           Accomplishment/Current Status                                  Impact
                                                                                                     Legislature. This action is yet to be done.
                                           Implement in the 3 major capital                          As above. This action is yet to be done.                This action is relevant and needs
                                           works Departments.                                                                                                to be carried out by GoK
(c) Payroll Computerization (linked to HR Database and Treasury)
Computerize payroll to enable central Pilot computerized payment of                                  Development of HRMS commenced in 2005,
generation of monthly payroll and salaries at Secretariat level.                                     after piloting was rolled out in the entire state
payment of salaries, as well as                                                                      in a phase manner. The secretariat was
management of             employee-related                                                           covered in 2009/10
accounts (e.g. insurance)                  Complete HR database and initiate                         A      computerized       Human        Resource         HRMS covers all employees of
                                           payroll computerization (complete                         Management System (HRMS) as a centralized               the        state       government
                                           plan. award contracts)                                    web based application has been implemented              (approximately 5.5 lacs including
                                                                                                     across the State. HRMS covers both service              teachers)      besides     covering
                                                                                                     records and pay bill generation. It comprises           employees of Taluk Panchayats
                                                                                                     the following seven modules – Service                   and urban local bodies, 70,000
                                                                                                     Register, Pay Bill, Transfers, Promotion,               employees       of   fully    aided
                                                                                                     Suspension, Compliant Monitoring and                    educational institution and of
                                                                                                     Reports.                                                some public sector undertakings
                                                                                                                                                             and about a lac Anganwadi
                                                                                                                                                             workers. This is a major
                                                                                                                                                             achievement as expenditure on
                                                                                                                                                             salaries (excluding district and
                                                                                                                                                             block panchayats 17 ) constitute
                                                                                                                                                             about 20% of revenue receipts
                                                                                                                                                             and about 14% of total revenue
                                                                                                                                                             expenditure during 2011/12.18
                                                     Start issuing cheque to individual              E-payments to staff directly from treasury              Faster payments and better
                                                     employees rather than each DDO.                 have been rolled out in 15 districts while in           internal controls thus reducing
                                                                                                     other districts the payment is made by the              burden of data entry and
                                                                                                     Treasury to the DDO in form of cheque which             reconciliation.
                                                                                                     is further handed over to the staff.                    In Khajane II, the default mode of
                                                                                                                                                             payment is planned to be
                                                                                                                                                             electronic transfers to the


17
     Salary is presently part of the grants released to the Panchayats. Salary is accounted for at the district Panchayats but not included in state accounts.
18
     Report on State Finances for the year ended Mar 31, 2012, C &AG
                                             | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status                    63
                                       Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
            2004 Reform Plan                                Agreed Action                         Accomplishment/Current Status                                Impact
                                                                                                                                                accounts of the payee.
(d) DDOs computerization
Computerize       DDOs       to     enable Initiate preparatory work (procedures            This is being done as a part of the KII
commitment controls, recording and study, linkages with Treasury and                        implementation
reporting; computerized bill preparation other systems, computerization plan)
(machine readable at Treasury); receipts
and payments record keeping; sub- Initiate             computerization    (award            This is being done as a part of the KII
accounts/detailed accounts for loans, contracts)                                            implementation
advances, etc.; records and registers at
DDOs; bills payable/arrears recording and
reporting; fixed assets (stores and stock)
registers
(e) Accelerating Monthly Accounts preparation schedule
Use Treasury computerization to enable Revise target dates for Monthly                      The LoC system has been discontinued. The           This action has been completed.
AG to accelerate production of monthly Accounts: rendering of accounts by                   current target date for submission of monthly       Accounts from treasury are share
accounts.                                  treasury and LoC Departments to                  compiled accounts by Treasuries to the AG is        with AG (A&E) in soft copy
                                           AG’s Office by 10th of next month;               9th of the next month (except that State Huzur      which is imported by AG (A&E).
                                           Monthly Accounts by AG to State                  Treasury submits by 18th). There are instances      A&E finalizes the accounts based
                                           Government by 25th of next month.                of delayed submission of monthly accounts by        on the treasury accounts and
                                                                                            the Treasuries19.                                   inputs from RBI. The Voucher
                                                                                            Monthly Accounts by AG to the Government            level entry has been dispensed
                                                                                            is usually made available between 25 to 55          with by AG.
                                                                                            days from close of the month.
III. Accounting Issues
(a) Public Account clean-up
Reduce backlog of public accounts and           Focus first on large funds, and take        The balances in these accounts as at the year-      One time action was carried out
prevent build-up in future.                     measures for one-time clean-up and to       end are required to be transferred back to the      by GoK. But this action still
                                                prevent build up in the future.             Consolidated Fund. This rule is not strictly        remains relevant and needs to be
                                                PRI and municipal funds: one-time           being followed in Karnataka and significant         done on a periodical basis.
                                                clean up, annual closure in the future      balances are carried forward to the subsequent
                                                to prevent build-up.                        year/s. Nearly half of the PD accounts are


19
  The AG (A&E) has reported delays in 2011-12 of up to 15 days on 294 occasions and over 15 up to 30 days on 18 occasions and over 30 days on 1 occasion. Persistent delays
are from State Huzur, Bangalore (Urban) and Bangalore (Rural) Treasuries - PAG (A&E), Karnataka Report on the Annual Review of the Working of the Treasuries for the year
2011-12 (April 5, 2013).
                                        | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status              64
                                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
           2004 Reform Plan                            Agreed Action                      Accomplishment/Current Status                            Impact
                                            KBJNL Deposits: Close????                inoperative, some have adverse balances and
                                            PDAs: Backlog: Prepare break-down        none of the Administrators have reconciled        One time action was carried out
                                            as on March 31, 2003 (individual         the balances with the Treasury and the AG         by GoK. But this action still
                                            item/entity wise, if necessary year-     (A&E).                                            remains relevant and needs to be
                                            wise).     Reconcile with totals in                                                        done on a periodical basis.
                                            Finance Accounts.         Write-back
                                            amounts as appropriate (e.g., amounts
                                            lapsed/expired, differences between
                                            totals and individual items). Prevent
                                            further build-up: Regularly prepare
                                            break-down and match with total
                                            accounts (monthly); review and close
                                            regularly (comprehensive GO to be
                                            issued)
                                            Reduce number of PDAs. Ban use of                                                          One time action was carried out
                                            PDAs for budget carry-forward                                                              by GoK. But this action still
                                            purposes.                                                                                  remains relevant and needs to be
                                                                                                                                       done on a periodical basis.
                                            Extend above process for PDAs to                                                           One time action was carried out
                                            other deposits and accounts                                                                by GoK. But this action still
                                                                                                                                       remains relevant and needs to be
                                                                                                                                       done on a periodical basis.
                                            Suspense       and      Miscellaneous                                                      One time action was carried out
                                            Accounts.     Backlog:        Prepare                                                      by GoK. But this action still
                                            breakdown for all these accounts as on                                                     remains relevant and needs to be
                                            March 31, 2003 and close as                                                                done on a periodical basis.
                                            appropriate. Prevent further build-up:
                                            Regularly      prepare     breakdown
                                            (monthly),    review     and     close
                                            (quarterly).
                                            Prepare monitoring database for                                                            This action has not been
                                            public accounts.                                                                           completed and it is relevant
                                                                                                                                       even in today’s context.
(b) Reconciliations
Reduce unreconciled amounts at all levels   Unencashed     Checks     and    LoC     The procedure for identification, reporting and   The Treasuries/DDOs are not

                                    | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status         65
                              Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
           2004 Reform Plan                      Agreed Action                       Accomplishment/Current Status                             Impact
of the system.                       Remittance accounts                        cancellation/write-back     of     unencashed     complying with the internal
                                      Backlog:       Prepare Break-down        (lapsed) cheques prescribed in the Karnataka      controls prescribed in this area.
                                       (cheque-wise details) on March 31,       Financial Code appears not to be working          Unpaid     cheques      are    not
                                       2003. Write-back and close expired       effectively as the quantum of unencashed          considered as part of the cash
                                       cheques. Identify how differences        cheques is showing an increasing trend over       position of the state. In terms of
                                       between total amount and individual      the years - The outstanding as at March 2013      accounting, if unpaid cheques are
                                       cheques if any would be addressed        is at a level of Rs. 6,820 crore compared to      reversed with delay in subsequent
                                       (e.g. write back).                       Rs. 1,120 crore in 2001/02. This level is also    year/s,     it     affects     the
                                      Regularly reconcile from April 2003      considerably high when compared to some           revenue/expenditure of the year in
                                       (monthly) – match totals with            other states Such as Gujarat, MP, Odisha and      which write-back is done.
                                       individual cheques, and write-back       Kerala. There is also a delay in requesting for   The balance in unencashed
                                       expired cheques.                         Alteration Memos by the Treasuries and issue      cheques is shown in the Public
                                                                                by the AG (A&E).                                  Account and is not considered as
                                      Establish and implement monitoring
                                                                                                                                  cash balance of the state.
                                       mechanisms       to    ensure    that
                                       reconciliations are done regularly in
                                                                                                                                  From an          internal control
                                       all Treasury offices and LoC offices
                                                                                                                                  perspective also, it is imperative
                                                                                                                                  that      cheques        remaining
                                                                                                                                  unencashed should be identified,
                                                                                                                                  document and reversed.

                                                                                                                                  The 2004 action point has not
                                                                                                                                  been adequately addressed and
                                                                                                                                  remains relevant.
                                     Matching of total accounts with            While GoK has achieved more than 90% in
                                     individual/sub-accounts in DDOs            terms of reconciliation of revenue figures,
                                     (e.g., loans, advances, deposits).         achievement in terms of reconciliation of
                                     Reconciliations of CCOs with AG’s          expenditure is only 58% (FY 2013) and there
                                     numbers, and DDOs with Treasury            is slippage over the last few years.
                                     numbers                                    PD accounts have not been reconciled since
                                      Reiterate requirements regarding         last several years. Issues in reconciliation of
                                       these reconciliations (issue Circular)   loans and advances continue.
                                      Establish and implement monitoring
                                       mechanisms      --  develop    and
                                       implement web-enabled application

                               | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status         66
                                  Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
          2004 Reform Plan                          Agreed Action                      Accomplishment/Current Status                           Impact
                                           for monitoring
                                          Improve controls over expenditure      The quantum of outstanding AC Bills are          Settlement of AC Bills need to be
                                           advances (AC Bills/MPWA Debits         contained at a reasonable level and showing a    followed scrupulously less they
                                           and Credits/ DC Bills)                 decreasing trend over the years in both          accumulate which inflates the
                                          Reiterate requirements regarding       outstanding as well as fresh drawls during the   expenditure as the amount drawn
                                           prompt submission of DC Bills and      year - as at March 2013, the outstanding AC      is already accounted for in the
                                           penalties for non-submission (such     Bills were Rs. 122 crore of which Rs. 45 crore   final head of account.
                                           as no further AC bills/MPWA            were drawn in March 2013 itself. AC Bills
                                           advances if AC Bills are not           aggregating Rs. 67 crore are outstanding prior
                                           cleared)                               to FY 2012-13 (i. e. more than 1 year) for
                                                                                  want of submission of DC Bills.
                                          Establish and implement monitoring
                                           arrangements
IV. Audit/PAC responsiveness and follow-up
(a) Audit Reports
Set up mechanisms to ensure prompt Continue to monitor using database,            Web enabled application (Audit Monitoring        A large number of audit
response to State Government audit and follow up with Departments;                System - AMS) developed and implemented.         observations including those with
reports and Inspection Reports          develop web-enabled application.          The AMS captures information on inspection       financial implications as well as
                                        Extend database to inspection reports.    reports, draft audit paras and action taken      systemic issues are pending
                                        Departments to identify systemic          reports – this however is not complete and       adequate resolution.
                                        issues in the 2001-02 and 2002-03         updated. Reports are available for all stages    GoK should improve AMS to
                                        Audit Reports and Inspection Reports,     except inspection reports. AMS also presently    capture systemic issues which
                                        and initiate improvements to address      does not cover the audit observations of         would support the management in
                                        these.                                    KSAD.                                            addressing thematic issues rather
                                                                                  However the important point on identifying       than individual issues. This is
                                                                                  and reporting systemic issues has not been       being addressed in the proposed
                                                                                  carried out in AMS.                              audit module of KII.
(b) PAC Reports
Set up mechanisms to ensure prompt       Coordinate with PAC Secretariat to       PAC has its own database of status of audit
response to PAC Reports                  include PAC Reports in the audit         paras, but is not linked with the AMS. This is
                                         response monitoring database; initiate   being addressed in the proposed audit module
                                         development       of     web-enabled     of KII.
                                         application.
                                         Identify systemic issues in the 2001-    The PAC is following the approach of             This has reduced the backlog.
                                         02 and 2002-03 PAC Reports and           reviewing latest audit reports first and         Review of CAG report on state

                                   | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status      67
                                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
           2004 Reform Plan                            Agreed Action                       Accomplishment/Current Status                              Impact
                                            initiate improvements to address these   focusing more on systemic issues. The                finances up to 2009/10 has been
                                                                                     selection of audit paras for hearing is done on      completed. Review of ATR for
                                                                                     the basis of materiality and risk. There is more     2010/11      and    2011/12    is
                                                                                     emphasis on taking up contemporary and               underway.        Finance     and
                                                                                     relevant issues.                                     Appropriation Accounts have
                                                                                                                                          been reviewed till 2010/11. Civil
                                                                                                                                          reports are taken up department –
                                                                                                                                          wise. PAC has regularized excess
                                                                                                                                          expenditure aggregating Rs. 9565
                                                                                                                                          crores up to year 2010-11.
V. Other Public Sector Agencies
(a) Government Companies/Corporations
Monitor compliance with core PFMA Continue monitoring of accounts and                The accounts and audit backlog have reduced          FD should have a cell to monitor
requirements (accounts and audits, audit backlog.                                    over the years. The individual administrative        the accounts and audit backlog of
responses and follow-up on audits and                                                departments and the AG monitor the                   the government companies.
COPU reports, audit committees,                                                      completion of accounts and conduct of audit.
reconciliations, internal control issues in Reiterate need for reconciliation of     ALMC has been designated to carry out the            Accounting and control in this
audit reports)                              amounts relating to transfers from       reconciliation. This issue still persists and this   area has not kept pace with the
                                            State Government reflected in the        suggestion is relevant in the current scenario       growth     in   the   investment
                                            Companies’/Corporations’ accounts        also.                                                portfolio. The Finance Accounts
                                            and State Government’s accounts; and                                                          may not disclose the correct
                                            monitor compliance (issue Circular)                                                           investments of GoK
(b) Statutory Boards and Authorities (SBAs), and Societies
Establish monitoring mechanisms and Start monitoring accounts and audit
monitor compliance with core PFMA backlog (C(AM)).
requirements (accounts and audits, Reiterate need for reconciliation of
responses and satisfactory follow-up on amounts relating to transfers from
audit reports                               State Government; and monitor
                                            compliance (issue Circular).
                                            Use Local Funds Authority Fiscal                                                              The    act    has   not    been
                                            Responsibility Act to develop standard   No steps have been taken to develop the              operationalized and needs to be
                                            PFMA framework (drawing on the           PFMS framework as the Act has not been               implemented.
                                            Indian Companies Act framework),         operationalized..
                                            and make applicable for all SBAs
(c) Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs)
                                    | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status           68
                                  Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
          2004 Reform Plan                            Agreed Action                       Accomplishment/Current Status                           Impact
Clear backlog of accounts and audits and   Continue monitoring of accounts and       Since ZP/TP are audited by C&AG, RDPR            RDPR-IFA and ZP-Special officer
ensure regularity and timeliness of        audit backlog.                            monitors the accounts closure on a regular       should monitor the status of
accounts and audit, and satisfactory                                                 basis, the accounts and audit backlog for        accounts and audit on a regular
follow-up on audit reports.                                                          ZP/TP has considerably reduced. In case of       basis.
                                                                                     GPs the accounts and audit backlog and GoK
                                                                                     needs to prepare a strategy to address this
                                                                                     issue.
                                           Stipulate    preparation  of    TP        This action has been carried out. Based on the
                                           accounts/audits at TP not ZP level;       2004 report the ZP/TP accounting rules where
                                           make necessary amendments to PRI          modified and separate accounts where to be
                                           Act.                                      furnished by the TP. Now TPs prepares their
                                                                                     own accounts and statements.
PFMA modernization agenda for PRIs         Complete        ZP/TP       accounting    ZP/TP accounting yet to be computerized and      ZP/TP accounting is being
                                           computerization (linked to Treasury);     linked to Treasury.                              computerized as a part of the KII
                                           GP account strengthening: (i)             All action except financial audits regarding     implementation.
                                           Finalize GP accounting rules; (ii)        GPs have been completed (i) new accounting       KSAD needs to carry out
                                           initiate pilots of financial audits of    rules have been issued in 2006 (ii)              financial audit which is still a
                                           GPs by Chartered Accountants              computerization has been completed for all       relevant action.
                                           (under supervision of KSAD); (iii)        GPs across the State and (iii) RTI has been
                                           initiate GP computerization               operationalized across the state.
                                           On basis of computerized database,
                                           Scheme rationalization for PRIs as
                                           per GO (GO under modification)
                                           Operationalize RTI at local level
                                           (incl.     public     boards       with
                                           works/beneficiary/financial info.)
(d) Urban Local Governments (ULBs)
Clear backlog of accounts and audits and   Start monitoring accounts and audit
ensure regularity and timeliness of        status for 6 City Corporations under
accounts and audit, and satisfactory       current statute.
follow-up on audit reports.                Start monitoring accounts and audit       New fund based accounting system has been
                                           backlog for other ULBs under current      implemented across ULBs.
                                           statute (clarify that accounts would
                                           be monitored using new receipts and
                                           payments statement).

                                   | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status         69
                                        Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
            2004 Reform Plan                                  Agreed Action                          Accomplishment/Current Status                                 Impact
PFMA modernization agenda for ULBs       Complete first phase accounting New fund based accounting system has been
                                         computerization of 32 ULBs with implemented across all ULBs, except in the
                                         population greater than 1 lakh.          Bangalore municipal corporation (BBMP)
                                         Complete BMP FBAS ; Develop This action has been completed
                                         revised accounting guidelines based
                                         on BMP experience
                                         Improve accounting capacity by Accountant posts have been created recruited
                                         recruiting     qualified     accountants in nearly 140 ULBs while for 70 ULBs it is
                                         (initially on contract in 32 ULBs)       yet to be done.
                                         Initiate pilots of financial audits of 6 Financial audits for all ULBs are being carried
                                         CCs by Chartered Accountants (under out by CA firms thought there is backlog in
                                         supervision of KSAD)                     completion of audit.
(e) Incentivize compliance by government bodies with accounting and audit requirements
On selective basis, introduce compliance Operationalize Local Fund Authority The Act is still to be operationalized                                  The Act was to apply to local
with basic PFMA requirements as Fiscal Responsibility Act                                                                                            bodies under state control and
prerequisite for release of government                                                                                                               handling public funds including
funds.                                                                                                                                               urban and rural local bodies.
                                                                                                                                                     Application of the Act would also
                                                                                                                                                     have paved the way for
                                                                                                                                                     preparation of MTFP as every
                                                                                                                                                     local authority would be obliged
                                                                                                                                                     to prepare a MTFP 20 . Also, the
                                                                                                                                                     Act would have enforced PFM
                                                                                                                                                     principles including submission
                                                                                                                                                     of accounts, setting up a Local
                                                                                                                                                     Fund Audit Overseeing Authority
                                                                                                                                                     and        provide      enhanced
                                                                                                                                                     participation of the citizens in
                                                                                                                                                     budget and planning.
                                                 Link fund transfers to public sector                                                                This action has not been
                                                 agencies from State Government to                                                                   implemented and it is still
                                                 adherence to stipulated PFMA                                                                        relevant for GoK to implement

20
   The Act prescribed that the Medium Term Fiscal Plan shall be the source document for the preparation of the annual budget and shall address the prime needs of the citizens as
relevant to the specific local fund authority such as water supply, construction of road, education, public health, solid waste management and the like.
                                         | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status                70
                                 Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
          2004 Reform Plan                           Agreed Action                       Accomplishment/Current Status                            Impact
                                         requirements (e.g., preparation of                                                          this.
                                         accounts and audits, responses and
                                         follow-up      action     on     audits,
                                         reconciliations,      other      PFMA
                                         requirement in the respective statute )
Require utilization certificates for     Establish mechanism to monitor             Monitoring of submission of UCs is done by        To     further    reinforce    this
government grants prior to release of    submission of Utilization Certificates     individual departments – a centralized           achievement,       GoK       should
further grants.                          for institutions which receive grants      mechanism for follow up is not in place. The     establish a centralized database of
                                         from governments                           Accountant General provides data on              outstanding UCs. A one-time
                                                                                    outstanding UCs in the Finance Accounts.
                                                                                    Efforts to reduce the outstanding UCs have
                                                                                    paid off as backlog has significantly reduced.
                                        Link fund transfers from State              This has been mandated through GOs, though
                                        Government to submission of                 in actual practice, further grants may be
                                        Utilization Certificates.                   provided pending UCs for previous releases.
VI. Institutional Arrangements and Capacity Building
Strengthen    financial  oversight   of All 3 employee insurance schemes to         ??
government insurance schemes.           be handled in single office (transfer
                                        Group Insurance Scheme/Savings
                                        Fund to KGID.). Eliminate remaining
                                        accounts/audit backlog. Computerize
                                        operations.     Subsequently include
                                        employee accounts maintenance in
                                        computerized payroll.
Ensure better management of government Government to review and decide              Senior level executive appointments are          This action has not been
bodies through competitive selection of mechanism          for     mandatory,       generally made by the Administrative             implemented and it is still
top management )                        competitive selection of senior level       Department (in consultation with the             relevant for GoK to implement
                                        executive        appointments     for       concerned Minister in charge) and competitive    this.
                                        Government Companies and SBAs               selection is an exception.
                                        and Societies – Directors, MDs and
                                        Chairmen. (e.g., Public Enterprises
                                        Selection Board as in GOI and Kerala)
Develop financial management capacity Ensure IFAs qualified (apply existing         All major departments have IFAs. The
within Government                       rule of 1/3 from AG office, 1/3 from        existing rule of appointment is followed.
                                        KSAD; 1/3 from Secretariat). Ensure         However the quality of non KSAS IFA’s

                                  | Annex 2: 2004 - PFMA Action Plan Accomplishments and Current Status         71
                   Government of Karnataka - Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan - 2014
2004 Reform Plan                     Agreed Action                      Accomplishment/Current Status               Impact
                          that all major spending departments      needs to be reevaluated by the GoK.
                          (e.g., Water Resources) have IFAs.
                          Appoint 10 Chartered Accountants for     This action has not been implemented and it is
                          State Accounts Department (initiated).   still relevant for GoK to implement this.
                          Identify other required capacity         This action has not been implemented and it is
                          enhancements for other Departments.      still relevant for GoK to implement this.
                          Review Accounts Management and
                          modify if required.




                                                                                            |   72
