                                                89087




                                 www.worldbank.org/social development

                                        www.worldbank.org/governance

                                                        www.odta.net




HOW-TO NOTES
Interactive Community Mapping:
Improving Service Delivery and
Empowering Communities
June 2014—This note was authored by Dr. Jennifer Shkabatur, Social Development Specialist at the Bank’s
Social Development Unit at Europe and Central Asia Region, with support of Saki Kumagai, Social Development
Specialist at the Social Development Department. The authors are grateful to Barjor Mehta and Sofia Bettencourt
for their peer review and public comment providers through its external consultation processes. The authors
would also like to thank Edward Charles Anderson, Andre Bald, Greta Byrum, John Crowley, Joshua Goldstein,
Erica Hagen, Mikel Maron, and Sarah Antos for their comments and insights in the preparation of this note, and
guidance provided by Helene Grandvoinnet and Sanjay Agarwal in the finalization of this note. The authors are
also thankful to Laura Johnson for editorial support. The views expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank Group.

The Open Development Technology Alliance (ODTA) is an initiative of the World Bank, anchored in the World Bank
Institute, the Social Development Department, and the ICT Sector Unit. It aims to enhance social accountability
and improve the delivery and quality of public services through technology-enabled citizen engagement.

Anchored in the World Bank’s Operations Policy and Country Services Unit, the Governance and Anticorruption
(GAC) in Operations initiative aims to provide Bank staff, clients, and development partners with good
governance practices and guidance to improve development outcomes.

Other How-To Notes currently available (downloadble on FURL “gacinoperations”):

•	 Citizen Charters: Enhancing Service Delivery through Accountability
•	 Citizen Report Cards: Monitoring Citizen Perspectives to Improve Service Delivery
•	 Citizen Service Centers: Enhancing Access, Improving Service Delivery, and
   Reducing Corruption
•	 Electronic Government Procurement
•	 Feedback Matters: Designing Effective Grievance Redress Mechanisms for
   Bank-Financed Projects—Theory
•	 Feedback Matters: Designing Effective Grievance Redress Mechanisms for
   Bank-Financed Projects—Practice
•	 From Open Government Data to Social Accountability
•	 GAC in Fragile and Conflict Situations: 10 Things to Know
•	 Good GAC Practices for FMS
•	 How, When, and Why to Use Demand-Side Governance Approaches in Projects
•	 Participatory and Third Party Monitoring in World Bank-financed Projects:
   What Can Non-state Actors Do?
•	 Political Economy Assessments
•	 Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery
•	 Supporting Passage and Implementation of Right to Information Laws
•	 Using Demand-Side Governance in Projects to Identify and Manage Risk in Projects
•	 Using Information and Communication Technology (ICT) to Improve Transparency in
   Bank-Financed Projects
•	 Value Chain Analysis
                                                                                   mpowering Communities  1
                    Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




       Introduction      Mapping presents a compelling way to demystify complex data and concepts into
                         useful visual information that most people could understand regardless of language,
                         level of literacy, or culture. With the advancement and wider availability of ICTs, digital
                         maps can be created faster, easier, and in a more participatory manner than be-
                         fore. These maps can also be shared instantaneously with the world via the Internet.
                         Interactive Community Mapping (ICM) is one method of ICT-enabled participatory
                         mapping. It is a process that engages individuals in creating maps of their commu-
                         nities. In the development context, ICM can be a useful approach in helping com-
                         munity members, members of civil society organizations (CSOs), governments, and
                         development partners to better picture and assess the needs and concerns of the
                         mapped communities and adjust their development plans, activities, and policies
                         accordingly.

                         Targeting task teams of the World Bank, this How-to Note is aimed at providing step-
                         by-step guidance on the design and implementation of the ICM process to achieve
                         an evidence-based and increasingly participatory decision-making approach for de-
                         velopment projects. Relying on good practice examples from Kenya and Tanzania,
                         this note seeks to provide a better understanding of how the potential benefits of
                         ICM can be translated into tangible results. The note goes on to outline some of the
                         available ICM technology, delineate the enabling environment for ICM, and provide
                         step-by-step guidance on how to effectively design and implement ICM in projects.



               ICM:      ICM is one of many ways to map a community in a participatory manner. For the
Definition, Benefits,    purpose of this note, it refers to ICT-enabled bottom-up mapping for a variety of
                         development purposes. The core of the process is to engage individuals, such as
           and Risks     community residents and civil society members, in creating maps of their own com-
                         munities. The broader idea of ICM is to harness the collective wisdom and knowledge
                         of these communities to become drivers of decision making in development. As part
                         of the ICM process, local residents utilize a basic global positioning system (GPS) to
                         locate roads, pathways, and points of interest in their communities, and then import
                         the data into a base map in the public database, generating dynamic and editable
                         maps. Further, the ICM process facilitates the creation of “social” maps of the com-
                         munity, encouraging local residents to share news, reports, and stories that are of
                         interest both within and outside the community, making ICM valuable not only for
                         the development of poor and marginalized communities that are often merely blank
                         spots on traditional maps, but also for incorporating the voices of these communities
                         in the process of development.
2  HOW-TO NOTES




                  ICM typically aims to achieve two major development outcomes:

                  1.	 Improved service provision. A key objective of the ICM process is to help
                      improve the provision of public services in communities using an evidence-based
                      approach. By drawing clear pictures of the social and economic conditions in
                      areas, interactive community maps help governments and service providers make
                      better decisions about resource allocations. For example, ICM supports decision
                      making about the types of service provision interventions that are required, what
                      needs and areas should be prioritized, and how and where interventions should
                      be implemented. Because community members are engaged throughout the
                      process, ICM also encourages them to identify local solutions to challenges
                      identified and monitor implementation processes in their communities.
                  2.	 Capacity building and empowerment. By its nature, the ICM process is
                      deeply participatory—it relies on the community at all stages of the mapping
                      process. This approach is valuable for at least two reasons:
                      •	 “Community mappers” who volunteer to collect data and map their own
                          communities acquire new technological skills. For example, they learn to use
                          GPS devices and become familiar with software programs for mapping and
                          social media. In marginalized communities with high unemployment rates
                          among the youth, these skills can be very beneficial to local residents, open-
                          ing them to potential employment opportunities in the future.
                      •	 The “digital storytelling” aspect of ICM amplifies the voices of the poor and
                          marginalized. It allows communities to articulate their own needs, issues,
                          and concerns rather than relying on information from external entities like
                          the mainstream media that often presents these personal views in a nega-
                          tive light. ICM allows them to put their communities and their voices on a
                          map and gives a better perspective to outsiders of their lives and unique
                          environments.

                  While the ICM approach is novel in its reliance on ICT tools, it has several advantages
                  over the traditional community and participatory mapping process:

                  •	   Speed. It may take several months—or even years—to develop community
                       maps in the traditional manner. The ICM process occurs at a substantially faster
                       rate, benefiting from innovations in geospatial technology, the openness of the
                       technology mapping platform that is provided, and access to local knowledge.
                  •	   Dynamic nature. While traditional maps remain static, with considerable effort
                       required to keep them updated, interactive community maps can be continually
                       digitally authored, shared, edited, changed, or updated.
                  •	   Costs. The ICM process relies on relatively inexpensive and simple technological
                       devices (e.g., laptops, GPS devices, scanners/printers, cameras and/or video
                       cameras, and Internet access), and it can employ free and open source software.
                       Mappers belong to their mapped communities and bring unique implicit
                       knowledge of their living environments to the ICM process. For the most part,
                                                                 mpowering Communities  3
  Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




            mappers voluntarily participate in the mapping process after completing basic
            technological training offered by ICM experts. Therefore, costs associated with
            ICM production are substantially lower than those for traditional mapmaking.
       •	   Granularity. Most traditional mapping efforts focus on large-scale geospatial
            data, lacking local context. The ICM process aims to provide granular information,
            tapping the local knowledge of community members. The dynamic nature
            of the ICM process allows “zooming in” and “zooming out” according to the
            specific information needs and demands of the community and its stakeholders.
            Information provided on the map may be as detailed, localized, and contextualized
            as the map designers, community members, and decision makers prefer.
       •	   Community empowerment. By positioning community mappers at the core of
            the mapping and decision-making processes, ICM provides unique opportunities
            for community engagement and empowerment. By offering community
            members the chance to become “community mappers” with technological skills,
            the ICM process amplifies their voices. Sometimes, the ICM process surpasses
            or vastly differs from the original objectives, achieving unexpected benefits for
            the community. In the case of Map Kibera in Kenya, for example, because of
            community demands, a map of safe and unsafe areas for girls was developed as
            part of the mapping process.1 This type of interactive and demand-driven feature
            is usually absent in traditional mapping exercises.

       ICM can be a powerful local empowerment tool for community members—especially
       among the marginalized and economically and socially disadvantaged—but it also
       involves potential risks.

       •	   Misuse and abuse of information. In the wrong hands, information available for
            the ICM process can be misused or abused. For example, landowners located in
            areas that are indicated as safe on a map could use that information to raise the
            price of land, investors interested in grabbing safer or better developed areas could
            use a map to their advantage, and governments or other entities looking to resettle
            vulnerable communities could use maps to identify tenures with uncertain rights.
       •	   Data reliability and accuracy. While larger amounts of data can be collected
            in shorter timeframes through the open and participatory approach of ICM, the
            exercise does not guarantee the quality of gathered data. In order to sustain quality
            standards for a map, collected data must be verified. Additionally, because of this
            data quality challenge, training for community members interested in becoming
            community mappers is key to the effective implementation of the ICM process.
       •	   Community representativeness. The ICM process may be captured by
            community elites or certain community groups/members when insufficient
            attention is paid to community representativeness. Special attention must be
            paid to encourage participation of women, the disabled, youth, the elderly, and
            other vulnerable groups, depending on the local context.

       1. http://www.mapkibera.org.
 4  HOW-TO NOTES




                         •	    Security. Context matters. Particularly in fragile and conflict-affected situations,
                               geospatial data and information collected through the ICM process can become
                               a source of information for groups instigating physical attacks on communities or
                               on members of donor agencies supporting the ICM process. In such contexts,
                               careful attention must be paid on when and how interactive community maps
                               should be widely shared with the public. For example, in sensitive situations,
                               access to community maps on the Internet could be limited to team members
                               until all the data are verified and until conflict situations calm down. The mapping
                               information could still be shared with partners and other donor agencies—
                               especially for the purposes of aid, project coordination, and decision making.
                               During this process, maps could also be shared with communities at community
                               meetings and the like in order to receive feedback, but only in print formats.

                         While the benefits of ICM generally outweigh the risks, it is important to identify po-
                         tential negative implications of the ICM process at the outset, and to incorporate
                         appropriate safeguards.

ICM Technology           There is no single technological approach for creating an interactive community map.
                         However, to date, OpenStreetMap2 (OSM) and Google Map Maker3 are the two most
                         common mapping platforms employed for ICM purposes (table 1).


              TABLE 1
                                                 OpenStreetMap (OSM)                           Google Map Maker
 Comparison of Basic
     Specifications—      Website                http://www.openstreetmap.org/                 https://www.google.com/mapmaker
 OpenStreetMap and
  Google Map Maker        Year Founded           2004                                          2008
    (as of April 2014)
                          Cost                   Free                                          Free

                          Licensing of           Open (Open database license)                  Closed (licensed to Google)
                          data produced

                          Data                   Monitored by editors to correct,              All edits are subject to verification and
                          verification           remove, and alter erroneous edits             approval by Google. Google Map will
                          process                                                              reflect edits after approval is granted

                          Speed of               Instant                                       Subject to approval
                          update                                                               (instant after approval)

                          Mapping                 Map Kibera,a Nairobi, Kenyab
                                                 •                                             Cyclone Nargis, Myanmar
                                                                                               •
                          examples                Map Mathare, Nairobi, Kenyab
                                                 •
                                                  Map Tandale, Dar Es Salaam,
                                                 •
                                                  Tanzaniab
                         a. http://www.mapkibera.org.
                         b. Project examples highlighted in this note.
                         Sources: https://www.google.com/mapmaker; http://www.openstreetmap.org; McDonough, 2013.



                         2. http://www.openstreetmap.org.
                         3. https://www.google.com/mapmaker.
                                                                                      mpowering Communities  5
                       Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




                            OSM is a collaborative web-based project that aims to create a free and editable map
                            of the world, built entirely by volunteers. OSM maps rely on data collected from GPS
                            devices, aerial photography, satellite imagery, publicly open sources of geospatial
                            data, and local knowledge. All of the data is available for public use under a Creative
                            Commons license that permits the downloading and use of data for any purpose,
                            only requiring attribution. Box 1 describes one of the earliest efforts of ICM using
                            OSM technology.

                  BOX 1
  The Earliest ICM Effort      Map Kiberaa, a commu-
Using OSM Technology:          nity    information          project
         Map Kibera—           launched by a team of
        Nairobi, Kenya
                               social activists in October
                               2009, is an interactive
                               grassroots map of Kibera,
                               Nairobi—one of the largest
                               slums in Africa. Although
                               many civil society and de-
                               velopment          organizations
                               have been present and
                               active in Kibera, the impoverished community has largely remained a blank spot
                               on the map. This lack of openly available geospatial data and other public sources
                               of information about the slum led a group of social activists to create Map Kibera.

                               The underlying idea of Map Kibera is that without basic geospatial knowledge, it is
                               impossible to conduct an informed discussion about how conditions in Kibera could
                               be improved. The Map Kibera team expected that the provision of such information
                               would facilitate better coordination, planning, and advocacy efforts within the com-
                               munity and between the community and the government.

                               In the first stage of its operation, the Map Kibera team recruited volunteer community
                               mappers residing in Kibera to map “points of interest” in the slum, using simple GPS
                               devices and uploading the collected data to OSM. The mappers collected data
                               about the location of clinics, toilets, water points, places of worship, and the like. On
                               top of this basic geospatial information, the mappers added a “storytelling” layer,
                               capturing personal accounts, stories, and news of Kibera residents. As part of the
                               second stage, Map Kibera deepened its coverage of the conditions of the people
                               living in the community, and collected more contextualized information in the areas
                               of health, security, education, and water and sanitation. At this stage, the Map Kibera
                               team also introduced the Voice of Kibera website—www.voiceofkibera.org—an
                               online news and information-sharing platform for the Kibera community.
                               Source: Interview with Erica Hagen by Jennifer Shkabatur, October 2012; Interviews with Mikel Maron by Jennifer Shkabatur,
                               December 2011 and April 2012.

                               a. www.mapkibera.org.
     6  HOW-TO NOTES




                           Google Map Maker encourages individuals to review and edit satellite imagery avail-
                           able on Google Maps. Google Map Maker allows three types of contributions to
                           existing Google Maps: placemarks (points of interest, such as schools, local busi-
                           nesses, and hospitals); lines (e.g., roads, railways, and rivers); and polygons (e.g.,
                           boundaries, borders, parks, and lakes). The contributions of new users are reviewed
                           and monitored by more experienced ones, in order to ensure accuracy. Contrary
                           to OSM, data that is submitted to Google Map Maker is not available under open
                           licenses for public reuse; it becomes the property of Google.

            Enabling       The design and implementation of an impactful ICM process requires close atten-
        Environment        tion to the enabling environment and conditions that facilitate the translation of ICM
                           into concrete development outcomes. The major drivers of effectiveness are tech-
              for ICM      nological capability, the need for information, governmental cooperation, civil society
                           capacity, and community incentives to participate, as illustrated in figure 1 and de-
                           scribed below.

                           Technological capability. Naturally, high Internet penetration rates and digital lit-
                           eracy are likely to contribute to a smoother ICM process. The availability of stable
                           Internet access facilitates steady data transition from GPS devices into the mapping
                           software, and widespread technological knowledge enhances the pool of potential
                           community mappers. However, lack of Internet access and low technological capa-
                           bility do not make interactive community maps unfeasible; they could, in fact, even
                           intensify the importance of the mapping process for the local community because
                           the development benefits from the map could be considerable. Box 2 describes how
                           Map Kibera overcame its lack of Internet access and shows that even community
                           members who lack ICT training can become active participants of the ICM process.

                                                                                  Need for information. ICM
                FIGURE 1                                                          would of course be most help-
ICM Enabling Environment                            Technolgical                  ful in places that have not been
                                                     capability
                                                                                  previously mapped. However,
                                                                                  an effective ICM process should
                                                                                  not only target blank spots on
                              Community               Enabling                    the world map, it should also
                                                                      Need for
                              incentive to        environment for                 identify specific needs and de-
                                                                    information
                               participate           impactful
                                                   ICM process                    mands for information as well as
                                                                                  concrete ways in which an ICM
                                                                                  would benefit its prospective
                                                                                  users—community members,
                                        Civil society        Governmental
                                                                                  CSOs, public officials, devel-
                                         capacity             cooperation
                                                                                  opment partners, and others.
                                                                                  Thus, while a lack of previously
                           Source: World Bank.                                    available geospatial information
                                                                                     mpowering Communities  7
                      Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




                 BOX 2
   Overcoming Lack of         Lack of Internet access may make the ICM process more difficult and limit the use-
      Internet Access—        fulness of the resulting map to members of the community because it would not be
Map Kibera’s Experience       easily accessible to them. However, Map Kibera and other ICM initiatives have man-
                              aged to overcome this challenge by actively involving community members offline.

                              First, after the completion of the ICM process, the team of Map Kibera printed out
                              the map on large posters, distributing them across Kibera because Internet access in
                              the community is limited. Relying on these printed maps, the team encouraged the
                              community to add more contextualized hand-written information. In particular, the
                              team reached out to different constituencies to identify approximate locations on the
                              printed map by using pins. For example, girls were asked to point out places where
                              they felt insecure, and women were asked to identify water sources and the like. This in-
                              formation was then georeferenced and added to the interactive map by volunteers.

                              Second, the team of Map Kibera created and distributed a printed Atlas of Kibera
                              containing the following materials: five detailed maps of Kibera focused on health,
                              education, water and sanitation, security, and religious institutions; a large-scale
                              map of the whole area of Kibera; and a description of the Map Kibera project. The
                              Map Kibera team distributed the map to schools, CSOs, and government represen-
                              tatives, encouraging them to utilize the map as part of their activities in the slum.
                              Source: Hagen 2011.




                           is certainly a signal that an ICM could be valuable, a more nuanced assessment of
                           conditions on the ground is necessary for an impactful implementation of the ICM
                           process.

                           Governmental cooperation. For reasons related to service delivery effectiveness
                           and sustainability, cooperation with governments—especially local governments—
                           from the earliest stages of the ICM process is vital, as is demonstrated by the ex-
                           ample in box 3.

                           •	 Service Delivery. Because local governments bear ultimate responsibility for
                              the provision of public services in many countries, governmental cooperation
                              with the ICM process at the local level is critical for its impact and sustainability.
                              For example, based on the mapped information, public officials might allocate
                              additional resources to particular concerns or reallocate funds that have already
                              been assigned in order to better cope with community problems. A government’s
                              endorsement of the ICM process can also bring other stakeholders on board
                              who can help distribute and utilize the map once it is completed. Furthermore,
                              the ICM process is beneficial to policy makers, who gain valuable and previously
                              unavailable information about the conditions and concerns of marginalized and
                              poor communities under their jurisdictions.
    8  HOW-TO NOTES




                 BOX 3
 Securing Governmental       The ICM process in Tandale—an informal settlement of 50,000 residents in Dar Es
   Support—Example of        Salaam, Tanzania—aimed to improve the delivery of public services in the com-
 Map Tandale Project at      munity and amplify the voices of community members. While Tandale’s population
Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania
                             is rapidly growing, the unplanned settlement suffers from insufficient basic services,
                             such as water supply, drainage systems, schools, and roads. Policy makers needed
                             to know how to allocate resources to improve service delivery in Tandale and to
                             understand the needs and concerns of the community. In August 2011, an array
                             of civil society actors, policy makers, urban planners, community members, and
                             development partners initiated Map Tandale with the support of the World Bank. The
                             Tandale ICM process consisted of 18 community mappers and 25 students from
                             Ardhi University who were specializing in urban planning. The mappers and students
                             were divided into six groups of six to eight people per group, one group for each
                             sub-ward of Tandale. Each team member specialized in one of the following areas:
                             GPS surveying, editing, satellite image tracing, or storytelling. The maps below illus-
                             trate the amount of information collected in just 10 days.




                             The support of the World Bank to the Map Tandale project was exemplary in terms
                             of acquiring cooperation from the government. The Bank acted as a “matchmaker”
                             and networker, introducing Dar Es Salaam city officials to the ICM concept and to
                             partners that could implement the project. It also worked with Ardhi University to em-
                             bed community mapping into the curriculum of their urban and regional planning
                             studies program and to engage students in the ICM process.
                             Sources: Iliffe 2012; GroundTruth Initiative—http://groundtruth.in/blog/; Mapping: (No) Big Deal—http://mappingnobigdeal.
                             wordpress.com/.




                          •	 Sustainability of interactive community maps. The ICM process should
                             not be considered a one-time activity. When maps are updated as community
                             development projects are implemented and service provision improves, they
                             can serve as monitoring tools that continuously inform policy makers, not only
                             on the status of service delivery but also on development policies and plans.
                             Institutionalizing an ICM approach in the decision-making mechanisms of a
                             government could contribute to the sustainability of ICM activities in communities.
                                                                 mpowering Communities  9
  Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




       Public officials, however, are not always aware of these benefits and might initially
       fail to cooperate with the process. They might also regard any collected geospatial
       data as government property that can be sold to generate government revenue, and
       challenge the ICM process from a copyright perspective. Therefore, they might be
       reluctant to cooperate with a process that seeks to create geospatial data openly or
       freely. The implementers of ICM projects should pay close attention to these potential
       obstacles and facilitate the ICM process by bringing local public officials on board
       and conveying the benefits of the map to them.

       Civil society capacity. Typically, the creation of an interactive community map is
       the easiest part of the ICM process. The map itself can be accurately developed by
       external parties who recruit community members to map their living environments
       and transfer the gathered data into an ICM technology platform. However, in order
       to ensure that the map is used by the relevant stakeholders and that actual develop-
       ment outcomes are achieved, local civil society—e.g., nongovernmental organiza-
       tions (NGOs) and other types of CSOs, academia, and research institutions—should
       play key roles in the process. Local CSOs and social activists are the main stakehold-
       ers of any effective ICM endeavor, assuming responsibility over community outreach
       and engagement efforts, helping recruit and engage community mappers, arranging
       the logistics for the process, publicizing and distributing maps once complete, and
       utilizing them for their own activities. The presence of local civil society and its capac-
       ity to perform these activities are central to the creation and impactful use of a map.

       Community incentive to participate. The incentives of local community members
       to participate in the ICM process can be tricky, as it requires a dual commitment: to
       take part in the initial data collection and mapping and, once the map is complete, to
       continue participating in decision-making processes and follow-up activities.

       •	 Incentive to participate in initial data collection and mapping. Volunteering
          for a common cause is not a natural decision for people in poor communities—
          many are unemployed and in urgent need of incomes. Engaging committed
          volunteers may be impractical in many slum areas. However, payment for ICM
          work can contradict the basic idea and principles of the whole ICM process,
          which is supposed to be done by and for the community. The incentives
          of community members to take part in the ICM process should, therefore,
          be carefully considered. In some cases, the free technological training that
          community mappers receive as part of their participation in ICM suffices to keep
          them engaged in mapping activities. More frequently though, some payment or
          reimbursement to encourage the continuing commitment of community mappers
          is required.
   10  HOW-TO NOTES




                           •	 Incentive to continue to participate in decision making. An interactive
                              community map is not normally a goal in itself but rather the first step to a
                              broader engagement by community members in decision-making processes
                              affecting their daily lives. Nevertheless, if a map is created and reactions from
                              government officials or service providers do not follow, community members
                              can quickly become disillusioned about the ICM process and lose interest in
                              it. For this reason, ensuring the participation of and responsiveness from the
                              government and/or service providers are crucial for incentivizing continuous
                              community involvement and interest in the ICM process.


   Designing and           This section introduces the step-by-step process for designing and implementing
   Implementing            ICM. Figure 2 illustrates six steps that task teams can follow.

ICM: Step-by-Step
        Guidance           STEP 1: Articulating the Objective and Demand-Driven Strategy
                           The technological aspects of creating an ICM are usually the easiest. The more dif-
                           ficult and challenging factors are community engagement, government cooperation,
                           sustainability, and impact. To maximize the chances that the outcome of the ICM
                           process will satisfy community needs and that relevant stakeholders will use the map,
                           the objective and design of the ICM process should be as demand-driven as pos-
                           sible. While the objective can change and evolve as the ICM process progresses,
                           establishing a clear objective at the onset of the planning stage helps to encourage a
                           demand-driven strategy. This can be accomplished by asking three basic questions:
                           (1) Who will use the map? (2) What information is required? and (3) How will the map
                           be used?

                FIGURE 2
 Six Steps to Design and                         1   Articulating the objective and demand-driven strategy
         Implement ICM

                                                     2       Engaging stakeholders



                                                         3    Reaching out to the target community members



                                                         4    Creating the map



                                                     5       Promoting the use of the map



                                                 6   Ensuring sustainability and scaling up



                           Source: World Bank.
                                                                 mpowering Communities  11
  Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




        Who will use the map? The initiator of the ICM varies—it can be initiated by the
        government, CSOs, service providers, donors, or others. The users of the map can
        also vary depending on the purpose of the map. It is tempting to think that if previ-
        ously unavailable geospatial data reaches the public arena, it will be well utilized, but
        this is only rarely the case. As the experience of Map Kibera in Kenya demonstrates,
        a map that is designed for general use that does not satisfy the concrete needs and
        demands of a community and relevant stakeholders will be underutilized. The initial
        goal of the Map Kibera team was to develop an accurate map of Kibera, because this
        type of information had been previously unavailable. It was assumed that interested
        parties would then begin to use the map for a variety of purposes. This assumption
        proved incorrect as the team discovered that their data had in fact remained largely
        untouched. The situation changed only after the team began collaborating with local
        CSOs, and when the mapping data corresponded to their concrete needs. An effec-
        tive ICM process should, therefore, begin with the identification of prospective users
        and targeted audiences of a map. Typically, users include the following:

        •	 Community members. An interactive community map represents each
           community’s living environment, but members of poor and marginalized
           communities are unlikely to access—let alone use—them in online formats.
           Therefore, targeting this audience requires a series of offline activities to make
           the maps more accessible and understandable. For example, printouts of maps
           can be distributed at community meetings and displayed in public places (see
           box 2), and information about the maps can be shared via community radio.
           This outreach process not only informs community members about the status of
           their communities, but also allows them to provide feedback and suggestions for
           further data and story collection as well as community development.
        •	 CSOs. These are the most likely users of maps. They may be interested in using
           them as part of their development and advocacy activities, project monitoring,
           and coordination with other CSOs and aid agencies in the area. An ICM process
           that targets this audience should be structured around the information needs of
           the CSOs and the resulting map should be presented to them in a way that is
           most helpful for their strategies, activities, and focus sectors.
        •	 Government and service providers. Local governments and service providers
           may be the most impactful users of interactive community maps, especially
           when the purpose of ICM is to improve service provision at the community level.
           Maps that target governments and service providers as their audience therefore
           require the understanding of governmental needs and priorities, along with close
           collaboration with public officials throughout the ICM process (see box 3).
      12  HOW-TO NOTES




                             •	 Other users. Possible other users may include the private sector, international
                                organizations, bilateral and other donors, and researchers that are already
                                engaged or intend to engage in the community and aim to improve their
                                effectiveness or enhance the scope of their activities. As with other ICM users, an
                                ICM process should target and engage them as early as possible in the design
                                process and be structured around their information needs and demands.

                             What information is required? Since local stakeholders, such as community mem-
                             bers, CSOs, and local representatives, know best what information is required and
                             how it will be used, they should be at the center of determining the types of geo-
                             spatial data that are collected in the ICM process. For this reason, it is important to
                             understand what types of geospatial data would be most useful to them and estab-
                             lish clear data collection objectives at the outset. Of course, different users will need
                             different types of data. For instance, a local CSO that attempts to address the water
                             and sanitation needs of the community, a public official who works on citizen security
                             issues, and a group of community volunteers who collect trash would each need dif-
                             ferent types of information. The ICM process should seek to satisfy the needs of all
                             potential stakeholders, directly engaging them in deciding what information should
                             be collected (see box 4). One of the advantages of an interactive community map
                             over a traditional map is its dynamic nature, so the initial identification of the required
                             types of information should not be regarded as conclusive. As long as community
                             mappers remain available, additional data can be collected and imported into the
                             map at any time.

                     BOX 4
    Collection of Thematic      As ICM experiences evolve, different approaches are emerging for articulating in-
       Geospacial Data—         formation needs. For example, Map Kibera, one of the first ICM exercises in the
The Kenyan and Tanzanian        service delivery field, experimented in matching information demand and need in
               Experiences
                                two phases. At the first phase of implementation, the designers of the ICM process
                                guided individual community mappers to include “points of interests,” thus granting
                                them discretion to decide what pieces of information should be part of the map.
                                The points of interest that were chosen included clinics, toilets, water points, NGO
                                offices, electric streetlights, and some businesses. After one week of mapping, the
                                mapping team compared the individual points of interests collected and decided
                                which of them should be part of the map.

                                The second phase of Map Kibera took a more contextualized approach, focusing
                                on four specific areas: health, security, education, and water and sanitation. Map-
                                pers gathered detailed information on each of these topics. In the area of health,
                                for instance, they collected information about the working hours of clinics and the
                                services provided by them. This information was added on top of the original ICM
                                layer, which only showed the location of the clinics.

                                                                                                         (continued)
                                                                      mpowering Communities  13
       Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




   BOX 4
Continued       After both phases of the mapping process were completed, the Map Kibera team
                was approached by CSOs working on water and sanitation issues. These stakehold-
                ers were interested in contextualized information on water and sanitation services
                available in Kibera. The Map Kibera’s community mappers collected the field infor-
                mation required by the CSOs in a format that would be most useful for them.

                Other ICM experiences in Tanza-
                nia decided to hold community
                consultations to identify interest
                areas. In Tandale, a community
                forum held at the beginning
                of the ICM process revealed
                that      community              members
                were particularly interested in
                detailed information on water,
                health, education, accessibility,
                and security. The ICM process
                incorporated these demands,
                requesting community map-
                pers collect detailed informa-
                tion about these topics. Similarly
                in Mukuru, Kenya, where ICM also took place, water and sanitation emerged as an
                important community interest. For this reason, detailed thematic data about toilets
                were collected—by locations and units (e.g., the precise location and the number
                of individual units attached), ownership of the toilets (e.g., public or private), type of
                toilets (e.g., “Asian style” or hanging toilet), connection of the toilets if any (e.g., con-
                nection to sewage, to river, or no connection), and functionality (e.g., the amount
                and location of operational and nonoperational toilets).
                Sources: GroundTruth Initiative blogs about Kibera and Kenya: http://groundtruth.in/blog/;
                Map Kibera website: http://www.mapkibera.org.




             How will the map be used? Interactive community maps are typically designed for
             two general purposes: (1) providing open and accurate geospatial data for effective
             evidence-based decision making; and (2) creating space for “digital storytelling”—
             encouraging residents to share experiences, news, and stories from their commu-
             nity life. As part of this general concept, some additional specific aspects should be
             considered.

             •	 Identifying specific purpose. The impact of ICM will likely increase if it aims to
                achieve specific purposes rather than providing general public information. Goals
                may include, for example, improving drainage and waste collection, improving
14  HOW-TO NOTES




                      the services of health clinics, or fixing broken pathways. The pursuit of each
                      of these goals requires a slightly different design and implementation strategy
                      for the ICM process. Articulating specific purposes will also help teams identify
                      relevant stakeholders that should be contacted.
                   •	 Mapping format follows function. A map format will depend on its audience
                      and the goals it aims to achieve. An ICM may result in an online interactive map
                      accessible on a designated website, spreadsheets that contain non-encoded
                      geospatial data, printouts of maps presented as posters in public places, or all
                      of the above—the most frequent option. Determining the map format can also
                      guide a team as it starts thinking about technical preparations4 and timelines.
                      This is discussed in more in detail in STEP 4: Creating the Map on page 17.


                   STEP 2: Engaging Stakeholders
                   To a large extent, the effectiveness of ICM depends on the cooperation of local com-
                   munities. To ensure that the mapping will be used, sustained, and further developed
                   after its initial completion, local CSOs, governments, service providers, community
                   members, and other groups should serve as entry points for the map’s creation.
                   These local community participants should sense that they “own” the ICM process
                   from its inception. Consequently, the ICM process should rely on robust and con-
                   structive partnerships with groups and organizations that are permanently active
                   in the target community. Such partnerships are important at all stages of the ICM
                   process.

                   Planning phase. In the beginning, local CSOs, governments, service providers, and
                   civil society activists can help identify the information needs and demands of commu-
                   nities and offer guidance regarding implementation within particular local contexts.
                   Box 5 gives an example of this effort with Map Mathare in Nairobi, Kenya. Local gov-
                   ernment committees that deal with development matters as well as service delivery
                   can be particularly instrumental during the ICM process.

                   Throughout the ICM process. Local partners can help by engaging and mobilizing
                   the community to take part in the ICM process, organizing community forums, trig-
                   gering public interest in the platform, and helping to recruit community mappers and
                   support them throughout the mapping process. Such local partners can be local
                   CSOs, youth groups, or universities and research institutions.

                   After completion of the map. Once a map is completed, local partners can serve
                   as its “hosts,” ensuring its utilization, further development, and updating.



                   4. Technical preparations have cost implications for projects because equipment needed for ICM process should
                   be provided by the project or trust funds. For World Bank-supported projects, task teams should keep in mind
                   that procurement could take up to six months.
                                                                                  mpowering Communities  15
                   Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




                 BOX 5
Building Partnerships—      Map Mathare, an interactive community map of the Mathare slum in Nairobi, is the
 The Example of Map         creation of GroundTruth Initiative (www.groundtruth.in), an enterprise built off the work
     Mathare in Kenya       of Map Kibera. Map Mathare consists of all major roads and pathways in Mathare
                            as well as major points of interest—e.g., schools, clinics, worship places, markets,
                            and businesses. In the months prior to the official project launch, the GroundTruth
                            team engaged in an extensive partnership-building effort. They met with local youth
                            groups, community leaders, CSOs, and government representatives. As a result,
                            they created partnerships with a number of local community groups—Community
                            Cleaning Services, Cooperazione Internazionale (COOPI), and Community Devel-
                            opment Center Huruma. These groups undertook the responsibility for much of the
                            ICM outreach efforts, organizing a large open forum to present the ICM idea to
                            the community, and helping to recruit volunteer community mappers. Almost 130
                            Mathare residents attended the open forum, and between 45 and 70 took part in
                            the training.
                            Source: Based on blogs about Mathare, GroundTruth Initiative—http://groundtruth.in/blog/.




                         STEP 3. Reaching Out to Target Community Members
                         The core of the ICM approach is community engagement and empowerment, and
                         thus local communities should be aware of the ICM process as early and as much
                         as possible. In order for a project team to effectively engage with communities, com-
                         munications and outreach strategies that can be incorporated into the ICM initiative
                         strategy should be developed and implemented.

                         Communications. Clear and transparent communications with community mem-
                         bers from the outset of the ICM process can become the basis of a trust-based rela-
                         tionship with a local community. It is important to reach out to community members
                         to acquire their support and participation in the process, particularly at the beginning
                         of the ICM process. Establishing a communication strategy in order to systematically
                         and strategically reach out to the community is recommended.

                         •	 High-profile endorsements. Public endorsements by high-profile community
                            leaders and politicians can be valuable for sparking initial public interest and
                            drawing attention to the ICM process.
                         •	 Communication of benefits. Communicating the benefits of ICM initiatives
                            while managing expectations—especially in communities with low technological
                            capabilities—can be challenging, largely for two reasons. First, the map is mainly
                            available online and most community members do not have access to the Internet.
                            Second, community members often feel that they do not need a map because
                            they know how to get around their neighborhood without one. Particularly in
                            these situations, it is important to convey to community members the benefits of
  16  HOW-TO NOTES




                            the ICM process by highlighting the importance of acquiring technological skills,
                            placing their community on a map to consequently help improve the provision
                            of public services in partnership with other stakeholders, and using the map
                            to enable the amplification of the presence and voice of a community. Sharing
                            ICM examples from other areas or countries can help capture the interests
                            of community members. While communicating about the benefits of ICM, it
                            is important to avoid inflating community expectations too much. Clear and
                            transparent communication on the purpose, scope, timeline, expected partners
                            or stakeholders, anticipated benefits, and how community members can be
                            involved in the process may help manage community expectations.

                       Outreach. At the beginning of the ICM process, it can be helpful for a team to iden-
                       tify the specific purposes of outreach activities and target groups that may require
                       additional outreach efforts.

                       •	 Infomediaries.5 Initial outreach efforts should focus on potential “infomediaries”—
                          local community leaders, social activists, and citizen journalists who can spread
                          the word, mobilize local residents to participate, and sustain community interest
                          in the ICM process. Early in the process, it is important to identify potentially
                          committed infomediaires and keep them as informed and engaged as possible
                          throughout the process. Infomediaries should be engaged in organizing
                          community open forums that serve as effective entry points to the ICM process
                          and help in the recruitment of community mappers. Community mappers who

               BOX 6
      An Example of       To strengthen the sustainability of the map and ensure that it responded to the con-
       a Community        crete needs and demands of community members, the Map Mathare team at-
    Outreach Effort—      tempted to hold a constant dialogue with them. To this end, the venues for trainings
Map Mathare in Kenya
                          and meetings with community mappers rotated between different villages, allowing
                          different parts of the community to participate, ask questions, and provide feed-
                          back. This approach allowed the team to recalibrate the project according to the
                          needs and demands of the community. As part of the community feedback, for
                          example, the Map Mathare team learned about the community’s issue with water
                          and sanitation. In response, they created a detailed water and sanitation map of
                          Mathare, focusing on four villages where the need for such information was particu-
                          larly acute.
                          Source: Interview with Erica Hagen by Jennifer Shkabatur, October 2012; Interviews with Mikel Maron by Jennifer Shkabatur,
                          December 2011 and April 2012.




                       5. The etymology of the term “infomediaries” is “information” and “intermediaries.” This concept was first sug-
                       gested in the Harvard Business Review article “The Coming Battle for Customer Information” (Hagel and Rayport
                       1997).
                                                                 mpowering Communities  17
  Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




           have been recruited can also function as informediaries to bridge communications
           between the community and other stakeholders and to translate data into easily
           understandable information on maps, so it becomes relevant to the community
           members.
        •	 Outreach to marginalized groups. A special effort should be made to reach
           out to underrepresented and marginalized community groups that can be
           considerably empowered by participation in the ICM process. These groups may
           include women, youth, the elderly, indigenous people, the disabled, migrants,
           and immigrants. For actual mapping activity, it may be particularly valuable to
           engage young women, thereby offering them skills that can be valuable for future
           employment pursuits. Including female community mappers can also make other
           women and girls in communities feel comfortable providing feedback and input.
        •	 Persistent outreach. Outreach and mobilization efforts should not cease once
           a sufficient amount of community mappers have been recruited. The ICM
           process should remain visible and welcoming to new participants. A persistent
           outreach approach is important for two reasons: (1) it can help participants
           better understand the needs and concerns of the community, allowing them to
           adjust the ICM process accordingly; and (2) it can increase the chances that the
           resulting map will be widely used by the community and other stakeholders.


        STEP 4. Creating the Map
        When creating an interactive community map, the preliminary tasks are: establishing
        a timeline, making technical preparations, obtaining existing imagery and maps, train-
        ing, and—ultimately—mapping. These five processes are described below.

        Timeline. The timeline for the creation of an interactive community map varies from
        one community to another, depending on the size of the area, the number of partici-
        pating community mappers, weather conditions, access to the Internet, and so on.
        In the cases of Kenya with the maps of Kibera and Mathare, the mapping process
        lasted an average of three to four weeks. The creation of Map Mathare took 17 days,
        with 15 community mappers working 5 hours per day on average. As part of this
        process, the following data were collected and put on the map: 750 points of interest,
        41.3 kilometers (25.1 miles) of roads and paths, 24 villages in 3 square kilometers
        (32.3 square feet), and 138 buildings.

        Technical preparations. The ICM process, which mainly targets marginalized and
        poor communities, cannot rely on sophisticated and expensive technological tools.
        Therefore, the ICM toolkit is basic: GPS units, laptops, digital cameras, videocam-
        eras, a printer/scanner, batteries and chargers, and a pelican case. The overall cost
        of this toolkit is US$4,000–5,000, typically provided by the sponsors of the project. It
        is also necessary to find a space where community mappers can be trained and work
        with the mapping software and equipment.
18  HOW-TO NOTES




                   Obtaining existing imagery and maps. Relying on existing maps of the terrain
                   substantially facilitates the mapping process, although the ICM process ultimately
                   calls for a new map to be built from scratch. Before the actual mapping begins, it
                   is important to obtain existing imagery and maps of the area and to structure the
                   ICM building process around them. Satellite imagery can be obtained from a vari-
                   ety of sources. In the case of Map Mathare in Kenya, the American Association of
                   Advancement of Science (AAAS) donated the imagery of the relevant parts of Nairobi.
                   Bing (Microsoft) provided the satellite imagery for Map Tandale in Tanzania.

                   Training. The time required for training community mappers is usually two to three
                   days. During this time, community mappers should be trained on how to use GPS
                   devices, collect and edit geospatial data, use camera and video equipment, and
                   work with the mapping platform (e.g., OSM), and other relevant software. For digital
                   storytelling purposes, community mappers are also taught how to use social media
                   and blogging platforms (e.g., WordPress).

                   Mapping. The actual mapping—and then editing—exercise can be broken down
                   to the following six steps: (1) dividing the geographical area, (2) ground surveying,
                   (3) tracing satellite images, (4) thematic mapping, (5) storytelling, and (6) validating
                   the data on the map. A summary of the six mapping and editing exercise steps is
                   provided below.

                   1.	 Dividing the geographical area. The first step is to decide which areas will be
                       covered and how they will be organized. This exercise is important in order to plan
                       the mapping process effectively and to assign each of the areas to community
                       mappers most familiar with them. Many slums consist of villages, as is the case
                       for Kibera and Mathare in Kenya. Determining the location of these villages is
                       important for ICM planning purposes because all villages must be represented;
                       teams of community mappers can be assigned to map their own villages—the
                       places they know best.
                   2.	 Ground surveying. Using a GPS device, roads, streets, and points of interest
                       are mapped during this step. As part of this exercise, community mappers
                       survey and locate the relevant areas “with their feet” or collect all geospatial data
                       that they observe around them. The GPS surveying process is complemented
                       by “walking papers”—detailed reprints of relevant sections of the existing OSM
                       map. Community mappers use these papers in the field to draw new features,
                       annotate existing data, and take notes that will complement the GPS data and
                       help with its importation. After the completion of ground surveying, community
                       mappers import the collected data from their GPS devices into the Java OSM
                       software, add metadata such as detailed names and descriptions of places, and
                       upload the information to the OSM database.
                                                                                        mpowering Communities  19
                         Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




                               3.	 Tracing satellite images. Relying on satellite imagery, this step involves tracing
                                   buildings and the natural terrain (e.g., rivers and mountains) and uploading
                                   the information into the OSM database. After satellite images are fed into the
                                   database, they should be corrected and contextualized. As part of this process,
                                   the satellite images are printed out, and community mappers go from one
                                   building to another in the mapped areas, checking and fixing the shapes of the
                                   buildings, deleting redundant structures, writing down the types of materials the
                                   structures are composed of (e.g., brick, corrugated iron sheet, or wood stalls)
                                   and the purposes of the buildings (e.g., school, private house, local business, or
                                   clinic). A similar method can be implemented for land usage in the mapped area.
                               4.	 Thematic mapping. At the same time that a general map of the area is being
                                   created, community mappers can also collect more detailed and contextualized
                                   information on selected priority issues. The general map provides only a broad
                                   representation of the area, but this contextualized information responds to the
                                   concrete needs and demands of the intended ICM users (see the examples in
                                   box 4).
                               5.	Storytelling. The ICM process goes beyond mapping in the geographic sense
                                   alone. It also empowers residents to amplify their voices and share local news
                                   and stories, creating an enhanced visual and contextual view of the community to
                                   the outside world. Community storytelling can occur during the ICM process as
                                   well as after the completion of the formal community mapping. As part of the ICM

                      BOX 7
Storytelling Examples: Voice      After the completion of
      of Kibera and Voice of      the interactive community
                    Mathare       map of Kibera, the team
                                  of Map Kibera established
                                  Voice of Kibera (www.
                                  voiceofkibera.org) to allow
                                  local residents to speak
                                  for themselves about cur-
                                  rent events and issues and
                                  to create a digital com-
                                  munity around local infor-
                                  mation. This online community for Kibera is constantly updated by the Map Kibera
                                  team with videos, photos, and stories that represent daily life in Kibera. Similarly, Map
                                  Mathare has its own online community, “Voice of Mathare” (www.voiceofmathare.
                                  org), which aims at picking up the voices of community members in Mathare. These
                                  voices are also geotagged and presented on an Ushahidi-powered map.a
                                  Source: Hagen 2011.

                                  a. Ushahidi (http://www.ushahidi.com) is a free and open source platform for information collection, visualization, and
                                  interactive mapping. In the case of the Voice of Mathare, the Ushahidi platform is being used to geotag and croudsource
                                  stories.
20  HOW-TO NOTES




                           process, community mappers visually document the places they are mapping.
                           They can talk to residents and report current news and events to a designated
                           online platform. These reports can consist of written notes, photos taken with
                           simple digital cameras, and videos that represent daily life in the community.
                           Local residents can share news and reports on a designated website, creating a
                           vibrant digital community.
                       6.	 Validating the map. After the ICM process is completed, the accuracy of
                           the resulting map should be validated, both to avoid mapping mistakes and to
                           add further context and depth to the geospatial data. Physical validation allows
                           for further improvement to the accuracy of the map. Teams of community
                           mappers revisit locations and correct their appearances on the map as needed.
                           Community validation involves printing out the digital maps created during the
                           ICM process (see figure 3 as example) and discussing them at designated
                           community meetings. This option can help improve the map in a number of
                           ways: by collecting additional information about the mapped areas, by double-
                           checking information that has already been collected, by identifying missing
                           objects, and by encouraging storytelling based on the map. The community
                           meetings also allow for discussing problems and brainstorming possible local
                           solutions.



           FIGURE 3
       Map Kirera—
Water and Sanitation




                       Source: http://www.mapkibera.org/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/DrawnWatSan3.jpg.
                                                                 mpowering Communities  21
  Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




        STEP 5: Promoting the Use of the Map
        The ICM process can be used in a variety of ways to improve service provision in a
        community and provide citizens a platform from which they can articulate their issues
        and needs. However, the working assumption of the ICM process should be that the
        map will be used by its stakeholders only if it complements their existing strategies
        and if it can be seamlessly integrated into their ongoing activities. With Map Kibera,
        for instance, after the completion of the mapping exercise, the team partnered with
        the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and several
        local CSOs interested in collecting information about the security of girls in Kibera.
        The community mappers of Map Kibera returned to the field to map the relevant data.
        Promoting usage of a map with both existing and new stakeholders and sustaining
        bottom-up engagement with community members must be a continuous effort.

        •	 Existing stakeholders. In a best-case scenario, stakeholders that have been
           involved in the creation of a map since its inception will incorporate it into their
           activities (e.g., using the information on water and sanitation provided by the map
           for advocacy purposes with the aim of improving its provision).
        •	 New stakeholders. The process should always encourage the further broadening
           of ways in which a map can be used and its network of stakeholders expanded.
           The team leading the ICM process should work with community members, local
           CSOs, government representatives, and service providers in communicating the
           advantages and the value added from using a community map.
        •	 Technology versus non-technology uses. The map should be available in both
           online and paper versions so that interested stakeholders will not be limited by a
           lack of technological capacity and accessibility. In communities with little access
           to ICTs, paper versions of the map should be printed out and widely distributed.
           The Atlas Kibera, which made the map of Kibera available on- and offline, was
           an exemplary initiative for disseminating the printed map to a wide constituency
           without access to the Internet or other necessary communications technology.
           In communities with higher Internet access rates or mobile penetration, data
           provided on the map have a greater potential for enhancing interactions between
           community members and service providers. For example, a mobile application
           allows residents to track and monitor solid waste collection and the supply of
           water and sanitation services or to report on service provision problems they
           observe in their communities, geotagging them to specific locations on the map.
22  HOW-TO NOTES




                   STEP 6: Ensuring Sustainability and Sailing-Up
                   Sustainability is one of the most challenging aspects of ICM. While a detailed map
                   can be created within several weeks, updating and sustaining it requires long-term
                   strategic planning and commitment. Initial mapping efforts are usually supported by
                   development partners and tend to spark public interest, but it can be difficult to sus-
                   tain this initial enthusiasm after a map is completed and once the external partners
                   leave the community. There are two possible approaches to ensure sustainability and
                   scale-up: relying on existing stakeholders or identifying and establishing a partnership
                   with new stakeholders.

                   •	 Relying on existing stakeholders. The most effective way to ensure the
                      sustainability of a map is to have a local CSO or public office “host” it—to develop
                      and safeguard their ownership. In so doing, a host will use the map as part of their
                      daily activities in the community and further develop it. Partnerships with potential
                      hosts should be formed as early as possible in the ICM process to allow for the
                      incorporation of their particular needs and demands into the creation of the map.
                      Of course, some stakeholders will be more effective than others. Established
                      community organizations, universities, and other educational bodies are well
                      positioned to take ownership over interactive community maps and sustain them
                      over time. For example, in the case of Map Tandale in Tanzania, Ardhi University
                      in Dar Es Salaam incorporated the ICM process into its curriculum in urban and
                      regional planning studies. This model of engagement encourages urban planning
                      students to participate in the ICM process, acquire skill sets, and collaborate with
                      community mappers as part of their education.
                   •	 Identifying new stakeholders. In addition, new hosts for the map can be found
                      after its completion. Outreach events should be conducted to present the map to
                      policy makers; community leaders; and international, regional, and local CSOs.
                      Awareness-raising of the ICM process and its results will help new stakeholders
                      figure out how to incorporate mapping into their ongoing community activities.

                   The ICM process is, by nature, granular and contextualized. It taps the implicit
                   knowledge of local communities and attempts to strengthen the sense of ownership
                   community mappers have over the course of the participatory process. While this
                   approach can be effective at the local level, it can also be translated to regional and
                   national levels to scale. ICM can have applications in the areas of natural resource
                   management, climate-resilient development planning, disaster risk management, and
                   so on. For example, World Bank-supported projects in São Tomé and Príncipe and
                   Samoa combined satellite and community-based mapping to develop participatory
                   plans and to guide decision makers about where to install future social infrastructure
                   (e.g., roads, schools, and health centers), while at the same time increasing commu-
                   nity resilience to natural disasters and climate change. World Bank-supported prac-
                   tices highlighted in box 8 are exemplary examples of how ICM might be scaled up.
                                                                                 mpowering Communities  23
                  Interactive Community Mapping: Improving Service Delivery and E




               BOX 8
  Examples of ICM in       In Indonesia, ICM is used for disaster preparedness. Various governmental agencies
World Bank-Supported       in Indonesia attempt to estimate the impact of potential disasters (e.g., flooding
             Projects      and earthquakes) on local populations and infrastructure. Informed estimates are
                           crucial for local governments and other stakeholders to prepare for future disasters
                           and to strengthen community resilience. The development of these estimates re-
                           quires accurate data, but access to such data is often limited. The Humanitarian
                           OpenStreetMap Team (HOT), through a World Bank-supported project, seeks to fill this
                           void. HOT leads community-mapping efforts to collect exposure data in Indonesia in
                           an attempt to improve emergency preparedness in disaster-prone areas.

                           In urban areas, HOT engages and trains university students to map government of-
                           fices, fire stations, police stations, schools, sports facilities, health facilities, religious
                           facilities, and other points of interests. In rural areas, it collaborates with partners al-
                           ready working on data collection and mapping, supporting their efforts and provid-
                           ing training in OSM techniques. The data collected by HOT is fed into Risk-in-a-Box
                           (impact modeling software offered by Trading Screen) to determine the effects of
                           potential disasters on the mapped communities.a

                           In South Sudan, the lack of accurate maps is a recurring problem. Absence of
                           geospatial data on basic infrastructure makes it difficult for government, civil society,
                           and development partners to initiate development projects and respond to a num-
                           ber of development challenges. In April 2011, the World Bank and Google orga-
                           nized a “mapathon,” attracting over 60 members of the South Sudanese diaspora.
                           Participants learned to use Google’s online mapping tool, Google Map Maker, to
                           map their home regions and add social infrastructure (e.g., schools, hospitals, and
                           local businesses) that they were aware of. This remote ICM is expected to help the
                           South Sudanese government and its development partners improve the provision of
                           public services in the country.b
                           a. For a full discussion, see Shkabatur 2014.

                           b. World Bank 2011.

                           Sources: Shkabatur 2014 and World Bank 2011.




     Conclusion         The ICM process offers powerful and unique development opportunities to improve
                        service delivery in poor and marginalized communities, to provide citizens with valu-
                        able skills, and to amplify their voices. From the perspective of governments and
                        service providers, the ICM process not only allows them to better allocate funding
                        through improved targeting and prioritization, but also enables them to use the in-
                        teractive community map as an interface or entry point for constructive citizen en-
                        gagement. The creation of an ICM can be considered a short cut on the otherwise
                        long road toward improved service provision and empowerment. Thoughtful design
                        and implementation of ICM optimizes the chances of successfully reaching desired
                        development outcomes.
  24  HOW-TO NOTES




Useful Resources     OpenStreetMap: http://www.openstreetmap.org
                     OpenStreetMap Wiki: http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Main_Page
                     OpenStreetMap Blog: http://blog.osmfoundation.org/about/
                     OpenStreetMap Meetup Groups: http://openstreetmap.meetup.com/
                     Map Kibera: http://www.mapkibera.org/
                     Voice of Kibera: http://voiceofkibera.org/
                     Google Map Maker: https://www.google.com/mapmaker
                     Google MapUp: https://sites.google.com/site/mapyourworldcommunity/mapups
                     World Bank GeoCenter Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Unit:
                       https://geowb.worldbank.org/portal/home/ (internal link)
                     World Bank GeoCenter Spark Group: https://spark.worldbank.org/groups/geocenter (internal link)


                     Useful Resource at the World Bank
                     At the World Bank, the GeoCenter’s GIS team provides support to task teams on
                     ICM. For example, targeting World Bank practitioners, it periodically provides train-
                     ing on ICM and mapping in general (information is made available on the Spark
                     page: https://spark.worldbank.org/groups/geocenter). The GIS team also provides
                     technical support ranging from capacity building of community mappers to other
                     types of implementation support on a cross-support basis. For details, check out the
                     GeoCenter’s GIS team’s internal website: https://geowb.worldbank.org/portal/home.


     References      Hagel, John III, and Jeffrey F. Rayport. 1997. “The Coming Battle for Customer Information.”
                       Harvard Business Review (January).
                     Hagen, Erica. Interview by Jennifer Shkabatur. October 2012.
                     Hagen, Erica. 2011. “Mapping Change: Community Information Empowerment in Kibera
                       (Innovations Case Narrative: Map Kibera).” Innovations 1 (6): 69–94.
                     Iliffe, Mark. 2012. Mark’s Brain (blog). https://markiliffe.wordpress.com/tag/tandale/.
                     Kova i , Primož. 2011. Mapping: (no) big deal: Making the Invisible Visible (blog).
                       http://mappingnobigdeal.wordpress.com.
                     Maron, Mikel. 2014. GroundTruth Initiative (blog). http://groundtruth.in/blog/.
                     Maron, Mikel. Interviews by Jennifer Shkabatur. December 2011 and April 2012.
                     McDonough, Meghan. 2013. “Google Map Maker vs. OpenStreetMap: Which Mapping Service Rules
                       Them All?” Digital Trends (blog), July 28. http://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/google-map-maker-
                       vs-openstreetmap-id-editor/#!MP7Uo.
                     Shkabatur, Jennifer. 2014. Interactive Community Mapping: Between Empowerment and Effectiveness.
                       Washington, DC: World Bank.
                     World Bank. 2011. “World Bank and Google Support Development in South Sudan with Diaspora-driven
                       ‘Mapathon.’” Press Release 2011/461/AFR, April 28. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/
                       NEWS/0,,contentMDK:22902389~pagePK:34370~piPK:34424~theSitePK:4607,00.html.
