                                                                                89245
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development / The World Bank. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent.
The material in this publication is copyrighted.




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

ALBANIA
CORE PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE DEPOSIT INSURANCE
SYSTEMS

DETAILED ASSESSMENT OF
OBSERVANCE
FEBRUARY 2014

This report was prepared in the context of a standards assessment mission in Albania during
October –November 2013, overseen by the Financial and Private Sector Development Vice
Presidency, World Bank and the Monetary and Capital Markets Department, IMF.

                        THE WORLD BANK
                        FINANCIAL AND PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT VICE PRESIDENCY
                        EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA REGIONAL VICE PRESIDENCY
                                                                  CONTENTS


GLOSSARY ................................................................................................................................... 2

I. BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE ASSESSMENT .................................................. 3

II. METHODOLOGY USED FOR THE ASSESSMENT ............................................................. 3

III. INSTITUTIONAL AND MACROPRUDENTIAL SETTING, AND MARKET
STRUCTURE OVERVIEW ........................................................................................................... 4
A. SUPERVISORY ENVIRONMENT ..................................................................................................... 4
B. OVERVIEW OF THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM...................................................................................... 4

IV. GENERAL PRECONDITIONS FOR AN EFFECTIVE DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEM 5
A. MACROECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT .............................................................................................. 5
B. SOUND GOVERNANCE OF AGENCIES COMPRISING THE FINANCIAL SAFETY NET ......................... 5
C. STRONG PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AND SUPERVISION............................................................... 6
D. WELL-DEVELOPED LEGAL FRAMEWORK .................................................................................... 6
E. SOUND ACCOUNTING AND DISCLOSURE REGIME ....................................................................... 7

V. MAIN FINDINGS ..................................................................................................................... 7

VI. ASSESSMENT OF THE OBSERVANCE OF THE CORE PRINCIPLES ............................ 9
TABLE 1: CORE PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT SUMMARY
TABLE ............................................................................................................................................ 10
TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES ............. 20
TABLE 3. RECOMMENDED CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN TO IMPROVE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES ......................................................................................... 23
TABLE 4. DETAILED ASSESSMENT OF DEPOSIT INSURANCE PRINCIPLES ........................................ 25




                                                                         1
                                    GLOSSARY

ADIA    Albania Deposit Insurance Agency

AFSA    Albanian Financial Supervisory Authority

ALL     Albanian Lek

BOA     Bank of Albania

CAR     Capital Adequacy Ratio

DIS     Deposit Insurance System

EBRD    European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

EU      European Union

EWS     Early Warning System

FIRST   Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative

FSAG    Financial Stability Advisory Group

FSAP    Financial Sector Assessment Program

LOB     Law on Banks

MOF     Ministry of Finance

MOJ     Ministry of Justice

MOU     Memorandum of Understanding

NBFIs   Non-bank Financial Institutions

NPLs    Non-performing Loans

P&A     Purchase and Assumption

PPOs    Public Policy Objectives

SCA     Savings and Credit Cooperatives Association

SCC     Savings and Credit Cooperatives




                                          2
                                                                                           1
                   I. BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE ASSESSMENT

1.    This assessment of compliance with the Core Principles for Effective Deposit
Insurance Systems (Core Principles) was conducted as a part of the Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) performed by the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank at the request of the Albanian government. This assessment was conducted by Claire
McGuire, Senior Financial Sector Specialist with the World Bank, during a mission to Albania
from October 28th to November 11th, 2013.

                       II. METHODOLOGY USED FOR THE ASSESSMENT

2.     The evaluation of the compliance with the Core Principles for Effective Deposit
Insurance Systems was conducted on Albania’s deposit insurer, the Albanian Deposit
Insurance Agency (“ADIA”) utilizing the Methodology for Compliance Assessment adopted in
December 2010 by the Bank for International Settlements and the International Association of
Deposit Insurers. The Assessment addresses ADIA’s compliance with the Core Principles with
respect to its operations as an insurer of deposits in 16 banks. ADIA was also recently given
responsibility for developing rules for insuring the deposits in 126 savings and credit cooperative
associations (SCAs). In accordance with the Methodology, the Assessment is designed to assess
to the extent possible whether the criteria are fulfilled in practice and not just in theory
(Methodology at 2).

3.     The assessment was based on a review of relevant laws, regulations and regulatory
and supervisory practices related to the banking sector and the operations of ADIA.
Multiple meetings were held with various employees of the Bank of Albania (BOA), Ministry of
Finance (MOF), the Banker’s Association, the two Savings and Credit Associations, and ADIA.
ADIA completed a self-assessment in preparation for the FSAP.

4.      There have not been any failures of an insured institution since ADIA’s
establishment in 2002. As a result the Assessment looked at the relevant provisions of the
amended legal framework without consideration of how the laws had been applied in practice or
interpreted by the courts. Several weaknesses in the legal framework have been noted in this
Assessment.

5.      The Core Principles assessor would like to express her sincere gratitude to ADIA,
BOA and MOF authorities for their assistance. The assessor received excellent cooperation
from the Albanian authorities and private sector representatives with knowledge of the financial
sector.




1
 This Detailed Assessment Report has been prepared by Claire McGuire, WB. It was prepared in the context of an
FSAP assessment mission led by Michael Edwards, World Bank and S. Erik Oppers, IMF which are respectively
overseen by the Financial and Private Sector Development Vice Presidency, World Bank and the Monetary and
Capital Markets Department, IMF.

                                                       3
        III. INSTITUTIONAL AND MACROPRUDENTIAL SETTING, AND MARKET
                             STRUCTURE OVERVIEW

                                    A. SUPERVISORY ENVIRONMENT

6.     The financial system is concentrated. In Albania, banks dominate the financial system,
accounting for 94% of financial system activity, equivalent to 88 percent of GDP in 2012 (up
from 76 percent in 2005). Subsidiaries of foreign banks represent about 93 percent of total
banking assets. Bank credit is funded largely by local deposits.

7.     BOA supervises the domestic banking system, saving and credit cooperatives, and
other nonbank financial institutions, and the Albanian Financial Regulatory Authority
(AFSA) supervises insurance companies, pensions and investments funds. The BOA intends
to implement Basel II by 2015 and complement the current focus on compliance with a forward-
looking risk-based approach to supervision. It cooperates with a number of home supervisors of
European banking groups that operate in Albania.2 A high level financial stability advisory group
(FSAG) chaired by MOF was formed in 2006 and became fully operational in 2012. It meets on
a quarterly basis to monitor developments and risks to the financial system. ADIA is
administered by a Board of Directors appointed by BOA and is managed by an executive, the
General Manager.

                              B. OVERVIEW OF THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

8.      The largest banks dominate the financial system. The top banks comprised almost
three-quarters of total financial assets as of year-end 2012. As a result of legal changes in 2012,
all foreign banks operate as subsidiaries. There are 15 foreign-owned bank subsidiaries of major
international banks, including banks from neighboring countries (Greece, Italy, Turkey and the
largest bank, Raiffessen, from Austria). Greek banks account for one-fifth of Albania’s banking
system. The non-bank financial institution (NBFI) sector constitutes a small but growing share of
the total financial system, with about 6.4% of financial system assets.

9.      Albania’s banking CAR and liquidity ratios are high, offset by significant NPLs. As
of March 2013, the banking system’s capital adequacy ratio (CAR) was 16.8 percent. Overall the
banking sector is characterized by moderate liquidity risk and adequate capitalization. However,
nonperforming loans (NPLs) reached 24 percent of gross loans, the highest in the region. Credit
risk thus represents the biggest challenge in the operation of the financial sector.

10.     The remainder of the financial system is small (6.4 percent of financial system
assets). As of mid-2013, it included 11 insurance companies, an investment fund, 126 savings
and credit associations largely in two unions, 6 pension funds, and 21 other non-bank (that is,
non-deposit-taking) financial institutions.




2
  The BOA has signed Memoranda of Understanding with supervisory authorities in Bulgaria, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Turkey and the regional supervisory authority.

                                                      4
    IV. GENERAL PRECONDITIONS FOR AN EFFECTIVE DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEM

                                   A. MACROECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT

11.     The Albanian economy is projected to grow at a rate of 1.7% in 2013 after growing
just 0.5% in 2012. Inflationary pressures are and will continue to remain low. However, public
debt continues to increase as budgetary spending rises. By the end of 2013 the MOF expects that
public debt will reach 69% of GDP. A large amount of outstanding government obligations to
businesses, estimated to be as much as Euro 400 million, also impacts the fiscal outlook.
Addressing these arrearages will add to the public debt burden.

12.     Albania successfully avoided a serious economic slowdown since the outbreak of the
financial crisis in 2008. Now, however, with the ongoing Eurozone problems, the economy has
slowed and the financial sector is exposed to domestic and external risks. The authorities have
strengthened financial sector supervision, crisis preparedness and bank resolution frameworks.

13.      BOA has adopted macro-prudential measures to safeguard financial stability.
Introduced in late 2011, these have helped protect against contagion, particularly related to
Greece: (i) foreign bank branches were converted into subsidiaries; (ii) the required ratio of
liquid assets to short-term liabilities was raised from 20 percent to 25 percent, with a more
restrictive definition of liquid assets, and haircuts applied to eligible assets based on their credit
rating;3 (iii) the regulation on related party exposure was tightened; and (iv) the risk-weighting
on unhedged foreign currency exposures was increased from 100 percent to 150 percent.

        B. SOUND GOVERNANCE OF AGENCIES COMPRISING THE FINANCIAL SAFETY NET

14.     BOA has as its principal objective the achievement and maintenance of price
stability. The Bank is governed by a Supervisory Council with the Governor as its Chairman.

15.    There is also a high level committee, the FSAG, staffed by BOA, AFSA and MOF
and attended by ADIA. The Committee meets quarterly and shares information, discusses
general economic policy, and engages in contingency planning and crisis preparation. ADIA
reports on issues of importance to its operations and solvency in accordance with a
Memorandum of Understanding entered into by the parties in February 2012.

16.    BOA has the authority to enter into arrangements with domestic and foreign
supervisory authorities to coordinate financial stability measures if relevant. BOA has
entered into a number of agreements with foreign supervisory authorities and participates in
some of the Supervisory Colleges for its largest banks. ADIA has the authority to enter into
agreements for information sharing with foreign deposit insurers but has not done so to date.




3
 For Greek banks the liquidity requirements were more stringent (30 percent for overall liquidity, and 25 percent for
domestic and foreign currency individually).

                                                         5
                     C. STRONG PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AND SUPERVISION

17.    The Bank of Albania (BOA) supervises the domestic banking system, saving and
credit cooperatives, and other nonbank financial institutions. The AFSA supervises
insurance companies and pension and investment funds. The BOA intends to implement Basel II
by 2015 and complement the current focus on compliance with a forward-looking risk-based
approach to supervision. It cooperates with a number of home supervisors of European banking
groups that operate in Albania. 4 The FSAG meets on a quarterly basis since early 2012 to
monitor developments and risks to the financial system. It last met in November 2013.

18.    BOA is broadly compliant with the Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking
Supervision. BOA conducts regular reviews of individual banks and bank groups. The quality of
banking supervision has improved significantly since the last FSAP in 2005 and is moving
towards alignment with the EU legal and regulatory framework.

                             D. WELL-DEVELOPED LEGAL FRAMEWORK

19.     The legal system in Albania is not well-developed. There is a need to strengthen
property rights, improve contract enforcement and simplify the tax system. There is an effective
credit registry in operation that reflects both positive and negative information on borrowers. The
registry became operational for banks in 2008 and later, in 2009, for SCAs. Judicial enforcement
of creditor rights is weak, with enforcement of secured claims taking on average three years or
more.

20.    Laws are in place under which the banking system and the deposit insurer can
operate. The legal structure in Albania has an adequate framework for the supervision of the
banking sector.

21.     A legal framework exists for handling a bank failure that includes a method for
failure resolution. BOA’s statute provides for various methods by which a bank can be
resolved, although the failure resolution regime for SCAs is less developed. In that it requires
involvement of the general assembly of the SCA for dissolution. ADIA is a paybox system and
its law allows it to participate in the various resolution methods for banks by providing funds that
represent the claims of insured depositors.              This Assessment contains a number of
recommendations as to how that resolution framework can be improved and made more
effective.

22.     Banking laws and regulations are updated as necessary to ensure that they remain
effective and relevant to a changing industry. BOA’s current law was passed in 2006 and
amended in 2011. ADIA’s law was passed in 2002 and was amended in 2012. There is an
ongoing review of what changes may be needed to the law to improve ADIA’s operations. Legal
reform will increase the authority of ADIA without changing its paybox mandate and make its
legal independence more robust.

4
  The BOA has signed Memoranda of Understanding with supervisory authorities in Bulgaria, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Turkey and the regional supervisory authority.

                                                      6
23.     Information exchange between the deposit insurance system participants and the
supervisor is legally protected for all measures necessary in order to protect the deposits
and to enable safety-net participants to intervene in case a bank is at risk. All members of
the safety net are governed by bank secrecy laws and there are no identified legal impediments to
information sharing among the participants. However, there is a need to increase the type and
amount of information ADIA receives from the supervisory authority to better prepare the
deposit insurer for any possible payout.

24.     Appropriate participants in the financial safety net are entitled to protect depositors
through a number of options including transferring deposits from a troubled bank to a
healthy bank. BOA has the ability to enter into purchase and assumption agreements and
establish a time-limited bridge bank.

25.    Relevant authorities can take legal action against the management of a failing bank.
There is authority to take action against those responsible for a failing or failed bank.

                      E. SOUND ACCOUNTING AND DISCLOSURE REGIME

26.    Accounting and disclosure regimes support:

       a. The ability of the supervisor and deposit insurer to adequately evaluate the health of
          individual banks and the banking system as a whole. Banks annual audited financial
          statements are publicly available as required by law.

       b. The accurate and timely identification of information on depositor accounts for the
          purposes of prompt reimbursements.

       c. The collection of premiums under the premium system adopted by the deposit
          insurer.

27.     The deposit insurer has the right to carry out or provide for an audit or inspection
of a member bank in a timely manner to verify deposits or the premium assessed. ADIA
has the power to inspect its member institutions for the purpose of verifying accounts, checking
the integrity of records, and determining the accuracy of the premium calculation and public
awareness information provided by banks on the insurance scheme. ADIA may also participate
in BOA examinations upon request under Article 9 of its law.

                                      V. MAIN FINDINGS

28.     The deposit insurance framework in Albania, managed by ADIA, broadly conforms
to best international practice. ADIA was established in 2002 pursuant to Law No. 8873, as
amended in 2009 and 2012. ADIA administers a Deposit Insurance System (DIS) which covers
deposits in 16 banks. It will also take on the responsibility for insuring deposits in SCAs in the
future as provided under the 2012 amendments to its governing law. ADIA does not have a
statutory target ratio per se, but under Article 24 of its law it has the authority to reduce annual

                                                 7
insurance premiums if its assets exceed 5% of the average of total insured deposits. It is
projected that as of December 31, 2013, ADIA’s fund will be at approximately 3.68% of insured
deposits.

29.     ADIA is funded by annual premiums collected from member institutions. The rate is
0.5 percent of the average amount of insured deposits held by the banks at the close of business
of the last calendar quarter of the preceding year. Premiums are paid on a quarterly basis; there is
no risk based element to the premiums. ADIA also has the authority to collect advance premiums
and, with the approval of BOA, special contributions where needed to replenish its fund.

30.     ADIA is managing an investment portfolio that has reached almost 20 billion ALL
or approximately 1.4 percent of GDP at end-September 2013. Potential payouts from the
fund to insured depositors would be in ALL but insured deposits are denominated both in ALL
and foreign currencies (largely Euro). Investment policies of ADIA are based on its law and an
internally approved policy appropriately focused on safety and liquidity over return. Current
investments are focused on safe investments in Treasury bills up to twelve months.

31.     As the portfolio grows and more information becomes available on its liability
structure it would be prudent for ADIA to adopt principles of asset-liability management.
This would entail taking into account the currency risk related to foreign denominated deposits
and an appropriate investment horizon. ADIA’s share of the twelve month Treasury bill portfolio
is growing and is now close to 10% of outstanding Treasury bills which makes it increasingly
difficult for ADIA to roll over its portfolio.

32.     Deposit insurance is compulsory for all banks. ADIA protects only natural persons, up
to the maximum of 2.5 million ALL (about $25,000) per depositor. Foreign denominated
deposits are insured to the same amount, but are paid in ALL, with the exchange rate set under
Article 4 of ADIA’s law as that in effect on the date of intervention. ADIA is legally mandated
to reimburse depositors within 3 months of the intervention by BOA in an insured bank, with the
ability to ask that this time be extended for no more than six additional months. ADIA insures
approximately 95% of individual depositors and 58% of deposits in the banking system.

33.      ADIA is Compliant or Largely Compliant with 13 of the 18 Core Principles (one
Principle is Not Applicable). ADIA has a number of strengths, including its ability to attract
qualified staff, its efforts to build a computerized data collection system and its cordial working
relationship with BOA as an entity within the central bank. However, there are several areas for
improvement, including its public awareness program particularly as it relates to investment
products offered by one of its member institutions, its governance framework which requires
ratification of many of its actions by BOA, the absence of full implementation of the information
sharing agreement between BOA and ADIA (including the lack of access to supervisory
information about member institutions that could impact ADIA’s preparedness for a payout ), its
overly restrictive legal requirements for approved investments and the limitations on legal
protection for its current and former employees as well as those acting at its direction. A
summary of the detailed assessment of compliance with the Core Principles is presented below.



                                                 8
           VI. ASSESSMENT OF THE OBSERVANCE OF THE CORE PRINCIPLES

34.     The ratings for compliance were awarded according to the methodology prescribed
in the Core Principles Methodology (December 2010). This methodology established five
levels of compliance: compliant, largely compliant, materially non-compliant, non-compliant and
not applicable. The criteria for awarding these ratings are as follows:


           Compliant – When the Essential Criteria are met without any significant
            deficiencies.

           Largely Compliant – When only minor shortcomings are observed and the
            authorities are able to achieve full compliance within a prescribed time frame.

           Materially Non-compliant – Severe shortcomings which cannot be rectified easily.

           Non-compliant – No substantive implementation of the Core Principle.

           Not Applicable – Not considered given the structural, legal and institutional features
            of the deposit insurance system.




                                                9
 TABLE 1: CORE PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEMS
      DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT SUMMARY TABLE

Core Principle 1: Public policy objectives. The first step in adopting a deposit insurance
system or reforming an existing system is to specify appropriate public policy objectives that it is
expected to achieve. These objectives should be formally specified and well integrated into the
design of the deposit insurance system. The principal objectives for deposit insurance systems
are to contribute to the stability of the financial system and protect depositors.

Description        ADIA’s public policy objectives (PPOs) are not clearly specified in its law. Its
                   2012-2014 Strategic Plan, Annual Report and public awareness materials
                   specify various public policy objectives, such as protection of small
                   depositors, contributing to the strengthening of the financial system and
                   strengthening public trust in the banking and financial system. There is no
                   review as to whether ADIA is meeting any of these various PPOs.

Assessment         Largely Compliant

Comments           ADIA’s public policy objectives are not formally specified. ADIA is a part of
                   the FSAG which was established in 2012 and therefore does play a role in
                   ensuring financial stability. ADIA should amend its law to include its PPOs
                   and establish a regular process for determining whether its operations do, in
                   fact, meet its PPOs.

Core Principle 2: Mitigating moral hazard. Moral hazard should be mitigated by ensuring that
the deposit insurance system contains appropriate design features and through other elements of
the financial system safety net.
Description        There is limited deposit insurance coverage for deposits held by natural
                   persons (currently the approximate equivalent of $25,000 per person per
                   institution). Foreign denominated accounts are insured at the same level.
                   ADIA charges flat rate premiums to its member banks.


Assessment        Compliant
Comments          At this stage of its development ADIA should not consider adopting risk
                  based premiums. Such premiums can be appropriate in some circumstances
                  for mature deposit insurers with adequate funding and resources to administer
                  what can often be a complex system.
Core Principle 3: Mandate. It is critical that the mandate selected for a deposit insurer is clearly
and formally specified and that there is consistency between the stated public policy objectives
and the powers and responsibilities given to the deposit insurer.

Description        ADIA has a paybox mandate to act as an insurer of deposits. This mandate is
                   clearly specified in ADIA’s governing statute in Article 6.

Assessment         Compliant


                                                10
Comments          There are some areas in ADIA’s law that need to be made clearer as to its role
                  when its funds are used to assist BOA in resolving a bank through the use of a
                  P&A or bridge bank tool.

Core Principle 4: Powers. A deposit insurer should have all powers necessary to fulfil its
mandate and these should be formally specified. All deposit insurers require the power to finance
reimbursements, enter into contracts, set internal operating budgets and procedures, and access
timely and accurate information to ensure that they can meet their obligations to depositors
promptly.

Description       Under Article 8 of ADIA’s law it has operational and financial autonomy. It
                  has powers consistent with its paybox mandate, including the power to get
                  information from member banks, to reimburse insured deposits, to enter into
                  contracts without regard to public contracting laws when making insured
                  deposit payments, to decide on the admission and exclusion of banks in the
                  deposit insurance system, to share information with other members of the
                  safety net and to engage in contingency planning. However, many of its
                  actions need to be ratified by the BOA, including its internal operating
                  budget, and it does not have the direct power to compel member institutions
                  to meet their obligations to pay premiums and provide information on deposit
                  accounts. There is no formal process by which ADIA and BOA determine
                  when ADIA’s funds will be used for a P&A or bridge bank resolution.

Assessment        Largely Compliant

Comments          ADIA has the power to enter into sharing agreements with foreign deposit
                  insurers but it has not done so to date. It would be prudent to have such
                  agreements in place given the presence of a significant number of foreign
                  banks in Albania. See discussion under CP 7, Cross-border issues. Although it
                  is exempt from public procurement rules for the purposes of completing an
                  insured deposit payment, such exemption should be extended to include work
                  done in preparation for such payment and to prepare for a transfer of funds.

Core Principle 5: Governance. The deposit insurer should be operationally independent,
transparent, accountable and insulated from undue political and industry influence.

Description       ADIA is a public legal entity supervised by BOA. There are five members of
                  ADIA’s board appointed for staggered five year terms. A Chief Executive
                  Officer is selected by BOA and appointed by the Board of Directors.
                  Members of the Board are appointed by BOA, with two members selected by
                  BOA, two members selected by MOF and one member selected by the
                  Professional Union of Public Accountants. Board members cannot be
                  employed by an insured entity, must meet certain other qualifications, and can
                  only be dismissed for specified cause under Article 13 of ADIA’s law. The
                  Chairman of the Board is selected by the Board from among its members but
                  cannot be the Chief Executive Officer. Representatives of insured entities can
                  attend Board meetings at the request of the Board. Qualifications for Board

                                               11
                   members are stated in Article 12 of ADIA’s law and require Board members
                   to be citizens with the appropriate personal and professional background and
                   expertise. All employees are subject to the conflict of interest provisions of
                   Article 17 of ADIA’s statute.

Assessment         Compliant

Comments           ADIA’s salary structure has recently been made consistent in many regards
                   with that of BOA but ADIA should explore further making its benefits
                   package entirely consistent with that of BOA. ADIA has not had difficulty
                   attracting qualified staff. There is also a Code of Conduct in place for ADIA
                   employees that requires certain disclosures, including loans at member
                   institutions. As noted under CP 4 ADIA could be made more independent in
                   its operations if many of its actions did not require ratification by BOA.

Core Principle 6: Relationships with other safety-net participants. A framework should be in
place for the close coordination and information sharing, on a routine basis as well as in relation
to particular banks, among the deposit insurer and other financial system safety-net participants.
Such information should be accurate and timely (subject to confidentiality when required).
Information-sharing and coordination arrangements should be formalized.

Description        There is a MOU in place between ADIA and BOA that dates from 2002. The
                   material to be shared includes monthly and quarterly financial statements,
                   quarterly analyses of individual banks for indicators identified by BOA’s
                   EWS, and examination ratings of insured banks. However, the materials
                   identified in the MOU have not as a matter of practice been shared with
                   ADIA. The FSAG has been a good vehicle for the sharing of information at a
                   high level about potential threats to financial stability and for engaging in
                   contingency planning. There is a MOU in place among MOF, BOA, AFSA
                   and ADIA regarding the operation of the FSAG and the exchange of
                   information connected with that operation. ADIA is in the process of
                   implementing a system to obtain deposit information directly from its member
                   institutions.

Assessment         Materially Non-Compliant

Comments           Although there is a formal agreement on information sharing between ADIA
                   and BOA, it has not been implemented. ADIA and BOA did cooperate in a
                   Crisis Simulation Exercise in 2010 which identified the need for greater
                   information sharing. There appears to be a willingness on the part of BOA to
                   improve coordination and information sharing with ADIA.

Core Principle 7: Cross-Border Issues. Provided confidentiality is ensured, all relevant
information should be exchanged between deposit insurers in different jurisdictions and possibly
between deposit insurers and other foreign safety-net participants when appropriate. In
circumstances where more than one deposit insurer will be responsible for coverage, it is
important to determine which deposit insurer or insurers will be responsible for the

                                                12
reimbursement process. The deposit insurance already provided by the home country system
should be recognized in the determination of levies and premiums.

Description       ADIA has the legal authority under Article 9 of its law to enter into
                  agreements with foreign deposit insurers for the sharing of relevant
                  information. However, no such agreements have been made to date. Given the
                  importance of foreign banks in Albania such agreements are essential. It is
                  important that ADIA be able to communicate with other deposit insurers
                  about possible payout activities in the home jurisdiction to be able to plan
                  effective communication strategies for the subsidiaries of those banks in
                  Albania. ADIA is only responsible for the payment of insured deposits within
                  Albania.

Assessment        Materially Non-Compliant

Comments          ADIA should establish lines of communication with deposit insurers in the
                  relevant jurisdictions where parent banks of member institutions operate to
                  both assist it in developing an effective communication strategy and to
                  understand risks seen by those deposit insurers to their banking system. ADIA
                  has met with authorities in Kosovo where there is a branch of an Albanian
                  bank.

Core Principle 8: Compulsory membership. Membership in the deposit insurance system
should be compulsory for all financial institutions accepting deposits from those deemed most in
need of protection (e.g. retail and small business depositors) to avoid adverse selection.

Description       All banks licensed by BOA are members of the DIS. ADIA’s law provides (in
                  accordance with its amendment in 2012) for the entry of SCAs into the
                  deposit insurance scheme. After amendment of its law to address the issue of
                  deposit insurance for SCAs ADIA prepared an Instruction entitled For
                  Insurance Of Deposits With The Savings And Credit Associations which set
                  forth a detailed process for application by the SCAs for entry into the deposit
                  insurance scheme. However, all necessary applications have not been
                  completed by the SCAs and ADIA’s Board recently extended the period for
                  completion of the process by six months. In addition to the requirement that
                  SCAs complete an application to join the deposit insurance scheme, the
                  Government of Albania agreed in the 2012 amendments to ADIA’s law to
                  provide initial funding for such purposes to ADIA in the amount of 50 million
                  ALL. To date that funding has not been provided.

Assessment        Largely Compliant

Comments          Under Article 11 of its law, ADIA does have a role in deciding on the
                  admission of banks to the deposit insurance scheme. On the issue of the
                  SCAs, it is imperative that BOA and ADIA work together expeditiously in
                  2014 to complete the enrollment of any currently active eligible deposit taking
                  SCA into the deposit insurance scheme and to provide for appropriate

                                               13
                  decisions (i.e. license withdrawal, restriction on deposit taking or closure) on
                  the significant number of SCAs that are inactive or not in compliance with all
                  prudential requirements.

Core Principle 9: Coverage. Policymakers should define clearly in law, prudential regulations
or by-laws what is an insurable deposit. The level of coverage should be limited but credible and
be capable of being quickly determined. It should cover adequately the large majority of
depositors to meet the public policy objectives of the system and be internally consistent with
other deposit insurance system design features.

Description       ADIA insures deposits of natural persons in both local and foreign currencies
                  up to 2.5 million ALL per person per institution. However, there are a large
                  number of exclusions enumerated in Article 5 of the ADIA law which exceed
                  those enumerated under the EU Draft Directive on deposit insurance. For
                  example, the deposits of shareholders holding more than 5% ownership
                  interest in the bank are excluded from coverage. Current coverage levels
                  cover 95% of individual depositors, 69% of all individual deposits and
                  approximately 58% of all bank deposits. There is no established process for
                  review of coverage rules and limits. The 2012 amendments to ADIA’s law
                  clarified that set-off of insured deposits would only occur against past due
                  loans.

Assessment        Compliant

Comments          The large number of exclusions from coverage in the law may complicate
                  payout calculation and be difficult for depositors to understand (see CP 17).
                  The coverage limit for SCAs has been set at the same amount as for deposits
                  in banks (2.5 million ALL) although average deposit accounts in SCAs are
                  much lower than the average in banks. The lack of coverage for enterprises is
                  not consistent with the Draft EU Directive on deposit insurance.

Core Principle 10: Transitioning from a blanket guarantee to a limited coverage deposit
insurance system. When a country decides to transition from a blanket guarantee to a limited
coverage deposit insurance system, or to change a given blanket guarantee, the transition should
be as rapid as a country’s circumstances permit. Blanket guarantees can have a number of
adverse effects if retained too long, notably moral hazard. Policymakers should pay particular
attention to public attitudes and expectations during the transition period.

Description       There has not been a blanket guarantee in place since ADIA’s establishment
                  as an independent deposit insurer.

Assessment        Not applicable

Comments

Core Principle 11: Funding. A deposit insurance system should have available all funding
mechanisms necessary to ensure the prompt reimbursement of depositor’s claims including a

                                               14
means of obtaining supplementary back-up funding for liquidity purposes when required.
Primary responsibility for paying the cost of deposit insurance should be borne by banks since
they and their clients directly benefit from having an effective deposit insurance system. For
deposit insurance systems (whether ex-ante, ex-post or hybrid) utilizing risk-adjusted differential
premium systems, the criteria used in the risk-adjusted differential premium system should be
transparent to all participants. As well, all necessary resources should be in place to administer
the risk-adjusted differential premium system appropriately.

Description        ADIA manages an ex ante fund. There was an initial contribution to the Fund
                   by the government which forms part of the capital of ADIA. Once the fund
                   reaches 5% of insured deposits ADIA may reduce the level of premiums it
                   collects. By year end 2013 it will be at approximately 3.68% of insured
                   deposits. As of end-September 2013 the fund had a total portfolio of
                   approximately 19.3 billion ALL, an amount sufficient to provide coverage for
                   net insured deposits in 8 of the 16 banks insured by the scheme. Additional
                   funds come from the initial contributions by members entering the insurance
                   scheme, premiums paid by member institutions, investment income, proceeds
                   from loans and liquidations and any special contributions made by member
                   institutions. Back-up funding for an insured deposit payout is provided in
                   accordance with Article 20/1 of the ADIA law and pursuant to a tri-partite
                   agreement with MOF, BOA and ADIA signed in March 2012. However, such
                   back-up funding is not available for transfer of funds by ADIA in support of a
                   P&A or bridge bank operation. ADIA is also negotiating with EBRD on a
                   contingent line of credit up to 100 million Euro for back-up funding purposes,
                   to be called upon if needed to fulfill its obligations to insured depositors.
                   ADIA has an investment policy, but the law restricts its investments to
                   securities with a maturity term of no more than one year. ADIA also holds
                   only a small percentage of its investment portfolio in foreign currency
                   although there is a sizeable portion of insured funds in such currencies.

Assessment         Largely Compliant

Comments           The back-up funding agreement entered into in December 2012 provides that
                   the parties will cooperate in improving the framework supporting the
                   agreement but no further procedures for implementation (for example, who
                   would be responsible for receiving the request for such funding and in what
                   timeframe would the request be considered) have been agreed. ADIA should
                   review its investments and investment policy to better diversify its fund and
                   establish a framework for its investments that mirrors its risk profile. It
                   should also explore amending its law to provide it greater flexibility in
                   investments with maturities of greater than one year. Its structure for
                   investment management should address internal controls including investment
                   compliance and separation of investment decision and back-office operations.
                   Benchmarks should be established to measure performance, ensure risk
                   management and provide for regular reporting to management. Even though
                   ADIA pays insured deposits in ALL, it should carefully study its foreign
                   exchange risk to be certain that it has sufficient investments in the currencies

                                                15
                   in which insured deposits are held so as to protect against a quickly devaluing
                   ALL in a time of crisis which would increase the cost to ADIA of paying out
                   insured deposits denominated in foreign currency (which exceed 40% of total
                   deposits in the system).

Core Principle 12: Public Awareness. In order for a deposit insurance system to be effective it
is essential that the public be informed on an ongoing basis about the benefits and limitations of
the deposit insurance system.

Description        ADIA has prepared a pamphlet that describes what is and is not covered by
                   deposit insurance and this pamphlet is provided at events ADIA attends. The
                   account forms prepared by member institutions for new accounts contain
                   information about deposit insurance. There are signs about ADIA coverage on
                   bank premises. ADIA also has information about coverage on its website and
                   has provided information on deposit insurance to BOA to include in its
                   education outreach on financial literacy. However, there is insufficient
                   outreach to investors in funds that recently began to be offered by one
                   commercial bank to be certain that those investors are aware that their
                   investments in such funds, sold by the bank on its premises, are not covered
                   by deposit insurance. These investment funds are growing rapidly, and offer
                   higher returns than on deposits at the bank (the funds have more than 22,000
                   investors, largely individuals). ADIA has not measured the level of awareness
                   of deposit insurance generally although there are plans to develop a survey
                   (there is such an instrument in draft) and some examples of such surveys were
                   provided to ADIA in connection with a FIRST funded project completed in
                   2012. ADIA has recently reorganized to have a dedicated public awareness
                   group.

Assessment         Materially Non Compliant

Comments            ADIA has not developed a process to be sure that investment fund materials
                   are accurately reflecting the non-insured nature of the product. Public
                   awareness programs should be a constant part of a deposit insurer’s
                   operations. Although the primary responsibility for promoting public
                   awareness of deposit insurance is with the deposit insurer, other members of
                   the safety net and member institutions also have a role in promoting public
                   awareness and the deposit insurer’s plans should include specific plans as to
                   how to involve those organizations in its awareness campaign. In this regard,
                   ADIA should thus work with AFSA on the disclosure requirements for the
                   investment funds sold by banks. In the event that AFSA determines that unit
                   holders were not correctly informed about the uninsured status of such
                   investments, AFSA should work with BOA and ADIA to develop a corrective
                   plan. It also is important to realize that it can be difficult to begin or
                   materially modify a public awareness campaign during times of crisis or stress
                   in the financial system. A public awareness campaign should be ongoing and
                   should include the use of all types of media.


                                                16
Core Principle 13: Legal Protection. The deposit insurer and individuals working for the
deposit insurer should be protected against lawsuits for their decisions and actions taken in “good
faith” while discharging their mandates. However, individuals must be required to follow
appropriate conflict-of-interest rules and codes of conduct to ensure they remain accountable.
Legal protection should be defined in legislation and administrative procedures, and under
appropriate circumstances, cover legal costs for those indemnified.

Description        Only ADIA employees have legal protection under Article 16/1 of its law.
                   There is no legal protection for former employees or for those acting at
                   ADIA’s direction. In addition employees are required to pay for the costs of
                   their legal defense and seek reimbursement from ADIA if they are found not
                   responsible.

Assessment         Materially Non Compliant

Comments           Legal protection for former employees and those working at ADIA’s direction
                   is essential as deposit insurers may make use of specialized expertise in the
                   resolution function from contractors and those individuals should be protected
                   from suit for lawful acts taken in furtherance of ADIA’s work. In addition
                   funds should be provided ex ante for defense costs, with recovery by ADIA if
                   the employee is found responsible.

Core Principle 14: Dealing with parties at fault in a failure. A deposit insurer, or other
relevant authority, should be provided with the power to seek legal redress against those parties
at fault in a bank failure.

Description        There are processes in place for dealing with parties at fault in a bank failure,
                   including through the public prosecutor and BOA. ADIA is not involved in
                   the process.

Assessment         Compliant

Comments

Core Principle 15: Early detection and timely intervention and resolution. The deposit
insurer should be part of a framework within the financial system safety net that provides for the
early detection and timely intervention and resolution of troubled banks. The determination and
recognition of when a bank is or is expected to be in serious financial difficulty should be made
early and on the basis of well-defined criteria by safety-net participants with the operational
independence and power to act.

Description
                   BOA does have an Early Warning System (EWS) for the banks it supervises.
                   ADIA does not receive information from BOA about banks that are part of the
                   EWS and thus is not part of the early detection framework. BOA does have
                   the power to use a variety of resolution tools, and ADIA under Article 7 of its
                   law can contribute to a P&A or bridge bank, up to the amount of insured

                                                 17
                   deposits.
Assessment         Largely Compliant

Comments           ADIA should be part of the early detection framework in place.

Core Principle 16: Effective resolution processes. Effective failure-resolution processes
should: facilitate the ability of the deposit insurer to meet its obligations including
reimbursement of depositors promptly and accurately and on an equitable basis; minimise
resolution costs and disruption of markets; maximise recoveries on assets; and, reinforce
discipline through legal actions in cases of negligence or other wrongdoings. In addition, the
deposit insurer or other relevant financial system safety-net participant should have the authority
to establish a flexible mechanism to help preserve critical banking functions by facilitating the
acquisition by an appropriate body of the assets and the assumption of the liabilities of a failed
bank (e.g. providing depositors with continuous access to their funds and maintaining clearing
and settlement activities).

Description        ADIA is involved in the resolution process once the BOA determines to place
                   a bank into liquidation (this is defined as an “intervention” under ADIA’s
                   law). Its role is limited to either completing an insured deposit payout or
                   contributing funds in that amount to a P&A or bridge bank transaction. There
                   is no formal process for ADIA to participate in the decision as to the use of its
                   funds in resolution.

Assessment         Compliant

Comments

Core Principle 17: Reimbursing depositors. The deposit insurance system should give
depositors prompt access to their insured funds. Therefore, the deposit insurer should be notified
or informed sufficiently in advance of the conditions under which a reimbursement may be
required and be provided with access to depositor information in advance. Depositors should
have a legal right to reimbursement up to the coverage limit and should know when and under
what conditions the deposit insurer will start the payment process, the time frame over which
payments will take place, whether any advance or interim payments will be made as well as the
applicable coverage limits.

escription         ADIA is in the process of developing an automated system for the payment of
                   insured deposits with the cooperation of its member banks. The system would
                   allow it to perform a payout in less than the current time it is provided in its
                   law (three months). ADIA is able currently to make a determination of which
                   deposits are insured at a member institution for purposes of verifying
                   premium payments. Once its automated system is operational ADIA intends
                   to conduct a simulation exercise to test its readiness for a payout. ADIA’s law
                   was amended in 2012 to eliminate set-off for other than overdue loans,
                   thereby simplifying calculations for a payout. However, there are still
                   significant exclusions from coverage which could complicate the payout


                                                18
                   process (See CP 9). There is no authority to make advance or interim
                   payments to depositors in case of delay. The LOB provides in Article 117 that
                   the liquidator shall send formal notice of his appointment to ADIA within 3
                   days and should cooperate with the deposit insurer for the compensation of
                   depositors although the time frame for such cooperation is stated as having to
                   occur within two months of his appointment.

Assessment         Largely Compliant

Comments           ADIA is working to position itself to be better able to make a prompt payout
                   of insured deposits. Any changes in its law on timeframes for payment to
                   insured depositors should be coordinated with the changes in the receivership
                   framework set forth in the LOB. It has worked with BOA on a Manual for
                   Receivership and Liquidation that provides that the receiver upon request
                   from ADIA will provide information on depositors at the bank which can then
                   be checked against information ADIA will have in its own records. Once
                   operational the automated system should be regularly audited for accuracy
                   and simulations of payouts should be conducted to assure ADIA of the
                   system’s capabilities. ADIA should also seek authority to make interim
                   payments to depositors.

Core Principle 18: Recoveries. The deposit insurer should share in the proceeds of recoveries
from the estate of the failed bank. The management of the assets of the failed bank and the
recovery process (by the deposit insurer or other party carrying out this role) should be guided by
commercial considerations and their economic merits.

Description        ADIA is subrogated to the claims of depositors it pays under its insurance
                   obligation. Adequate judicial processes exist to allow for asset recovery
                   although the process of realizing on collateral can be slow.

Assessment         Compliant

Comments           The Law on Banks in Article 121 should make clear that expenses of ADIA in
                   compensating depositors should be treated as first priority claims for
                   recovery.




                                                19
   TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES

  [Key: C = Compliant; LC = Largely Compliant; MNC= Materially Noncompliant; NC
                        =Noncompliant; NA = Not Applicable]

1. Public Policy         LC    ADIA does not have a set of specified Public Policy
Objectives (PPOs)              Objectives.
2. Mitigating Moral       C    ADIA has limited deposit insurance coverage although the
Hazard                         current amount covers the vast majority of individual
                               depositors. The coverage level planned for SCAs may be
                               higher than is necessary to provide adequate coverage for
                               depositors in those institutions.
3. Mandate                C    ADIA’s mandate as a paybox is formally specified in its law.

4. Powers                LC    ADIA has extensive powers available to it in fulfilling its
                               mission. It has the ability to request information directly from
                               its member institutions and go on site to review records of its
                               members. However, it does not have the power to enforce such
                               requests, and must seek ratification of many of its actions from
                               BOA. It is exempt from the provisions of public contracting
                               laws when making an insured deposit payment. ADIA is tax
                               exempt under Article 8 of its law.

5. Governance             C    ADIA is a public legal entity that is part of the BOA. It has a
                               five member board and board members are governed by
                               conflict of interest rules. Active bankers are not permitted on
                               the board.

6. Relationship with     MNC   Although ADIA has a MOU for the purposes of sharing
Other Safety Net               information with BOA that MOU has not been implemented.
Participants                   ADIA is involved in the FSAG process which allows it to
                               attend FSAG meetings and be part of the information flow
                               associated with such meetings.

7. Cross-border Issues   MNC   Although ADIA has the explicit legal authority to enter into
                               agreements with foreign deposit insurers, it has not done so.
8. Compulsory            LC     All licensed banks are members of the DIS. The process for
Membership                     including the SCAs in the deposit insurance scheme has not
                               been completed and the promised funds for the DIS have not
                               been provided to ADIA by the government.
9. Coverage               C    Coverage is limited but credible, with the vast majority of
                               individual depositors covered by insurance. The numerous
                               exclusions from coverage and coverage only for natural
                               persons (not enterprises) are weaknesses in the scope of


                                           20
                                 coverage in its law.

10. Transitioning from     NA    There have been no blanket guarantees since ADIA’s creation
Blanket Guarantee                in 2002.

11. Funding                LC    ADIA has available to it an ex ante fund as well as a back-up
                                 source of funding from the government. It is also negotiating
                                 with EBRD for a contingent credit line in the amount of 100
                                 million Euro. However its ability to diversify its investment
                                 portfolio is too restrictive under Article 21/1 of its law and its
                                 investment policy should better reflect the risks it may face of
                                 a quickly devaluing currency at the time of an intervention
                                 when it would have to convert foreign currency deposits into
                                 ALL for a payment of insured deposits. ADIA should consider
                                 amending its law to provide it with the ability to better
                                 diversify its investment portfolio.

12. Public Awareness       MNC   ADIA has not measured the level of public awareness of
                                 deposit insurance and specifically has not developed a plan in
                                 conjunction with AFSA on what disclosures should be made to
                                 investors in uninsured products sold by a commercial bank on
                                 its premises.

13. Legal Protection       MNC   There is no protection against legal actions for former
                                 employees and no coverage for those individuals acting at
                                 ADIA’s direction. Defense costs for employees are not funded
                                 on an ex ante basis.

14. Dealing with Parties    C    Public entities have the power to deal with parties at fault in
at Fault                         the failure of a member institution.

15. Early Detection and    LC    ADIA does not receive information on BOA’s EWS and
Timely Intervention and          therefore is not part of the framework for early detection.
Resolution
16. Effective Resolution    C    BOA has the power to arrange for a P&A and authority to
Processes                        organize a bridge bank. ADIA can contribute to such
                                 resolutions up to the amount of insured deposits. There is no
                                 formal process for ADIA to be involved in the decision to
                                 make use of its funds in a P&A or bridge bank.

17. Reimbursing            LC    ADIA is in the process of automating its access to depositor
Depositors                       records. Its current legal framework allows it three months to
                                 make an insured deposit payout which period should be
                                 shortened. It does not have the authority to make advance or


                                             21
                     interim payments to depositors.

18. Recoveries   C   ADIA is subrogated to depositors’ claims and shares in
                     recoveries from the failed bank estate.




                                22
 TABLE 3. RECOMMENDED CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN TO IMPROVE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
                      DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES

CP 1: Public Policy     LC    Amend ADIA’s governing statute to specifically state its public
Objectives                    policy objectives. Develop a process for measuring whether
                              ADIA meets those objectives.
CP 4: Powers            LC    ADIA should be able to have greater autonomy from BOA in its
                              daily operations and should have fewer of its actions (for
                              example, its approval of an internal budget or regulations) subject
                              to ratification by BOA. ADIA’s exemption from public
                              procurement rules should be extended to include work done in
                              preparation for an insured deposit payment and the transfer of
                              funds.
CP 6: Relationships     MNC   Full implementation of the MOU on information sharing between
With Other Safety Net         ADIA and BOA is essential to allow ADIA to prepare for the
Participants                  possibility of an insured deposit event. For example, ADIA
                              should get full information on risk ratings for banks and have
                              access to complete supervisory records, including reporst of
                              examination.
CP 7: Cross-border      MNC   Enter into agreements with relevant deposit insurance authorities
Issues                        to facilitate resolution planning and ensure an effective
                              communication strategy if parent banks should face stress in their
                              operations leading to a bank run or a resolution action. This is
                              particularly important in a jurisdiction like Albania where foreign
                              banks form a significant part of the financial system.
CP 8: Compulsory        LC    ADIA and BOA need to work together to complete the process
Membership                    for all eligible SCSs to join the deposit insurance system; the
                              government must comply with its obligation to provide the
                              funding for the DIS to allow the SCAs to be covered by ADIA.
CP 9: Coverage           C    ADIA should revise the list of exclusions from coverage to align
                              it with exclusions provided under the EU Draft Directive on
                              Deposit Insurance and the LOB. ADIA should also study (1) the
                              appropriate level of insurance coverage for SCAs and (2) the
                              possibility of extending insurance coverage to enterprises.
CP 11: Funding          LC    Amend the law to allow for the ability to have greater
                              diversification and longer maturities in ADIA’s investment
                              portfolio; prepare an Investment Policy that reflects the risk
                              ADIA has with regard to the presence of insured foreign deposits
                              that would have to be converted into ALL at the time of an
                              intervention or consider allowing ADIA the flexibility to pay
                              such deposits in foreign currency; adopt principles of asset-
                              liability management and internal controls on investment
                              operations. ADIA should explore amending its back-up funding
                              agreement to clarify that such funding is available to support its
                              contributions to a P&A or bridge bank resolution.
CP 12: Public           MNC   Work with AFSA (and BOA if necessary) on a plan to fully

                                          23
Awareness                       inform investors in products sold by banks of the uninsured
                                nature of such investments. Fully implement a Public Awareness
                                Plan, making use of various forms of media and member
                                institutions in advancing knowledge of the deposit insurance
                                protection system and conducting a survey to test awareness.
                                Continue working with BOA on a Financial Literacy Program
                                that will include educating the target audience about deposit
                                insurance.
CP 13: Legal Protection   MNC   Amend ADIA’s governing statute to offer the same level of legal
                                protection given to employees to former employees and those
                                working at ADIA’s direction. Provide rules for ex ante payment
                                of defense costs.
CP 15: Early Detection    LC    Fully implement the MOU with BOA to allow access to
and Timely Resolution           information on member banks, including information in BOA’s
                                EWS and supervisory actions taken against member institutions.
CP 16: Effective           C    BOA and ADIA should work together to develop a formal
Resolution Processes            process for ADIA’s involvement in the decision to use its funds
                                in support of P&A or bridge bank resolution decisions.
CP 17: Reimbursing        LC    Amend the ADIA law to provide the authority to make advance
Depositors                      or interim payments.
CP 18: Recoveries          C    ADIA’s expenses in preparing for any use of its funds in
                                resolution should be treated as an administrative expense under
                                Article 121 of the Law on Banks.




                                            24
               TABLE 4. DETAILED ASSESSMENT OF DEPOSIT INSURANCE PRINCIPLES


Principle 1           Public policy objectives

                      The first step in adopting a deposit insurance system or reforming an existing
                      system is to specify appropriate public policy objectives that it is expected to
                      achieve. These objectives should be formally specified and well integrated
                      into the design of the deposit insurance system. The principal objectives for
                      deposit insurance systems are to contribute to the stability of the financial
                      system and protect depositors.

Description           ADIA’s s public policy objectives are not set forth in its governing statute.
                      The public policy objectives as detailed in its Annual Report and 2012-2014
                      Strategic Plan are to protect small depositors in the banking system, to
                      contribute to the strengthening of (1) the stability of the financial system and
                      (2) public trust in the banking and financial system. ADIA does not regularly
                      review its operations to determine if it is meeting these objectives.

Assessment            Largely Compliant

Comments             ADIA’s statute should be amended to specifically include its PPOs.

Essential              1. The public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system are clearly
Criteria                  defined and formally specified, for example, through legislation or
                          documents accompanying legislation.5
Description          ADIA’s PPOs are not clearly defined or specified in law.

Comments

Essential
Criteria
                         2. The public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system are
                             publically disclosed.
Description          The public policy objectives are disclosed in ADIA’s Annual Report and
                     Strategic Plan.

Comments


5
  The public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system refer to the objectives or goals the system is
expected to achieve. The mandate of the deposit insurer refers to the set of official instructions or statement of
purpose describing its roles and responsibilities. There is no single mandate or set of mandates suitable for all
deposit insurers. Existing deposit insurers have mandates ranging from narrow, so-called “paybox” systems to
those with broader powers or responsibilities, such as preventive action and loss or risk minimisation/
management, with a variety of combinations in between.


                                                           25
Essential         3. There is a review of the extent to which a deposit insurance system is
Criteria              meeting its public policy objectives on a regular basis (e.g. between two
                      to five years or on a more frequent basis as deemed necessary). This
                      review takes into consideration the views of stakeholders.
Description   There is no specific process for the review of ADIA’s public policy objectives.
              Such a review should include measuring the effectiveness of ADIA’s
              operations in meeting its public policy objectives. For example, ADIA could
              review its practices with regard to insuring only the accounts of natural persons
              to measure whether such a practice is effective in terms of the overall public
              policy to strengthen public trust in the banking and financial system.

Comments

Principle 2   Mitigating moral hazard

              Moral hazard should be mitigated by ensuring that the deposit insurance
              system contains appropriate design features and through other elements of the
              financial system safety net (see Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance
              Systems “Preconditions” paragraph 16).

Description   There is a limited coverage amount for deposits (approximately $25,000) and
              various exclusions from coverage. ADIA appropriately applies a flat rate
              premium system.

Assessment    Compliant

Comments

Essential        1.   The design of the deposit insurance system recognises the existence of
Criteria              moral hazard and mitigates it as much as possible in-line with public
                      policy objectives. Specific design features that mitigate the risk of
                      moral hazard may include: limited deposit insurance coverage and
                      scope; where appropriate, deposit insurance premiums that are assessed
                      on a differential or risk-adjusted basis; and, minimizing the risk of loss
                      through timely intervention and resolution by the deposit insurer or
                      other participants in the safety net with such powers.
Description   ADIA applies a limited deposit insurance system, with limitations on both
              amount and scope. There has been no experience with bank resolution but an
              adequate framework is in place for intervention in banks; there are some
              weaknesses in the framework for intervention as regards SCAs (for example,
              dissolution of a SCA requires the involvement of the organization’s general
              assembly).

Comments


                                             26
Essential        2.  The financial safety net creates and supports appropriate incentives to
Criteria             mitigate moral hazard. These may include: the promotion of good
                     corporate governance and sound risk management of individual banks,
                     effective market discipline and frameworks for, and enforcement of,
                     strong prudential regulation, supervision and laws and regulations (to
                     be assessed through a review of “Preconditions”, see pages 8-9.).
Description   BOA promotes sound risk management at individual banks and is in the
              process of working with ADIA on a plan for the SCAs that will require
              changes in the operations or closures of those deemed inactive or at risk.

Comments

Principle 3   Mandate

              It is critical that the mandate selected for a deposit insurer is clearly and
              formally specified and that there is consistency between the stated public
              policy objectives and the powers and responsibilities given to the deposit
              insurer.

Description   ADIA’s paybox mandate is formally specified in its law in Article 9 to require
              it to provide compensation for insured deposits up to the level specified by law
              and to effectively administer its fund.

Assessment    Compliant

Comments

Essential        1.The deposit insurer has a mandate that is clearly defined and formally
Criteria           specified, for example, through legislation or documents accompanying
                   legislation. The mandate clarifies the role and responsibilities of the
                   deposit insurer within the financial safety net.
Description   ADIA’s mandate is clearly defined in its law.

Comments

Essential        2.   The mandate is consistent with the stated public policy objectives and
Criteria              the powers, roles and responsibilities given to the deposit insurer.

Description   ADIA has the needed powers to advance its mandate to insure deposits and pay
              compensation although it could benefit from certain additional powers as
              detailed in this assessment.

Comments

Principle 4   Powers

              A deposit insurer should have all powers necessary to fulfil its mandate and

                                              27
              these should be formally specified. All deposit insurers require the power to
              finance reimbursements, enter into contracts, set internal operating budgets and
              procedures, and access timely and accurate information to ensure that they can
              meet their obligations to depositors promptly.

Description   ADIA has extensive powers available to it in fulfilling its mandate. It has the
              ability to request information directly from its member institutions and enter its
              member institutions to review information. However, ADIA must refer
              requests to enforce its demands for information to BOA and must seek
              ratification of many of its actions from BOA. ADIA is tax exempt and is
              exempt from the application of public contracting laws when making an
              insured deposit payment.

Assessment    Largely Compliant

Comments

Essential        1.  The powers (legal authority) of the deposit insurance system are clearly
Criteria             defined and formally specified in law or regulation (including approved
                     self-regulation in the context of private or public deposit insurance
                     systems).
Description   ADIA’s law establishes its powers. ADIA only acts as a paybox but may not
              have adequate information to prepare. As it shortens the target period for
              payout it may need more information than it currently has access to.

Comments

Essential        2.   The powers of the deposit insurer are aligned to its mandate and public
Criteria              policy objectives.

Description   ADIA largely has powers consistent with its mandate.

Comments

Essential        3.   The deposit insurer has the following minimum powers:
Criteria

Description

Comments

                 a.   compel member banks to comply with their obligations to the deposit
                      insurer, or request that the supervisor or another safety-net participant
                      do so on behalf of the deposit insurer;
Description   Article 26 provides that ADIA may recommend that BOA take action to
              enforce the obligations of member banks regarding payment of premiums and


                                             28
              other requirements set by ADIA.

Comments

                 b.   have the legal authority and capability to reimburse depositors;

Description   ADIA has the legal authority and capability to reimburse depositors when
              BOA intervenes in an insured entity. Intervention is defined as the liquidation
              of an insured entity. ADIA also has the power to contribute funds for a P&A or
              bridge bank up to the amount of its insured deposit obligation. ADIA has three
              months within which to compensate depositors under Article 7 of its law.
              ADIA will have direct access to deposit information through its computerized
              data system.

Comments

                 c.  enter into contracts (e.g., agreements/transactions to obtain goods and
                     services/insurance);
Description   ADIA has the authority to enter into contracts but in most circumstances it
              must comply with public procurement law. Its exemption from such laws could
              be expanded to include its ability to enter into contracts in preparation for an
              insured deposit transfer.

Comments

                 d.  set internal operating budgets and internal policies and procedures (e.g.
                     in areas such as human resources and information technology);
Description   ADIA’s budget must be ratified by BOA under Article 11 of its law. ADIA is
              tax exempt.

Comments

                 e.   access timely and accurate information to promptly meet their
                      obligations to depositors;
Description   ADIA can access deposit information from its member institutions and will be
              able to do so on an ongoing basis directly from its member institutions based
              on the computerized system under development.

Comments

                 f.   share information with other safety-net participants;

Description   ADIA can and does share information with other members of the safety net and
              is a participant in FSAG.



                                             29
Comments

                 g.    engage in information sharing and coordination agreements with
                       deposit insurers in other jurisdictions (subject to confidentiality when
                       required); and
Description   ADIA has the explicit power to enter into such agreements but has not done so
              to date.

Comments

                 h.   engage in contingency planning.

Description   ADIA has the power to engage in contingency planning. It has not done a
              simulation of a payout but it did take part in the Crisis Simulation Exercise
              conducted in 2010 with other safety net members. It intends to do a simulation
              exercise for a payout once its computerized deposit records system is
              functional.

Comments

Essential        4.   In support of the deposit insurance system, the other participants in the
Criteria              financial safety net are provided with all powers necessary to fulfil their
                      mandates (see Preconditions).
Description   All members of the financial safety net have the necessary powers to
              implement their mandates although several of the powers have not been
              utilized and may need to be tested by use of simulation exercises.

Comments

Principle 5   Governance

              The deposit insurer should be operationally independent, transparent,
              accountable and insulated from undue political and industry influence.

Description   ADIA is a public legal entity that is part of BOA. There are no active bankers
              on the Board.

Assessment    Compliant

Comments

Essential        1.   The deposit insurer is able to use the powers and means assigned to it
Criteria              without undue influence from external parties. There is in practice no
                      significant evidence of government or industry interference in the
                      operational independence of the deposit insurer and its ability to obtain
                      and deploy the resources needed to carry out its mandate.


                                             30
Description   There is no evidence of political or undue influence from external parties.
              ADIA’s involvement in the FSAG process also provides it with an important
              voice on financial stability issues.

Comments

Essential        2.   The operational funding of the deposit insurer is provided in a manner
Criteria              that does not undermine its autonomy or independence and permits it to
                      fulfil its mandate. Examples include:
Description   ADIA is funded from premium assessments on its member institutions and
              returns on its Fund.

Comments

                 a. Salary scales that allow it to attract and retain qualified staff;

Description   ADIA has aligned its salary structure with that of BOA. It has not had
              difficulty attracting qualified staff.

Comments

                b. The ability to hire outside experts to deal with special situations,
                    subject to appropriate confidentiality restrictions;
Description   ADIA has the ability to contract with private experts to assist it in its work.

Comments

                 c. A training budget and programme that provides appropriate training
                     opportunities for staff;
Description   ADIA has a training budget and also participates in training programs
              organized by BOA and the International Association of Deposit Insurers
              (IADI).

Comments

                  d. A budget for computers and other equipment sufficient to equip its staff
                     with tools needed to fulfil its mandate; and
Description   ADIA has sufficient budget resources to obtain the tools necessary for meeting
              its mandate.

Comments

                 e. A travel budget that allows appropriate on-site work.

Description   There is sufficient budget for travel as needed to accomplish its work.



                                             31
Comments

Essential        3.   The governing statute, internal policies of the deposit insurer or other
Criteria              relevant laws or policies specify:

Description

Comments

                 a.   the governing body and management are fit and proper persons and
                      have the requisite knowledge or experience;
Description   Qualifications for Board members are stated in Article 12 of ADIA’s law and
              require Board members to be citizens with the personal and professional
              background and expertise in the field. There is a Code of Conduct which
              applies to all ADIA employees. All employees are also covered by bank
              secrecy rules.

Comments

                 b.  members of the governing body (with the exception of ex-officio
                     appointees) and the
                 c. head of the deposit insurer are subject to limitations on their term of
                     appointment; and
Description   Members of the Board and the General Director are subject to 5 year terms
              under Article 12 of its law. Terms of Board members are staggered.

Comments

                 d.  members of the governing body can be removed from office during
                     their term only for reasons specified or defined in law or rules of
                     professional conduct, and not without cause.
Description   Members of the governing body can only be removed for cause under Article
              13 of ADIA’s law.

Comments

Essential        4.  The members of the governing body (e.g., directors or officers) and
Criteria             management of the deposit insurer are held accountable to a higher
                     authority, whether public or private, through a transparent framework
                     for the discharge of the system’s duties in relation to its objectives and
                     mandate.
Description   ADIA reports annually on its activities through the General Director in the
              Parliamentary Commission of Economy. ADIA also reports to BOA and the
              Council of Ministers.



                                             32
Comments

Essential        5. The deposit insurer operates in a transparent and responsible manner. It
Criteria            discloses and publishes on a regular basis appropriate information on its
                    activities, governance practices, structure and financial results.
Description   ADIA publishes extensive information on its website and also publishes an
              Annual Report.

Comments

Essential        6.   The deposit insurer is structured such that the potential for conflicts of
Criteria              interest for or between members of the governing body and
                      management is minimised and that they are subjected to appropriate
                      codes of conduct/ethics.
Description   All ADIA employees are subject to a Code of Conduct and Board members are
              subject to the conflict of interest policies set forth in Article 15 of the law.
              There are no private bankers on the Board.



Essential        7.   The deposit insurer takes into consideration the views of stakeholders.
Criteria

Description   ADIA can request representatives of insured entities to attend Board meetings
              under Article 12 of its law. Its General Director also meets regularly with
              bankers and the Banker’s Association. Annual reports with appropriate
              information on its activities and financial results are delivered to all
              stakeholders and published on ADIA’s website.

Comments

Essential        8.   Where decision making is delegated by the governing body of the
Criteria              deposit insurer to its employees, the governing body has appropriate
                      procedures to oversee the exercise of delegation.
Description   ADIA is a relatively small organization with 19 employees. Decision making is
              held largely at the Board level with appropriate procedures in place to oversee
              the work of all the employees. Where necessary appropriate delegations are in
              place.

Comments

Essential        9.   The deposit insurer is subjected to regular external audits with reports
Criteria              provided to the authority to which it is accountable.

Description   Annual external audits are carried out by independent chartered accountants.


                                             33
                    ADIA is also subject to audit by the state authority.

Comments

Essential                10.   The deposit insurer has a governing body approved strategic plan in
Criteria                       place.6

Description         ADIA has a 2012-2014 Strategic Plan in place, approved by the Board of
                    Directors.

Comments

Essential                11.   Regular board meetings are held (e.g. on a quarterly basis or more
Criteria                       frequently as deemed necessary).

Description         ADIA’s Board meets on a monthly basis and can meet more often if necessary.

Comments

Additional               1. The deposit insurer adheres to best practices in corporate governance,
Criterion                   such as:

Description

Comments

                         a. Regular assessments of the extent to which the governing body is
                            meeting its objectives are carried out. Systems and practices are in
                            place to facilitate assessments of its effectiveness; and
Description         The Board of Directors makes an annual analysis of the activity of ADIA in its
                    first meeting of the new year.

Comments

                         b.    The governing body has a well-defined charter that outlines the specific
                               powers reserved for the board and those delegated to management.
Description

Comments

Principle 6         Relationships with other safety-net participants

                    A framework should be in place for the close coordination and information
                    sharing, on a routine basis as well as in relation to particular banks, among the

6
 The term “strategic plan” refers to a document which sets out an organisation’s goals and how it plans to
achieve them.


                                                         34
              deposit insurer and other financial system safety-net participants. Such
              information should be accurate and timely (subject to confidentiality when
              required). Information-sharing and coordination arrangements should be
              formalised.

Description   Although ADIA and BOA have a MOU governing information sharing it is not
              fully implemented. ADIA does not get risk ratings for banks or complete
              examination reports or information on institutions subject to BOA’s EWS.
              ADIA does receive quarterly financial stability reports and materials associated
              with FSAG meetings. Although it is working on a system for gaining access on
              a timely basis to depositor level data at member institutions no such system is
              currently in place.

Assessment    Materially Non Compliant

Comments      The MOU in place should be reviewed and updated as it dates from 2002. Any
              agreement for information sharing must also be implemented so that ADIA has
              access to all necessary information in managing its operations. Contingency
              planning should also take place between ADIA and BOA for resolution
              purposes.

Essential         1. A framework for timely information sharing and the coordination of
Criteria              actions among the deposit insurer and other safety-net participants, on a
                      routine basis as well as in relation to particular banks, is explicit and
                      formalised through legislation, regulation, memoranda of
                      understanding, legal agreements or a combination of these instruments.
Description   There are no legal impediments to the sharing of information among members
              of the safety net and specific agreements are in place between all relevant
              parties in the safety net.

Comments

Essential        2. Planning and operations of safety-net participants, both individually
Criteria              and together, not only cover past and ongoing circumstances but also
                      consider plausible future scenarios.
Description   The process of contingency planning is underway with BOA as part of the
              FSAG process. There was a crisis simulation exercise in 2010. ADIA plans to
              conduct testing of its payment system once developed. ADIA reports to FSAG
              about its finances and solvency and its readiness to conduct a deposit payout.

Comments

Essential        3. All deposit insurers are provided with information on a timely basis to
Criteria            be able to reimburse depositors’ claims promptly including information
                    on the amount of insured deposits held by individual depositors.

                                             35
Description   ADIA is not currently provided with information on a timely basis with
              depositor level data but is in the process of developing a system for ongoing
              access to depositor level information at its member institutions.

Comments

Essential        4. Rules regarding confidentiality of information apply to all safety-net
Criteria            participants and the exchange of information among them.

Description   All members of the safety net are governed by bank secrecy laws.

Comments

Essential         5. The safety-net participants make information on banks that are in
Criteria              financial difficulty or are expected to be in financial difficulty available
                      to the deposit insurer in advance and, where confidentiality
                      requirements prevent this, or where the information is not available
                      from other safety-net participants, the deposit insurer has the power to
                      collect information directly from such banks.
Description   Information sharing has not been done on a systematic basis and the provisions
              of the existing MOU between ADIA and BOA have not been fully
              implemented.

Comments

Additional       1.   A deposit insurer with a broader mandate, such as “loss-” or “risk-
Criterion             minimisation”, has access to timely and accurate information so that it
                      can assess the financial condition of individual banks, as well as the
                      banking industry. These deposit insurers may also need access to
                      information regarding the value of the bank’s assets and the expected
                      time frame for the liquidation process, given that the value of a bank’s
                      assets depends, in part, on the time necessary to liquidate them.
Description

Comments

Principle 7   Cross-border issues

               Provided confidentiality is ensured, all relevant information should be
              exchanged between deposit insurers in different jurisdictions and possibly
              between deposit insurers and other foreign safety-net participants when
              appropriate. In circumstances where more than one deposit insurer will be
              responsible for coverage, it is important to determine which deposit insurer or
              insurers will be responsible for the reimbursement process. The deposit
              insurance already provided by the home country system should be recognised


                                              36
              in the determination of levies and premiums.

Description   ADIA has the power to enter into information sharing agreements with deposit
              insurers in other jurisdictions but has not done so to date. There are no cross-
              border agreements in place.

Assessment    Materially Non Compliant

Comments

Essential        1.Appropriate cross-border bilateral/multilateral agreements are in place
Criteria           in circumstances where, due to the presence of cross-border banking
                   operations, coverage for deposits in foreign branches is provided by the
                   deposit insurer in another jurisdiction or by a combination of deposit
                   insurers in different jurisdictions. For example, where the home country
                   system provides coverage for the branches of its domestic bank, banks
                   in the host countries and/or the host country system provides
                   supplementary coverage for foreign bank branches.
Description   ADIA is responsible for deposits within Albania.

Comments

                 a.   The agreements involve appropriate home and host deposit insurers as
                      well as other appropriate financial safety-net participants when
                      appropriate, including in circumstances where one deposit insurer will
                      be solely responsible for coverage.
Description   Although ADIA has the power to enter into such agreements there are none yet
              in place.

Comments

                 b.   The agreements provide for ongoing close coordination and
                      information sharing between home/host deposit insurers and possibly
                      other safety-net participants, as well as in relation to particular banks
                      when necessary.
Description    ADIA itself does not have share agreements in place and it does not receive
              information from BOA about supervisory issues and concerns in home
              jurisdictions other than as part of the FSAG process.

Comments

                 c.  The agreements specify which deposit insurer or insurers will be
                     responsible for reimbursement as well as premium assessment, cost
                     sharing, and the deposit insurance public awareness issues raised by
                     cross-border banking.
Description   No agreements are in place although ADIA would only be responsible for


                                              37
              paying depositors within Albania.

Comments

Essential        2.  Depositors in the jurisdictions affected by cross-border banking
Criteria             arrangements are provided with clear and easily understandable
                     information on the existence and identification of the deposit insurance
                     system legally responsible for reimbursement and the limits and scope
                     of coverage. Information on the deposit insurance system’s source of
                     funding and standard claims procedures and reimbursement options is
                     also available to affected depositors (e.g. such as on the deposit
                     insurer’s website, through printed materials or similar means).
Description   Not applicable.

Comments

Principle 8   Compulsory membership

              Membership in the deposit insurance system should be compulsory for all
              financial institutions accepting deposits from those deemed most in need of
              protection (e.g. retail and small business depositors) to avoid adverse selection.

Description   All deposit taking banks within Albania are members of the DIS. ADIA has a
              role in the licensing process for new banks. The process for making SCAs part
              of the DIS is underway but has been subject to delay.

Assessment    Largely Compliant

Comments

Essential        1. Membership in a deposit insurance system is compulsory for all
Criteria            financial institutions accepting deposits from those deemed most in
                    need of protection (e.g. retail or individual depositors and small
                    business depositors).
Description   DIS membership is compulsory for all banks licensed by BOA. There is
              ongoing work on making SCAs members of the DIS.

Comments

Essential         2. Policymakers determine whether eligible banks will be given
Criteria              membership as a part of the licensing process or upon application to the
                      deposit insurer.
Description   There have not been new banks licensed in Albania since 2005. ADIA was part
              of the BOA team involved in calculating the deposit insurance premium for the
              new bank. ADIA and BOA cooperate in connection with newly licensed banks
              during the 12 month provisional license period under Article 17 of the Law on

                                             38
                      Banks.

Comments

Essential                  3. Criteria for membership that detail the conditions, process and time
Criteria                      frame for attaining membership are explicitly stated and transparent.

Description           BOA has procedures relating to the licensing of banks and ADIA is involved in
                      the process. An application for membership to ADIA is part of the licensing
                      process.

Comments

Essential                4. If the deposit insurer does not control membership (i.e. cannot refuse
Criteria                     membership), the law or administrative procedures describe a clear
                             time frame in which the deposit insurer is consulted about or informed
                             in advance of “newly licensed” banks.
Description           ADIA is involved in the licensing process and no bank can be licensed without
                      ADIA approval.The LOB (Article 20) requires a potential licensee to submit an
                      application for membership to ADIA.

Comments

Essential                5. When deposit insurance membership is terminated by the deposit
Criteria                    insurer, arrangements are in place that provide for coordination in
                            withdrawing the bank’s operating license by the relevant authority. If
                            relevant, an appropriate general notice is given to depositors (e.g. on
                            the deposit insurer’s website) to inform them that any new deposits
                            issued will not receive deposit protection.
Description           ADIA terminates membership in the DIS once the license is withdrawn by
                      BOA. ADIA is obliged to ask BOA to take administrative sanctions against
                      any member of the DIS if it deemed it appropriate.

Comments

Essential                 6. All financial institutions accepting deposits are subject to strong
Criteria                      prudential regulation and supervision and are financially viable when
                              they become members of a deposit insurance system.7
Description           All financial institutions are subject to prudential regulation and supervision by
                      BOA. The process for involving SCAs in the DIS are being developed so as
                      not to allow inactive or ineligible SCAs into the DIS.

Comments


7
    See discussion “Preconditions” pages 2, 6 and 8.

                                                       39
Principle 9   Coverage

              Policymakers should define clearly in law, prudential regulations or by-laws
              what is an insurable deposit. The level of coverage should be limited but
              credible and be capable of being quickly determined. It should cover
              adequately the large majority of depositors to meet the public policy objectives
              of the system and be internally consistent with other deposit insurance system
              design features.

Description   ADIA insures deposits of natural persons in both local and foreign currency in
              up to the amount of 2.5 million ALL per person per institution. ADIA sets off
              collateralized deposits and also insured deposits against past due loans.
              However, there are a large number of exclusions enumerated in Article 5 of the
              ADIA law, exceeding those required under the EU Draft Directive on deposit
              insurance and not completely consistent with definitions in the LOB (see also
              discussion under CP 17). Current coverage levels cover 95% of individual
              depositors and approximately 58% of all bank deposits. There is no coverage
              for enterprises.

Assessment    Compliant

Comments      There are numerous exemptions from coverage which are inconsistent with
              definitions contained in the LOB.

Essential        1. Insured deposits are clearly and publicly defined. This comprises the
Criteria             level and scope of coverage. If certain depositors are ineligible for
                     deposit protection, the criteria are clearly defined.
Description   ADIA’s statute clearly defines coverage levels and the types of deposits
              covered which are limited to those of natural persons. However there are
              numerous exclusions which may complicate an insured deposit payout.

Comments      ADIA should work with BOA to make sure its definitions for excluded
              deposits are consistent with provisions in the LOB, specifically Article 4 on
              shareholders and persons or group of connected persons.

Essential        2. The definition of “insured deposit” reflects the public policy objectives
Criteria              of protecting depositors and promoting public confidence and financial
                      stability (e.g. protect small transaction accounts).
Description   Only deposits of natural persons are covered. This may have an impact on
              public confidence in the deposit insurance system.

Comments

Essential        3. The level of coverage is limited but credible (e.g. the level of coverage
                    is high enough

                                            40
Criteria                      to maintain confidence, but limited to maintain market discipline). The
                              level of
                              coverage is consistent with the deposit insurer’s public policy
                              objectives.

Description         The level of coverage is sufficiently high to maintain depositor’s confidence
                    but is also limited in amount. The coverage level for SCA deposits should be
                    studied to be sure it is not in excess of what is needed to meet ADIA’s PPOs.

Comments

Essential                4. Depositors have sufficient information readily available to determine
Criteria                    the amount of coverage for their individual deposits.

Description         ADIA has pamphlets that describe its deposit insurance coverage. The banks
                    also provide information about deposit insurance coverage at their customer
                    service sites.

Comments

Essential                5. The coverage limit applies equally to all banks in a deposit insurance
Criteria                    system.

Description         All banks licensed by BOA are covered by ADIA to the same level.

Comments

Essential              6. The deposit insurance system does not incorporate co-insurance, where
Criteria                   depositors absorb some portion of the loss under the coverage limit in
                           the event of bank failure.8
Description         There is no co-insurance.

Comments

Essential                7. Deposit insurance coverage is reviewed periodically to ensure that it
Criteria                    can meet the public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system.

Description         There is no formalized process to review the current levels of deposit
                    insurance. ADIA should review the level of coverage planned for SCAs to be
                    sure the level is consistent with ADIA’s public policy objectives.



8
  Although the use of co-insurance can encourage depositors to monitor bank risk taking, it presents a number
of serious problems. In order to provide effective market discipline it assumes that depositors will have access
to the necessary financial information and that most retail/individual depositors can accurately assess risk.
And, even when depositors are in a position to make such determinations, co-insurance provides strong
incentives for depositors to run on a bank to avoid even a small loss of their funds.

                                                          41
Comments

Principle 10        Transitioning from a blanket guarantee to a limited coverage deposit
                    insurance system

                    When a country decides to transition from a blanket guarantee to a limited
                    coverage deposit insurance system, or to change a given blanket guarantee, the
                    transition should be as rapid as a country’s circumstances permit.9 Blanket
                    guarantees can have a number of adverse effects if retained too long, notably
                    moral hazard. Policymakers should pay particular attention to public attitudes
                    and expectations during the transition period.

Description         There has not been a blanket guarantee in place since ADIA’s establishment.

Assessment           Not applicable

Comments

Essential              1. A situational analysis of the economic environment as it affects the
Criteria                   banking system is conducted before a country begins a transition from a
                           blanket guarantee to limited coverage.
Description         There has not been a blanket guarantee in place since the establishment of
                    ADIA in 2002.

Comments

Essential              2. The situational analysis assesses structure and soundness of the banking
Criteria                   system including an evaluation of the condition of banks’ capital,
                           liquidity, credit quality, risk management policies and practices, and the
                           extent of any problems; and an evaluation of the number, type and
                           characteristics of banks.
Description         Not applicable.

Comments

Essential              3. The situational analysis assesses the strength of prudential regulation
Criteria                   and supervision, the effectiveness of the legal framework, and the
                           soundness of the accounting and disclosure regimes.
Description         Not applicable.


9
  A “blanket guarantee” is a declaration by authorities that in addition to the protection provided by limited
coverage deposit insurance or other arrangements, certain deposits and perhaps other financial instruments
will be protected. A wide range of factors need to be considered when introducing blanket guarantees,
including decisions on the scope of the guarantee (e.g. the type of institutions, products and term maturities
covered) and whether the banks utilising the guarantees will be required to contribute in some manner to the
costs of providing the guarantees.

                                                          42
Comments

Essential         4. The pace of the transition to limited coverage is consistent with the
Criteria              state of the banking industry, prudential regulation and supervision,
                      legal framework and accounting and disclosure regimes.
Description    Not applicable.

Comments

Essential         5. Policymakers are aware of the tradeoff between the length of time it
Criteria              takes for the transition to the limited coverage system and the degree of
                      moral hazard in the system, and have planned the transition
                      accordingly.
Description    Not applicable.

Comments

Essential         6. Policymakers are aware of and anticipate the reaction of the public to a
Criteria              reduction in coverage levels. Policymakers develop effective
                      communication strategies to mitigate adverse public reaction to the
                      transition.
Description    Not applicable.

Comments

Essential         7. Where there is a high level of capital mobility, and/or a regional
Criteria              integration policy, the decision to lower coverage levels (and/or scope)
                      considers the effects of different countries’ protection levels and related
                      policies.
Description    Not applicable.

Comments

Essential        8. The new limited-coverage deposit insurance system has access to
Criteria             adequate funding during and after the transition. Policymakers consider
                     the capacity of the banking system to fund a limited-coverage deposit
                     insurance scheme. If the banking system is unable to fund the cost of
                     the blanket guarantee, government funding may be needed.
Description    When the deposit insurance system was established the government provided
               ADIA with initial funding of 400 million ALL pursuant to Article 19 of its law.

Comments

Principle 11   Funding

               A deposit insurance system should have available all funding mechanisms
               necessary to ensure the prompt reimbursement of depositors’ claims including


                                              43
              a means of obtaining supplementary back-up funding for liquidity purposes
              when required. Primary responsibility for paying the cost of deposit insurance
              should be borne by banks since they and their clients directly benefit from
              having an effective deposit insurance system. For deposit insurance systems
              (whether ex-ante, ex-post or hybrid) utilising risk-adjusted differential
              premium systems, the criteria used in the risk-adjusted differential premium
              system should be transparent to all participants. As well, all necessary
              resources should be in place to administer the risk-adjusted differential
              premium system appropriately.

Description   ADIA’s law allows for the use of advance payments of premiums as well as
              the ability to recommend the levy of special assessments on member
              institutions. Once the fund reaches 5% of insured deposits ADIA may reduce
              the level of premiums it collects. By year end 2013 it will be at approximately
              3.68% of insured deposits. Back-up funding for an insured deposit payout is
              provided in accordance with Article 20/1 of the ADIA law and pursuant to a
              tri-partite agreement with MOF, BOA and ADIA signed in March 2012.

Assessment    Largely Compliant

Comments

Essential       1. Funding arrangements for the deposit insurance system are provided on
Criteria           an ex-ante or an ex-post basis or some (hybrid) combination of these
                   and are clearly defined and established in law or regulation.
Description   ADIA’s funding is on an ex-ante basis.

Comments

Essential         2. Funding arrangements for the deposit insurance system ensure the
Criteria              prompt reimbursement of depositors’ claims and include a pre-arranged
                      and assured source(s) of back-up funding for liquidity purposes. Such
                      sources may include a funding agreement with the central bank, a line
                      of credit with the government treasury, or another type of public fund
                      or market borrowing. If market borrowing is used by the deposit insurer
                      it should not be the sole source of back-up funding. The deposit insurer
                      should not be overly dependent on a line of credit from any single
                      private source.
Description   ADIA has the ability to have the government repurchase its securities in
              advance of their maturity date and also has access to back-up funding from the
              government if needed for an insured deposit payout. It can also request a
              government guarantee for the purposes of obtaining a loan. However, such
              back-up funding is not available for a transfer of funds for purposes of a P&A
              or bridge bank. ADIA also has negotiated a contingent line of credit with


                                            44
              EBRD which, once guaranteed by the government, will provide it access to up
              to 100 million EURO for purposes of fulfilling its obligations towards insured
              depositors in accordance with its law.

Comments

Essential        3. Primary responsibility for funding the deposit insurance system is borne
Criteria            by member banks and is enforceable by the deposit insurer.

Description   ADIA collects premiums from its member institutions.

Comments

Essential         4. If an ex-ante deposit insurance fund is established the size of the fund
Criteria             (e.g. the fund reserve ratio) is defined on the basis of clear, consistent
                     and well-developed criteria that aim at meeting the public policy
                     objectives. If an ex-post funding arrangement is used the main source
                     of funding is credible and readily available.
Description   ADIA can (but does not have to) consider a reduction in its premiums assessed
              on member institutions under Article 24 of its law; it may also increase deposit
              insurance premiums to not more than 0.7 per cent of average insured deposits.

Comments

Essential         5. The deposit insurance fund has sound investment policies and
Criteria              procedures, internal controls and disclosure and reporting systems.
                      These are approved by the deposit insurer’s governing body and
                      subjected to regular review by an independent party. Investment
                      policies emphasise the need to ensure the preservation of fund capital
                      and liquidity.
Description   ADIA’s investment policy and law setting restrictions on the maturity of its
              investments should be reviewed to be sure its investment strategy accurately
              reflects its risk profile, including the risks associated with foreign denominated
              insured deposits in the banking system. ADIA should also adopt principles of
              asset-liability management with the guiding principles remaining as safety and
              liquidity over return. ADIA should also adopt a set of internal controls for its
              investment management function.

Comments

Essential        6. For deposit insurers that use risk-adjusted differential premium
Criteria            systems:

                 a. the system for calculating premiums is transparent to all participants;



                                             45
Description   ADIA appropriately does not have a risk adjusted premium system.

Comments

                 b. The ratings and rankings resulting from the system pertaining to
                     individual member banks are kept confidential; and
Description   Not applicable.

Comments

                 c. policymakers ensure that the deposit insurer has the necessary
                     authority, resources and information in place to carry out its
                     responsibilities with regard to the operation of such systems.
Description   Not applicable.

Comments

Essential         7. In so far as the funds of the deposit insurer may be used by other
Criteria              members of the safety net for the purposes of depositor protection
                      and/or bank resolution, those circumstances are clearly stated and
                      public and known to member banks. The deposit insurer has adequate
                      information to:
Description   ADIA’s law and the LOB describe the circumstances under which ADIA funds
              can be used for depositor protection purposes through the use of a P&A or
              bridge bank transaction. Such funds are limited to the amount of insured
              deposits. ADIA needs to amend its back-up funding agreements to reflect the
              possibility of a contribution of funds to such transactions in the case where its
              resources could be depleted. ADIA should participate in the decision to use its
              funds as part of a resolution transaction and should provide for an audit of the
              use of its funds after the fact.

Comments

                 a. understand the use of the funds;

Description   ADIA’s law makes clear how its funds can be used in bank resolution.

Comments

                  b. seek reimbursement for the estate of the failed bank or participate in
                     recoveries from the bank;
Description   ADIA is subrogated for its payment of insured deposits. However, it does not
              receive first priority for its administrative expenses in preparing for an insured
              deposit payout.

Comments


                                             46
                  c. restrict the resolution or depositor reimbursement amount to the costs
                      the deposit insurer would otherwise have incurred without such
                      intervention or resolution.
Description    The law provides under Article 7 that ADIA’s contribution to a P&A or bridge
               bank transaction is limited to its obligation to pay insured deposits.

Comments

Principle 12   Public awareness

               In order for a deposit insurance system to be effective it is essential that the
               public be informed on an ongoing basis about the benefits and limitations of
               the deposit insurance system.

Description    ADIA has a pamphlet describing its deposit insurance coverage levels and
               insured institutions must display a sign saying their deposits are insured by
               ADIA. There is also extensive information about coverage on ADIA’s website.
               ADIA has also developed a template for the use of banks in incorporating
               information about deposit insurance into their account documentation. ADIA is
               developing a survey instrument to measure the level of public awareness.
               ADIA has also cooperated with BOA on its financial education program for
               schools. ADIA has recently reorganized to have a dedicated public awareness
               group. However ADIA has not developed a plan for insuring that investors in
               funds recently made available through a commercial bank understand that such
               funds are not deposits and therefore are not insured by ADIA. There has been
               no measurement of public awareness and ADIA is still in the process of
               working on reimbursement processes and making information about such
               processes part of its public awareness program.

Assessment     Materially Non Compliant

Comments

Essential        1. The deposit insurer is responsible for promoting public awareness of
Criteria             the deposit insurance system and how the system works, including its
                     benefits and limitations, on an on-going basis.
Description    ADIA is responsible for promoting public awareness.

Comments

Essential        2. The objectives of the public awareness programme are clearly defined
Criteria             and consistent with the public policy objectives and mandate of the
                     deposit insurance system.
Description    ADIA is working on increasing its public awareness activities.



                                              47
Comments

Essential        3. The public awareness programme or activities convey information
Criteria            about the following:

                  a. which financial instruments are covered by deposit insurance and which
                     are not (e.g. whether the system covers foreign deposits);
Description   ADIA’s pamphlet explains coverage levels and exclusions from coverage.
              However there needs to be additional outreach in conjunction with AFSA on
              making clear the uninsured nature of the investment products sold by one of
              the commercial banks.

Comments

                  b. which financial institutions offer insured deposits and how they can be
                     identified;
Description   Financial institutions are required to display a banner showing that they are
              insured by ADIA. Insured financial institutions are also listed on ADIA’s
              website and in its Annual Report.

Comments

                 c. deposit insurance coverage limits and the potential for losses on
                     deposits in excess of those limits; and
Description   Coverage limits are explained in ADIA’s pamphlet. The limited amount of
              such coverage is clearly set forth.

Comments

                  d. the reimbursement process – how, when and where depositors may file
                      claims and receive reimbursements in the event of a bank failure.
Description   Processes for reimbursement in the case of a liquidation are being developed as
              part of ADIA’s planning process. There have not been any bank resolutions
              since ADIA was formed in 2002.

Comments

Essential        4. There is an effective contingency planning process for public awareness
Criteria             and communication that addresses plausible future scenarios and that
                     involves the cooperation and coordination of other safety-net
                     participants as appropriate.
Description   ADIA has the power to engage in contingency planning and is in the process of
              developing manuals. It plans to engage in a simulation once its computerized
              deposit system is in place.



                                            48
Comments

Essential          5. The deposit insurer works closely with member banks and other safety-
Criteria               net participants to ensure consistency in the information provided and
                       to maximize awareness on an ongoing basis.
Description    There are ongoing public awareness activities with member institutions. For
               example, ADIA is reviewing the way banks train their employees at customer
               service points with regard to their knowledge about deposit insurance. ADIA
               has not developed a communication plan to deal with the issues that could arise
               of a parent bank of one if its member institutions should experience a run on
               deposits or a failure. However ADIA should work with AFSA and BOA on
               making clear to investors the lack of coverage for investment products sold by
               one of its member institutions.

Comments

Essential         6. The deposit insurer receives or conducts a regular evaluation of the
Criteria             effectiveness of its public awareness programme or activities.

Description    There is no evaluation of public awareness of deposit insurance in place
               although a survey on deposit insurance is being developed by ADIA.

Comments

Principle 13   Legal protection

               The deposit insurer and individuals working for the deposit insurer should be
               protected against lawsuits for their decisions and actions taken in “good faith”
               while discharging their mandates. However, individuals must be required to
               follow appropriate conflict-of-interest rules and codes of conduct to ensure
               they remain accountable. Legal protection should be defined in legislation and
               administrative procedures, and under appropriate circumstances, cover legal
               costs for those indemnified.

Description    Article 16/1 of ADIA’s law provides legal protection for actions taken in good
               faith. However, it does not provide protection for former employees or those
               working at ADIA’s direction and does not provide ex ante coverage of legal
               defense costs.

Assessment     Materially Non Compliant

Comments       Many functions ADIA would have to perform in its role in the resolution
               process would be performed by contractors working at its direction. Under the
               current law, those individuals would have to be made employees to receive
               protection from suit. The law also does not explicitly cover former employees

                                              49
               and requires an employee who is sued to advance defense costs and seek
               reimbursement only after he is found not responsible.

Essential         1. The deposit insurer and individuals working for the deposit insurer are
Criteria             protected against lawsuits for their decisions and actions taken in “good
                     faith” while discharging their mandates.
Description    ADIA’s employees are explicitly covered by Article 16/1, with former
               employees and contractors not explicitly covered.

Comments

Essential         2. Individuals are required to follow appropriate conflict-of-interest rules
Criteria             and codes of conduct to ensure they remain accountable.

Description    There are codes of conduct and conflict of interest rules in place for ADIA
               employees.

Comments

Essential         3. Legal protection is defined in legislation and administrative procedures,
Criteria              and under appropriate circumstances, cover legal costs for those
                      indemnified.
Description    Legal costs for employees are only covered on an ex ante basis.

Comments

Principle 14   Dealing with parties at fault in a bank failure

               A deposit insurer, or other relevant authority, should be provided with the
               power to seek legal redress against those parties at fault in a bank failure.

Description    BOA and the public prosecution authorities have the right to deal with parties
               responsible for contributing to the failure of a bank.

Assessment     Compliant

Comments

Essential         1. The conduct of parties responsible for or who contributed to the failure
Criteria             of a bank (e.g. officers, directors, managers, auditors, asset appraisers
                     and related parties of the failed bank) are subject to investigation by the
                     deposit insurer or other relevant national authority. The investigation of
                     the conduct of such parties may be carried out by one or more of the
                     following: the deposit insurer, supervisor or regulatory authority,
                     criminal or investigative authorities, or a professional or disciplinary
                     body, as applicable.


                                              50
Description    Relevant authorities would investigate the conduct of parties responsible for
               the failure of member institutions. Such authorities could include BOA or
               public prosecutors.

Comments

Essential          2. If identified as culpable for the failure of a bank, such parties are
Criteria              subject to sanction and/or redress. Sanction or redress may include
                      personal or professional disciplinary measures (including fines or
                      penalties), criminal prosecution, and civil proceedings for damages
Description    Such parties could be subject to civil suit, administrative actions by BOA or
               criminal prosecution.

Comments

 Failure       The deposit insurer may, but often does not, perform many or most of the roles
resolution     identified in Core Principles 15 and 16. However, it is essential that one or
               more of the financial safety net participants performs these roles.

Principle 15   Early detection and timely intervention and resolution

               The deposit insurer should be part of a framework within the financial system
               safety net that provides for the early detection and timely intervention and
               resolution of troubled banks. The determination and recognition of when a
               bank is or is expected to be in serious financial difficulty should be made early
               and on the basis of well defined criteria by safety-net participants with the
               operational independence and power to act.

Description    ADIA does not receive information from BOA about banks that are part of the
               EWS or other information that would allow it to prepare for a possible insured
               deposit payout or transfer of funds for resolution. BOA does have the power to
               use a variety of resolution tools, and ADIA can contribute to a P&A or bridge
               bank under Article 7 of its law up to the amount of insured deposits.

Assessment     Largely Compliant

Comments

Essential         1. The deposit insurer is part of a framework within the financial system
Criteria              safety net that provides for the early detection and timely intervention
                      and resolution of troubled banks (failure resolution framework).
Description    BOA does have a system to monitor its institutions on a regular basis that
               measures the quality of assets and earnings and provides opportunities for early
               warning of potential problems. This information is not shared with ADIA but is
               needed for it to prepare for any possible payout or use of its funds.


                                              51
Comments

Essential        2. The failure resolution framework is established by law or regulation,
Criteria              and is effective at the early detection and timely intervention and
                      resolution of troubled banks. The failure resolution framework is
                      insulated against legal actions that aim at the reversal of early and
                      timely decisions related to corrective procedures, interventions and
                      resolutions of troubled banks.
Description   The failure resolution framework is established by law, and provides BOA
              with a variety of resolution powers. There is no power to reverse BOA’s
              decision on intervention.

Comments

Essential        3. The safety-net participants have the operational independence and
Criteria             power to perform their respective roles in the failure resolution
                     framework and a clearly defined early intervention mechanism exists
                     (including resolution tools) to ensure that appropriate action is taken (to
                     allow the orderly resolution of a troubled bank) by the responsible party
                     without delay.
Description   There are adequate resolution tools provided to BOA.

Comments

Essential         4. The failure resolution framework includes a set of criteria that are used
Criteria              to identify banks that are or are expected to be in serious financial
                      difficulty and are used as a basis to initiate some form of early
                      intervention or corrective action to reduce the likelihood that a
                      resolution would be necessary. Such action should minimise losses to
                      the deposit insurance fund.
Description   There are established criteria about the condition of a bank that require BOA to
              take action.

Comments

                  a. The criteria are clearly defined in law or regulation and are well
                      understood by banks and their stakeholders; and
Description   The criteria for placing a bank into receivership are established by Article 108
              of the LOB; Article 96 specifies the rules governing conservatorship.

Comments

                 b. The criteria will be country specific and may reflect concerns about a
                      bank’s capital, liquidity, and asset quality, among other factors.
Description   The criteria do specify concerns with liquidity, solvency or management
              capacity and set some specific triggers for intervention.


                                             52
Comments

Principle 16   Effective resolution processes

               Effective failure-resolution processes should: facilitate the ability of the deposit
               insurer to meet its obligations including reimbursement of depositors promptly
               and accurately and on an equitable basis; minimise resolution costs and
               disruption of markets; maximise recoveries on assets; and, reinforce discipline
               through legal actions in cases of negligence or other wrongdoings. In addition,
               the deposit insurer or other relevant financial system safety-net participant
               should have the authority to establish a flexible mechanism to help preserve
               critical banking functions by facilitating the acquisition by an appropriate body
               of the assets and the assumption of the liabilities of a failed bank (e.g.
               providing depositors with continuous access to their funds and maintaining
               clearing and settlement activities).

Description    As a paybox ADIA is involved in the bank resolution process once the BOA
               determines to intervene by placing a bank in liquidation. Its role is limited to
               paying insured depositors or contributing funds to a P&A or bridge bank
               transaction. ADIA does not currently insure deposits in SCAs but the
               resolution framework for SCAs is not as robust at that for banks. Under its law
               (Article 30) the consent of depositors or shareholders is not needed for transfer
               to another bank or a bridge bank.

Assessment     Compliant

Comments

Essential          1. The overall national legal framework ensures the effective and timely
Criteria              functioning of the failure resolution framework, permitting the orderly
                      liquidation of the bank, the payout or transfer of insured deposits and
                      the intervention by a receiver to carry out the resolution functions.
Description    BOA is the resolution authority and ADIA has the power to contribute to the
               various methods of resolution for banks that can be employed by BOA, up to
               the amount of insured deposits.

Comments

Essential         2. The mandate of the deposit insurer or other safety-net participants
Criteria             allows for the effective resolution of banks of all sizes.

Description    There is bridge bank and P&A authority that could assist in the resolution of a
               large financial institution.



                                               53
Comments

Essential       3. Bank resolution and depositor protection procedures are not limited to
Criteria           depositor reimbursement. The deposit insurer or other safety-net
                   participant has effective resolution tools designed to help preserve
                   critical bank functions, to achieve a transfer of accounts or
                   assets/businesses and/or maintain continuity of banking services.
Description   BOA does have purchase and assumption and bridge bank authority for banks.

Comments

Essential         4. Where no single authority is responsible for all resolution processes, the
Criteria              mandate, roles and responsibilities of each safety-net participant is
                      clearly defined and formally specified.
Description   The mandate and roles of BOA and ADIA are set forth in the law on the
              resolution process although operational details are in the process of being
              developed.

Comments

Essential       5. One or more of the resolution procedures allows the flexibility for
Criteria           resolution at a lesser cost than otherwise likely on a depositor
                   reimbursement in a liquidation.
Description   BOA and ADIA do consider lesser cost in their use of resolution tools.

Comments

Essential        6. A clear and well-sustained methodology is available to the deposit
Criteria             insurer or other safety-net participant to provide for the transfer of
                     insured deposits to stronger banks.
Description   There is no methodology yet in place to operationalize BOA’s resolution
              powers.

Comments

Essential        7. Resolution procedures clearly ensure that bank shareholders take first
Criteria            losses.

Description   Under Article 102 of the LOB there is the power to appoint a conservator with
              the authority to ask shareholders to cover losses at a financial institution by
              providing additional capital. If the bank is put into compulsory liquidation, the
              rights of shareholders are frozen (other than the right to dividends out of the
              liquidation estate) (Article 116). Shareholders have last priority in the recovery
              of assets from a failed bank estate.

Comments


                                             54
Principle 17       Reimbursing depositors

                   The deposit insurance system should give depositors prompt access to their
                   insured funds. Therefore, the deposit insurer should be notified or informed
                   sufficiently in advance of the conditions under which a reimbursement may be
                   required and be provided with access to depositor information in advance.
                   Depositors should have a legal right to reimbursement up to the coverage limit
                   and should know when and under what conditions the deposit insurer will start
                   the payment process, the time frame over which payments will take place,
                   whether any advance or interim payments will be made as well as the
                   applicable coverage limits.

Description        ADIA is in the process of developing an automated system for the payment of
                   insured deposits with the cooperation of its member banks. The current
                   resolution framework only requires reimbursement of depositors within 3
                   months of an intervention event. Procedures for informing depositors about
                   reimbursement processes in liquidation are being developed. There are a large
                   number of exclusions from insurance coverage that could complicate the
                   payout process.

Assessment          Largely Compliant

Comments

Essential              1. The deposit insurer is able to reimburse depositors promptly after the
Criteria                    deposit insurance system is triggered by law, contract or the relevant
                            authority.10
Description        ADIA has not had to perform an insured deposit payout and has not tested its
                   ability to do so. A test of its ability to do that will be undertaken once its
                   computerized depositor information system is in place.

Comments           The process of reimbursing depositors could be complicated by the multiple
                   exclusions from coverage in ADIA’s law. The recent amendments to its law
                   limited set-off to accounts that are past due.

Essential              2. The time frame for accomplishing the reimbursement process is prompt
Criteria                   and clearly stated to meet the public policy objectives of protecting
                           depositors and promoting public confidence and financial stability of
                           the deposit insurance system. The time frame is made public.
Description        The time frame for reimbursing depositors is set forth in Article 7 of ADIA’s
                   statute as within three months. This is longer than good practice would require.

10
  A prompt reimbursement is defined to be when depositors are reimbursed within a time frame that does not
undermine financial stability and the proper functioning of payment systems.


                                                       55
              There has been no payout and no testing of payout processes to determine if
              ADIA could meet this deadline. ADIA is moving towards being able to make a
              payout within 20 days by adoption of a new computerized system for depositor
              records.

Comments

                  a. Depositors are provided information after the failure on when and
                     under what conditions the deposit insurer will start the reimbursement
                     process and when the process is expected to be completed;
Description   ADIA is in the process of developing processes and policies for a payout,
              including the development of communication materials. Its manual on deposit
              compensation provides samples of public communication materials.

Comments

                b. Information on coverage limits, scope of coverage and whether advance
                    or interim payments will be made is provided; and
Description   ADIA does not have the legal authority to make advance or interim payments.

Comments

                  c. If there is an interest-bearing account, the deposit insurer shall
                      reimburse depositors for interest as provided by contract, law or
                      regulation up until at least the date the deposit insurance obligation is
                      triggered.
Description   ADIA is required to reimburse depositors for the contract rate of interest up to
              the date of intervention.

Comments

Essential        3. In order to promptly reimburse depositors, the deposit insurer has:
Criteria

                  a. Access to necessary data, including deposit account records, to prepare
                     for reimbursing depositors as soon as the supervisor is aware of a
                     likelihood of failure.
Description   ADIA is working on a system to access account data through a computerized
              system; it can go into a member institution at any time to check or update the
              data.

Comments

                 b. The power to review in advance by itself (or by request from the
                    supervisory authority) the way depositor records are kept by banks to
                    ensure the reliability of records, to reduce the time needed for

                                             56
                    calculation and verification of depositors’ claims;
Description   ADIA has this power.

Comments

                 c. A range of payment methods for reimbursing depositors; and

Description   ADIA can utilize a range of payment methods, including cash, transfer of
              funds and check.

Comments

                 d. Access to adequate and credible sources of funding (e.g. reserve fund,
                     Ministry of Finance, central bank) to meet its obligations under the
                     established time frames.
Description   ADIA has access to back-up funding from the Ministry of Finance in
              accordance with a tri-partite agreement with BOA and MOF.

Comments

Essential        4. The deposit insurer has the capacity to carry out the reimbursement
Criteria            process in a timely manner, including:

Description

Comments

                 a. Adequate information technology; and

Description   ADIA is working on building a well-functioning computerized deposit data
              system.

Comments

                 b. Adequate personnel (in-house or contractor).

Description   ADIA has a small staff but has the power to engage contractors as needed for
              its operations.

Comments

Essential       5. In situations where there may be extended delays in reimbursements,
Criteria            the deposit insurer can make advance, interim or emergency partial
                    payments.
Description   ADIA does not have this power.

Comments


                                            57
Principle 18   Recoveries

               The deposit insurer should share in the proceeds of recoveries from the estate
               of the failed bank. The management of the assets of the failed bank and the
               recovery process (by the deposit insurer or other party carrying out this role)
               should be guided by commercial considerations and their economic merits.

Description    ADIA does share in the recovery of assets from the failed institution’s estate.

Assessment     Compliant

Comments

Essential        1. If the deposit insurer plays a role in the recovery process, its role is
Criteria             clearly defined in law or regulation and the deposit insurer maximises
                     recoveries to the extent that it can from the failed bank on a commercial
                     or economic basis.
Description    ADIA does not play a role in the recovery process.

Comments

Essential         2. The deposit insurer shares in the proceeds of the recoveries arising from
Criteria               the failure of its member banks. The deposit insurer is clearly
                       recognised as a creditor of the failed bank for the reimbursement of
                       losses and costs it incurs; and receives recoveries from the estate of the
                       failed bank directly.
Description    ADIA does share in the recovery of assets from the failed institution’s estate
               and is subrogated to depositors’ claims. However, ADIA’s costs are not
               considered as an expense of the receivership as are the costs of BOA.

Comments

Essential          3. The deposit insurer has at least the same or comparable creditor rights
Criteria               or status as a depositor in the conduct of the estate of the failed bank,
                       and has access to information to make and pursue its recovery claim
                       against the estate and to exercise the appropriate degree of influence on
                       the conduct of the estate.
Description    ADIA is subrogated for payments of insured deposits but does not have a role
               in the conduct of the liquidation.

Comments

Essential         4. If, in addition to creditor status, the deposit insurer is the
Criteria              receiver/liquidator/ conservator of the failed bank or of only some
                      assets of the failed bank, then:
Description    Not applicable.


                                              58
Comments

                        a. the role played by the deposit insurer for asset management and
                           recovery is clearly defined in law or regulation; and
Description

Comments

                        b. its asset management and recovery approaches are guided by such
                           factors as: the quality of the assets, market conditions, expert advice,
                           and any legal requirements.11
Description

Comments

Essential               5. In determining the asset management and recovery approaches, the
Criteria                    interests of all creditors are given appropriate weight and decisions on
                            asset disposal are made using concepts such as net present value to
                            balance the competing goals of securing maximum value and early
                            disposal.
Description         This is the responsibility of BOA. Under the LOB (Articles 117 and 119), the
                    liquidator must use commercial methods to assess values in selling the bank
                    and aim for recovery of the maximum amount from the assets of the bank.

Comments




11
  In some circumstances the deposit insurer may seek to pursue the parties responsible for fraud or misconduct
even though costs may exceed recoveries.

                                                        59
