                                                      89250
REVENUE MOBILIZATION PROGRAM FOR RESULTS

      VAT IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (VIP)

  Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh




            PROGRAM FOR RESULTS

       Integrated Fiduciary System Assessment

                     April, 2014
Executive Summary

1.      In accordance with the Bank’s OP/BP 9.0 an Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment
(IFSA) was carried out to determine whether the fiduciary systems pertaining to the Program
provide reasonable assurances that the Program funds will be used for their intended purpose.
The IFSA comprised an assessment of the fiduciary risks relating to: (a) procurement; (b)
financial management; and (c) governance (including fraud and corruption risks) of the
implementing agency (the VAT Wing of NBR) which accounts for 95 percent of the Bank-
supported Program financing over the next five years. An additional 5 percent of funds will be
spent through the ERD as the coordinating agency and the agency responsible for hiring the third
party entity for independent verification and reporting to the World Bank. For disbursement
purposes, the Bank retains the right to make the final decision whether DLIs have been achieved
or not. The conclusion of the IFSA is that the overall fiduciary framework is “high? risk, but
with risk mitigating measures, it is adequate to support Program implementation and to achieve
the desired results.
2.     Funding for the Program will be provided through the government’s annual development
budget and the Program funds will flow through the treasury system. The program expenditure
framework estimates a total program expenditure of US$73 million over FY2014-19. IDA
resources for the Program under the proposed operation will be US$60 million.
Budgeting and Planning

3.      The PforR Bank operation will provide financial support through the government’s
development budget that will be accounted towards the VAT Improvement Program and
identified as IDA financed (as opposed to government or sector program financing which will be
accounted for separately). The total budget for the Program over the next five years has already
been approved, and will be presented in the government’s development budget (the Annual
Development Plan) at the time of the 2013/14 supplementary budget in April 2014. The VAT
program was already approved by the Prime Minister-chaired project approval committee.1 The
expenditure framework for the program is shown in Table 1 below.




1
    The Development Project proposal/proforma (DPP) on Value Added Tax and Supplementary Duty Act, 2012 Implementation
Project; known as VAT On-line was approved in October 2013.
                  Table 1: Expenditure Framework, Consolidated Program Expenditures, US$ millions 2012/3-2019/20
           Classificatio   Sub-category    2012/13    2013/14     2014/15     2015/16     2016/17     2017/18    2018/19    2019/20    Total
           n
GoB        Capital         Furniture                                   2.79                                                              2.79
                           IT hardware                                 0.17                                                              0.17
                           Vehicles                        0.18        0.01        0.01        0.01       0.01                           0.24
           Goods and       Goods                           0.00        4.20        0.70        0.26       0.26                           5.43
           Services
                           Office                                      3.09                                                              3.09
                           Refurbishment
           Contingency     Price                           0.01        0.82        0.06        0.02       0.02                           0.94
                           Physical                        0.00        0.21        0.01        0.01       0.01                           0.23
Subtotal                                                   0.21       11.29        0.79        0.30       0.30                          12.89
IDA        Capital         Furniture                                   0.00                                                              0.00
                           generators                                  1.67                                                              1.67
                           IT hardware                                 3.97        2.32        0.75       0.33                           7.38
                           IT software                     2.70       13.31        2.93        0.05                                     18.98
           Goods and       Consulting                      0.57        2.29        1.14                                                  4.00
           Services
                           Other goods                                 0.91        0.10                                                  1.01
                           IT services                     1.50        3.65        2.86        2.86       2.86                          13.71
                           Training                        0.50        4.25        0.25                                                  5.00
           Contingency     Price                           0.42        2.40        0.77        0.29       0.25                           4.14
                           physical                        0.11        0.60        0.19        0.07       0.06                           1.04
Subtotal                                                   5.80       33.05       10.56        4.01       3.50                          56.93
NBR expenditures                                           6.00       44.34       11.35        4.32       3.81                          69.82
ERD and ACC                                                            0.95        0.50        0.50       0.50       0.50       0.00     2.95
Cabinet Division PPA                           0.05                                                                                      0.05
Total                                          0.05        6.00       45.29       11.85        4.82       4.31       0.50       0.00      72.
4.      The government has a well-defined budget approval process; which is based on a
development budget and a separate revenue budget. As yet there is no integrated budgeting
process. The revenue and the development budgets both include capital and recurrent
expenditures. The development budget typically includes development projects; both those
financed by the government and also those financed by the government; which are typically seen
as expenditure programs with a finite financing term, and which constitute either technical
assistance; or capital investments. There is a medium term fiscal framework that is currently
developed in the context of the IMF program. There is also a medium term budget framework
which has been rolled out to line Ministries which sets a 5-year ceiling on the revenue-budget;
and this has now been institutionalized in all 60 line ministries. There is no medium-term
framework brought together for the development budget; but development projects are typically
approved for multiple years. The development program has therefore been treated in the budget
much like a development project. It is clear that during the course of the program
implementation, the on-going revenue costs associated with the programs will need to be
included in the recurrent costs of the revenue budget.
5.     The VAT Wing of the NBR does not have much experience in budgeting and planning of
development programs. This needs to be mitigated against with strong support from the Bank
team, as well as mitigated against by the technical assistance support already being provided to
the VAT by the IFC and the IMF resident advisers.
Budget Execution

6.      While delayed fund releases from treasury are possible if the spending Ministry/Agency
is unable to send their accounts statements and utilization reports to the Finance Division on
time; there is typically no such delay occurring for the implementing agencies. The release of
resources to the implementing agencies through the government budget is typically on time in
the first two quarters of the fiscal year. However, since line Ministries need to send accounts
statements and fund utilization reports to the Finance Division of the Ministry of Finance by the
15th and 30th of every month, this can lead to delays in fund releases, if the submission is not
timely. However, delay in release of funds is not anticipated for the VAT wing of NBR; since
NBR is an integral part of the Ministry of Finance. Typically, development programs and
projects have faced delays in implementation in part due to fund release issues; part reporting
requirements to financiers and also due to procurement procedures for capital investments, which
is generally a more typical category of expenditures in the development budget.
7.     To mitigate against the risk that funding for this program is unpredictable, the Project
Director of the Program Implementation Unit in NBR will capture actual expenditure data on a
systematic and regular basis in close coordination with the concerned Chief Accounts Officer
(CAO) and will be responsible for reporting in accordance with the fund release requirements of
the Ministry of Finance and the program as a whole. This will enable the Project Director to
prepare timely and accurate fund utilization reports. An additional staff from the office of
Comptroller General of Accounts will be recruited in the PIU who will maintain close liaison
with the MOF for ensuring that fund release processes are handled in a timely manner in
conformity with the requirement of the government and that meet the timeline for fund
disbursement arrangement of the program.
8.     Flow of Funds: IDA funds will be disbursed in accordance with the agreed disbursement
arrangements to the Treasury Single Account maintained with the Central Bank. The
government should allocate sufficient funds to VAT program account and ERD account. The
funds in VAT program account and ERD account will be used to support program activities to be
implemented by NBR and ERD. The Project Directors in NBR and ERD are responsible for
operation of the two accounts.
9.      Internal Controls and Internal Audit: The internal audit function is very nascent in
Bangladesh; a separate cadre of internal auditors does not exist. There are internal audit cells in
line ministries which conduct routine transaction and compliance testing but they do not employ
modern internal audit techniques and methodology. The internal audit follow-up process is also
not tracked, monitored nor acted upon by senior management.
10.    Financial procedures, rules and regulations are generally well defined and issued through
executive orders. Other forms of internal controls include “compliance with general financial
rules and treasury rules? during pre-audit processes, in other words at the point of payment.
Since the passage of the Public Money and Budget Management Act in 2009, two rules relating
to the Act have been prepared: (i) Financial Reporting under the Medium-term Budget
Framework, outlining the responsibilities of chief accounts officers in line ministries and (ii)
Constitution of Budget Management Wings in all line ministries and divisions to prepare and
implement the Medium-term Budget Frameworks.
11.     A strategy and manual for internal audit has been developed under the public financial
management reform program, which is awaiting government approval. The draft strategy
recognizes the need to the separate internal audit function from the existing expenditure control
wing, and considers three options: a large scale modernization project for all line ministries,
developing internal auditors in a group of ministries, or developing internal auditors in the
Finance Division. In the case of NBR, the expenditure control wing of the Ministry of Finance
will conduct periodic internal audits. The key findings of the internal audit together with
management actions will be shared with the Bank within one month from the conclusion of each
internal audit.
12.     Accounting and Reporting: Delays in compiling information on actual expenditures is
considered another weak area which may constrain NBR’s ability to monitor and report on the
progress of the program and to intervene and facilitate trouble shooting. The availability of
information on program expenditure is critical for the following purposes: (a) preparation of the
fund utilization report when requesting fund release from the Ministry of Finance (b) completion
and verification of the fiduciary action in DLI6 and (iii) to undertake the annual audit. This
would be addressed by requiring that the Project Director in NBR provide regular reports to the
Internal Resources Division, certifying that the financial information is adequate and correct.
The Project Director will work with the CAO and Accountant in the PIU well ahead of reports
becoming due for ensuring that there is no delay encountered as far as reporting of program
expenditure is concerned.
13.     Fixed Assets Management: There is no system for managing the fixed assets typically
procured as “capital? expenditures. Some ‘stores management’ regulations are in place,
specifying the process for recording some fixed assets, but there is no systematic approach to the
reporting of capital expenditures or understanding of the recording, handling, disposal,
accounting treatment and overall management of fixed assets. Regulations such as those in the
Ministry of Finance’s Internal Control Manual stipulate that asset registers are to be established
and maintained but those are not followed in practice and no auditing of assets is undertaken
across the government. Purchasing Rules do not identify assets and all purchase information is
held in Stock Registers since this is compulsory under the Purchasing Rules, but assets are not
identified as such. Such clerical records are unsuitable for use with a modern asset management
system which requires on-line access to accurate and up-to-date information on assets.
14.     Use of a large number of fixed assets in the Program is a definite risk area as a large
number of products like air conditioners, servers, generators for the NBR components of the
Program are planned to be procured. It is proposed, and agreed that a fixed asset tracking
software should be included in the program scope for the VAT Wing so that NBR is able to track
where the assets have been installed. Program Action Plan includes this as capacity building
activity which will be implemented within 1 year of program effectiveness.
15.     Program Audit and follow up Mechanism: The annual audit of the program requires
standardization in the country system. Three potential risk areas include (i) involvement of three
audit directorates for audit of the program because of expenditure category and use of treasury
system; (ii) the program may be treated as a fully GoB funded project and lose priority in the
annual audit process since funds will be channeled through the Treasury Single Account of the
government; and (iii) poor follow up of audit findings.

      The risk mitigation and capacity building measures include:

a. As this PforR operation will fully use country systems, the audit of the program will be
      carried out by the Comptroller and Auditor General (OCAG). The OCAG is considered
      independent of the executive and accepted by the Bank as an independent auditor for Bank
      funded projects.

b. An agreement has been reached that the OCAG will entrust the responsibility for single
      program audit to FAPAD. A TOR, covering both financial and program performance
      including major procurement will be agreed upon within 4 months of effectiveness of the
      program. The PIU in consultation with FAPAD will prepare and share a copy of the TOR
      with the Bank.

c. Within 4 months of program effectiveness, IRD of NBR will constitute and operationalize
      the audit Committee which will be responsible for follow up of audit objections and to
      facilitate resolution of significant observations.

d. Program audit will cover both parts of the program implemented by NBR and ERD. The
      auditor will be required to express an opinion on the program financial statement in
      accordance with international standards of auditing and submit the report within six months
      of the end of the fiscal year. In addition, the auditor is required to provide a detailed
      management letter containing auditor observations of the internal controls and compliance
      with financial covenants in the Financing Agreement.

e. OCAG will nominate a group of auditors who will be trained on specific features of the
      program and will be responsible for audit throughout the program implementation.
f.    Audit reports will be shared with the Bank and NBR and ERD within six months of the end
      of the fiscal year. The Bank will communicate to the Recipient on the reported significant
      financial irregularities in the audit report within 15 days of the receipt of the audit report.
      The IRD will coordinate with NBR for audit follow up and ensure that remedies are
      implemented within an agreed time frame. ERD and NBR will communicate directly with
      the Bank in respect of audit follow up issues. Significant audit findings should be resolved
      before commencement of the next annual audit. The resolution of significant audit findings
      within 6 months of receiving the audit report will result in the achievement of DLI 6.

g. The annual audit will take into account the DLI verification report for ensuring that program
      expenditure supports the findings with respect to the results and confirms funds were spent
      for the purpose intended.

16.     Parliamentary Oversight: The Parliament or legislature’s oversight of public accounts in
the form of ‘ex-post’ scrutiny is carried out through a review of the audit reports on the executive
branch. The review is carried out mainly by the Public Accounts Committee (PAC). Previously
a large backlog of audit reports awaiting review by the PAC had built up. However, over the
years, there has been substantive progress in PAC’s hearings on OCAG reports. PAC’s review
of audit reports has, as a result, become fairly up to date. Thus, statutory parliamentary oversight
of the audit findings of the Program is not expected to be an area of major concern.
17.     Based on the fiduciary context and assessment, the overall fiduciary risk for the Program
is high. The program will address fiduciary risks and other capacity gaps in various ways. The
government has agreed to undertake a set of actions summarized in Table 2 in order to improve
program execution and achieve program results. The government commitment to implement all
the actions has been confirmed. Implementation of the actions which are to address both
fiduciary risk and improve capacity will be systematically monitored by the Bank and the ERD
during implementation support missions.
Procurement

18.     There is a sound legal and regulatory framework for public procurement. The legal and
regulatory framework for the Program is governed by the Public Procurement Act of 2006 (PPA-
2006) and Public Procurement Rules 2008 (PPR). These are generally found to be sound and
consistent with good public procurement principles. For example, in line with the provisions of
PPA-2006 and PPR-2008, the Central Procurement Technical Unit (CPTU) has issued standard
bidding documents, and request for proposals (RFPs) for goods, works and services. These
standard bidding documents contain all required internationally accepted provisions. All three
Program implementing agencies are already using these standard documents for government
funded procurements.
19.     The procurement of ICT equipment does not require the use of specific bidding
documents, unlike many international and national public procurement agencies that have seen
the need to provide these. The CPTU has not issued any standard or sample bidding documents
specific to ICT procurements. However, the PPR-2008 does allow for specific documents to be
used for specialist procurements. As a mitigating measure to manage the risks involved with the
large ICT procurement (especially the large software procurement under the NBR VAT
program); it has been agreed that VAT Wing will use custom ICT bidding documents; which are
consistent with the best international practice for ICT procurements. The bidding document of
the COTS has been written with the strong support of technical advisory inputs provided by a
technical team from international consultants. Furthermore, as a condition under the DLI 1
(VAT implementation stays on track) the high value procurement processes have been agreed
with the Bank; including the terms of reference of the bid evaluation committee. For all high
value IT procurements, four out of seven representatives of the bid evaluation committee will be
independent of the agency; two of which will come from local institutions (the Bangladesh
University of Engineering and technology and the Bangladesh Computer Center) and two
international experts. Bid evaluation committees for the other procurements will have at least
five members with two experts from outside the procuring entity, who have a proven track record
and experience in procurement. Depending on the type of procurement such experts will be
either from public offices and/or from professional bodies, or individuals of known probity.
Individual consultants and/or representatives of consulting firms may participate as members of
the bid evaluation committees.
20.    Procurement Processing, e-Procurement and Approval Process: The Government issued
in October 2004 the Public Procurement Processing and Approval Process for streamlining all
public procurements covered under the Public Procurement Regulations 2003 (PPR-2003. The
Process was subsequently embodied in PPR-2008 and it specifies procurement processing and
approving entities with respective time-lines for different types and magnitudes of procurement.
Under Section 65 of the PPA-2006 and Rule 128 of PPR-2008 contain the provisions for e-
Government Procurement.
21.      NBR’s weaknesses with regard to procurement are the following:
      a) Lack of trained procurement staff: NBR does not have a separate procuring unit, and does
         not have procurement-trained personnel to conduct its procurement operations. It
         procured ICT products on a small number of occasions in the past with long intervals
         between one instance and another. The ICT equipment belonged to the higher
         technological levels of their time, and those were procured for special-purpose use in
         tariff and tax administration.

      b) Inadequate capacity to prepare technical specification for IT product and to certify that
         the supplied IT products are as per agreed technical specifications: All the above
         procurements took place under donor funded projects, and there were inputs from IT
         consultants while preparing the specifications. However in certain instances the procured
         goods could not be put to use and the reason for failure was generally attributed at the
         time to the lack of capacity in NBR or its related agencies to commission and/or operate
         the system.

      c) Inadequate capacity to manage complex high value IT procurement: Proposed program
         has one complex high value IT system procurement (COTS Procurement). NBR has no
         experience to manage such complex procurement; it has limited capacity to procure and
         implement high value complex IT procurements.
22.     Given the shortfall in in-house capacity and in past performance of the implementing
agency, there is a high procurement risk to the program. To enhance the capacity following
actions have been agreed with NBR
      a. Form a procurement core team (minimum three people) in NBR to conduct procurements
         under this subprogram. The core team members will receive procurement certification
         training arranged by Central Procurement Technical Unit (CPTU).
      b. Prepare or review the technical specifications for IT procurements by a qualified
         international IT technical expert
      c. Form seven member bid evaluation committees for high value IT procurements with two
         international experts, one expert from the Bangladesh Computer Council (BCC) and one
         expert from the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET).
      d. Use electronic government procurement (e-GP) for submission of tender electronically.
      e. Provide report on key procurement performance indicator using national procurement
         monitoring system named PROMIS developed and maintained by CPTU
      f. Establish a system for handling complaints and a database for recording, monitoring and
         follow up on all procurement complaints.


23.     Other procurement mitigation measures are part of DLI 1 and DLI 6 as explained in the
table below.
Actions                             Linked     Timeframe       Responsibilit   Verification
                                    to DLI                     y
Form a 7 member tender                  ×        Within 1      NBR             Notification and
evaluation committee for IT                      month of                      independent
procurements with at least one                    program                      verification of DLI
expert from the Bangladesh                     effectiveness                   1.1 and 1.2 as
Computer Council and one from                                                  “agreed
the Bangladesh University of                                                   procurement
Engineering and Technology and 2                                               process?
international experts for high value
procurements (more than US$ 2
million).
Install a fixed asset tracking                 Within 1 year   NBR             Action Plan.
software to record, track and                   of program                     Procurement
manage assets procured under the               effectiveness                   Process and
program in VAT Wing of NBR,                                                    Completion Plan
and train staff in its use.                                                    submitted.
Provide report on key procurement                Within 12     NBR             Action Plan.
performance indicator using                      months of                     Notification and
national procurement monitoring                   program                      independent
system named PROMIS developed                  effectiveness                   verification
and maintained by CPTU.
To facilitate reporting and                      Within 3      NBR, ERD        Action Plan.
monitoring of the disposition of                 months of                     Notification and
Fraud and Corruption complaints,                  program                      independent
the ERD will collate all such                  effectiveness                   verification
complaints, and compile these into
reports that will be provided to the
Bank every six months, based on a
format being agreed with the
Bank.
DLI-linked Actions
Integrated VAT Tax Administration System (COTS)                DLI 1.1.1
Software vendor selected by NBR through agreed
procurement process. That is 4 independent members of the
tender evaluation committee; 2 of which should be
international experts; modified government tender documents
for IT procurements and international competitive bidding
with agreed TOR for the bid evaluation committee.**
 Vendor’s for contact center, processing center and other                                DLI 1.1
 internationally procured IT infrastructure under the program
 selected through agreed procurement process.
 Project Management Consultancy vendor selected through                                  DLI 1.2
 agreed procurement process.
 National e-GP system used for tendering of the national                                 DLI 6
 competitive bidding contracts under the program as follows:
 1st Year at least 25%, 2nd year at least 50% and rest of the
 years at least 75%.
 From year 2: Resolve all significant audit findings within 6                            DLI 6
 months.
 Prepare and submit quarterly fund utilization reports in the                            DLI 6
 specified format to Finance Division and complete fund
 release processes after completion of each quarter.

Note: ** TOR of the bid evaluation Committee: NBR will prepare and officially issue a detailed TOR for the BEC including
approval of the procurement process. This TOR shall include the following provisions: (i) keeping the bids in safe custody at all
times with access to BEC members only; (ii) conducting evaluation of bids by the BEC members themselves without delegating
any task to junior or other staff under any circumstance; (iii) engaging all BEC members on a full-time basis at an isolated
location (very similar to sequestering) until the evaluation is complete and the bid evaluation report (BER) is prepared, finalized,
and signed; (iv) carrying of bids or copies of evaluation-related materials outside the specified office location (venue of
evaluation) by any BEC member or any official will be strictly prohibited; (v) declaration of impartiality by each BEC member as
per a prescribed format that will be attached to the BER; (vi) submission of BER in a sealed envelope by the BEC Chair directly
to the approving authority, without any tier in between.



24.    Compliance with all of the fiduciary risks mitigating aspects will be leveraged by a
separate DLI of US$5 million. All measures proposed will need to have been achieved for the
DLI 6 to be triggered.

Governance

25.    The prevalence and public perception of corruption in Bangladesh generally remains
high. Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index (CPI) 2013 of 177 countries
ranked Bangladesh at 136th indicating a high level of perception of corruption. Some of the
perception problems may also affect the Program and the procurement processes. In the case of
the NBR there has been little high-level procurements undertaken, and here the concern is far
more due to the capacity of the staff (a referred to in the section above).
26.   The Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) as the primary anti-corruption agency in
Bangladesh remains institutionally and operationally challenged to operate under its mandate.
Bangladesh has anti-corruption, anti-money laundering and mutual legal assistance legislation in
place, and has also ratified the United Nations Convention Against Corruption in 2007.2 These
laws are however still not meeting international standards and best practices, and need to be
strengthened. Bangladesh established an ACC which is endowed with significant formal
independence in investigating and prosecuting corruption; and has some financial independence
with the recent ruling by the Minister of Finance and the Bangladesh Bank that the ACC could
retain recovered stolen assets. Under the 2008 caretaker government, the ACC had played an
active role in prosecuting cases against a large number of politicians and bureaucrats, including
the leaders of the country’s main political parties. A proposed amendment to the Act was
approved by the Parliament in November 2013, but was subsequently declared “illegal? and
“unconstitutional? by the High Court in January 2014. (The amendment had included some
changes which enhanced ACC’s standing and some of which weakened its independence, the
most damaging change as assessed by Transparency International Bangladesh was the
requirement that ACC needed to obtain approval from the executive before proceeding with
presenting cases before the judiciary against high-level officials). The ACC records indicate a
high level of investigative activity by the ACC. In 2012 it had 1,520 active investigative cases,
had received close to 10,000 complaints, and opened inquiries in 1,013 of these, while referring
418 to the relevant line ministry/agency for further investigation, and launched a first
investigative report on 521. Meanwhile, also in 2012, it issued 382 final reports, and had 2,016
cases under trial – 411 cases were “stayed? based on an order of the higher court; while it
managed 42 convictions. There were 90 cases that resulted in acquittal. Its activities in 2013
increased slightly, as it gathered a marginally higher number of complaints, at 10,034, and
lodged a higher number of first investigative reports, 550, as well as a higher number of final
reports, 409. But ACC was managing a lower number of cases, compared to 2012, at 1,100.
Even so, it pursued a higher number of cases at trial, at 2380, achieved a higher number of
convictions, 67, but saw a higher number of acquittals also, 116.
27.    The judicial system in Bangladesh suffers from a significant lack of resources and is also
handicapped by a backlog of cases. Enforcement of anti-corruption laws and penalties is
perceived to be weak or ineffective.
28.    The ACC does not have a dedicated prosecution unit although section 33 of the ACC Act
2004 states that the commission shall have its own prosecution unit consisting of the number of
prosecutors required conducting the cases to be investigated by the commission under the law
and to be tried before the special judge. However, a panel has been formed by ACC consisting
eminent lawyers of the country (on retention) who are required to serve ACC on a case-by-case
basis. Bangladesh criminal justice system also lacks a career prosecution service. All
prosecutors are hired externally on a contract basis on the basis of their qualifications. Engaging
with prosecution services and therefore with the criminal justice system is in itself creates risk,

2
  In June 2012, Bangladesh completed its first UNCAC peer review process, which reviewed chapters III (Criminalization and
Law Enforcement) and IV (International Cooperation). The next ‘peer review’ of the UNCAC process for Bangladesh focuses
on Chapters II (Preventive Measures) and V (Asset Recovery). The review will be undertaken in 2014/15. In June 2012 ACC
and the Ministry of Law requested assistance from the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ) to prepare this up-
coming review, and improve compliance with Chapters II and V UNCAC. GIZ approached the World Bank to support this
assistance because of its extensive experience of assisting countries with their efforts to combat money laundering and recovering
the proceeds of corruption. As part of this program – which has been complemented by GIZ assistance on the other areas of the
relevant UNCAC Chapters, the World Bank designed a NLTA to support use of anti-money laundering (AML) tools to combat
corruption and bolster the recovering of stolen assets.
and even more so in a context where there is a lack of strong, career based prosecution services,
with operational independence. These issues, coupled with the political issues affecting the fight
against corruption in Bangladesh, makes the risk profile of the program high.
29. The ACC is working towards preparing a 5-year Strategic Plan which would contain both a
      personnel and a training strategy; developing communications and advocacy strategy for
      corruption prevention and anti-money laundering. A Strategic Planning Working Group
      headed by the Chairman of the ACC has been recently established. A World Bank technical
      assistance program: “Building Capacity for Compliance with Anti-Corruption Standards
      using Anti-Money Laundering Tools? is currently assisting the ACC with developing a
      communications strategy on anti-corruption and anti-money laundering with a modality for
      its implementation under ACC’s 5-year strategic plan. The first phase of the work has led
      the ACC to commit and nominate five officials to work with the World Bank team in
      developing the communication strategy. The ACC is receiving technical assistance from the
      German Development Agency. The World Bank and the German Development Agency are
      working in close cooperation to support the ACC, and in particular to improve the ACC’s
      own record on transparency and improving its website.
30.     Under the Program's legal documents, the ERD and NBR are formally committed to the
obligations under the Anti-Corruption Guidelines for Program-for-Results operations (ACG).
The government has agreed to implement the Program in accordance with the ACG as follows:
        a)      Debarment list of firms and individuals: Companies and individuals debarred by
        the Bank and Central Procurement Technical Unit (CPTU) will be posted and updated
        regularly on the CPTU and the ERD and NBR websites with a link to the current list
        available on the World Bank external website. This will include the list of temporarily
        suspended firms and individuals. The single large IT procurement for NBR (estimated to
        be over US $10 million) will state that the tender will comply with ACG on the
        procurement bidding documents.
                                                                            1.
        b)      Sharing information on fraud and corruption allegations and investigations with
        the Bank: The ERD has agreed to report any credible and material fraud-and-corruption
        allegations regarding the Program as part of the overall program reporting requirements
        to the Bank, and will bring all sources of information together into one report from the
        Anti-Corruption Commission, the National Board of Revenue and the Comptroller and
        Auditor General. The Bank will inform the ERD about similar allegations that it
        receives. The ERD has also agreed that any allegation of fraud and corruption will be
        investigated as per existing law and persons or entities debarred or suspended by the
        Bank will not be awarded any contract under the Program during the debarment or
        suspension period.
                                                                            2.
        c)     Investigation of fraud and corruption allegations: For the program, fraud and
        corruption complaints may be channeled through updated and current audit reports of
        CAG, complaints made to the Internal Resources Division as well as to the ACC, and
        from the procurement complaints system being developed.
31.    Under the Bangladesh Civil Servants Conduct Rules of 1979 and Disciplinary and
Appeal Rules of 1985 for civil servants the primary responsibility for investigation of corruption
is with the departmental inquiry committee that is operational in each ministry. The law also
permits the Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) to investigate corruption allegations that it
chooses to.
32.    The Bank’s right to investigate allegations regarding the Program's activities and
expenditures, and the related access to needed persons, information, and documents will be
observed, and the Bank will initiate investigation at any point it considers necessary. The ERD
and the Bank have agreed, depending upon the nature of fraud and corruption, to pursue a range
of remedies within an agreed time frame.
33.     For the Program, given the range of possible types of fraud and corruption risk, all key
agencies agree it would be important to clarify roles and responsibilities over the intake,
tracking/monitoring, hand-off, and disposition of complaints around fraud and corruption, i.e.,
who takes care of what, until a fraud and corruption issue is resolved. The agreed modalities are:
ERD will write to the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General, ACC and NBR on a
quarterly basis to request them to share information against the agreed template on issues of
fraud and corruption. The entities will respond within 10 business days to ERD. The ERD will
deliver a report on fraud and corruption issues under the Program to the Bank every 6 months,
not later than 31 December and 30 June annually. ERD will maintain a database of the
information provided and will ensure that access to this database is restricted to authorized
personnel only. ERD will use this database to formulate the reports provided to the Bank every 6
months.
34.    To both assist in the roll-out of the VAT program, and to build program management
capacity in NBR, an international management consultant firm with deep experience in helping
national agencies roll-out VAT programs is being hired. The bid evaluation committee
overseeing procurement of this contract will screen closely for such experience and will require
the winning bidder to obtain prior approval from the Project Director, VAT Wing and the World
Bank before key staff identified in the bid submitted can be changed during the contract’s
execution. Technical assistance is also to be provided to the ACC to strengthen its capacity to
manage case files and develop an electronic filing system.
35.    Other governance and accountability mechanisms include: (a) the Comptroller and
Auditor General’s annual audit, where the detection of fraud and corruption and holding the
ministry or department accountable is part of the audit process; (b) the Right to Information Act,
which requires any public entity to proactively disclose information of general interest and to
respond to requests for information within a specified time, or face a judicial investigation and
possible fine; (c) the procurement grievance redress system, which records and responds to
complaints relating to a specific sector; and (d) the requirement for the DLI verification to be
undertaken by an independent entity.
36.     The conclusion of the Fiduciary System Assessment is that the systems to be put in place
in the Program are expected to provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be
used for their intended purposes, with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency,
transparency and accountability.
Introduction

1.      The VAT Improvement Program is to be implemented by the VAT Wing of the National
Board of Revenue (NBR), which is the central authority for tax administration in Bangladesh. It
is administratively situated under the Internal Resources Division (IRD) of the Ministry of
Finance (MoF). The main responsibility of NBR is to mobilize domestic resources through
collection of import duties and taxes, value added tax (VAT) and income tax. Other
responsibilities include administration of matters related to taxes, duties and other revenue
related fees/charges and prevention of smuggling. The NBR is headed by a Chairman who is
also the Secretary of the IRD.

A.       Fiduciary System Assessment

         i. Financial Management

2.      The government has been reforming and improving weaknesses in the public
financial management systems since 1995. Development partners have supported three
consecutive technical assistance public financial management (PFM) programs over the past
seventeen years. In 2011, the “Strengthening Public Expenditure Management Program?
(SPEMP) was launched to provide a comprehensive support to government’s reform program.
SPEMP supports the implementation of the government’s 2006 PFM strategy and focuses on (i)
making the budget more strategic and reflective of policy priorities through improvements in the
budget formulation and execution processes, (ii) strengthening institutions for financial
accountability by improving the quality and timeliness of fiscal information, accounting and
reporting, (iii) strengthening audit practices according to international standards and (iv)
improving legislative oversight. The SPEMP is financed by a multi-donor trust fund contributed
to by the UK’s Department for International Development (DfID), the European Commission,
the Governments of Denmark, the Netherlands and Canada for a total amount of $103 million;
and is administered by the World Bank.

3.    The legal framework is provided by the Constitution and the Public Money and Budget
Management Act, 2009. These are supported by Executive Orders issued by the President
namely; the General Financial Rules; Treasury Rules and Subsidiary Rules; and the Account
Code. The Government Rules of Business (revised 2010) and the Finance Division’s Public
Expenditure Manual provides additional operational guidance.

4.     There is a consolidated fund, or single treasury account. Constitutionally,
Bangladesh uses the term 'Annual Financial Statement' for the budget, which shows the
estimated receipts and expenditures of the government for a particular financial year. In
accordance with the Constitutional provisions in the country, the budget is divided into
Consolidated Fund (CF) and Public Account (PA) of the Republic. 3 The Consolidated Fund

3
 The Constitution provides for the Consolidated Fund and the Public Account. The Public Money and Budget Management Act
provides additional guidance on the scope and nature of the Consolidated Fund. All taxes, loans, loan repayments, and grants are
deposited into the Consolidated Fund. All spending authorized in the budget come from the Consolidated Fund, including
development and non-development, and voted and charged, expenditures. The Public Account includes all other money deposited
by or on behalf of the government, and which do not require an annual act of Parliament in order to disburse. This includes
includes all receipts of the government, all loans and grants received from domestic and foreign
sources and the recoveries of loans and interest thereon. The Consolidated Fund is termed as
Single Treasury Account when expenditure is processed using treasury rules.

5.     The government budget is comprised of two parts: the revenue and the
development budget. The revenue budget primarily includes recurrent expenditures; and the
development budget is primarily concerned with capital expenditures, but also includes all
development-financed projects – including sector-wide approaches which include recurrent
expenditures. Budget formulation follows two completely separate procedures. Furthermore,
the delegated authorities of incurring expenditure are also different for the revenue and
development budget. The preparation of the revenue budget is the responsibility of the Finance
Division. The Planning Commission formulates the Annual Development Plan which is the
basis for the development budget.4 While the recurrent budget has a medium-term budget
outlook; the development budget is prepared annually with no medium term outlook.

6.       Although constrained by the lack of integration with the development budget, the
introduction of a medium-term budget framework (MTBF) for the revenue budget has
strengthened the strategic and performance-oriented approach to budgeting. The
budgeting process entails sufficient negotiations between the spending agencies (ministries) and
the central budget coordination agency (Finance Division of the Ministry of Finance). Under
the MTBF, Finance Division sets resource envelopes–aggregate spending limits–for both
revenue and development budgets. Although the MTBF is an important vehicle for linking
planning, budgeting and priority spending in accordance with strategic objectives, there remains
some challenges: (i) lack of engagement of policy makers in the budget policy planning exercise
early in the budget preparation process and (ii) weak coordination and duplication of functions
among the Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission and the line ministries in planning and
monitoring of budget implementation.



national savings schemes (such as national savings certificates, postal savings, postal life insurance); provident fund; and deposit
accounts (such as suppliers deposits, election deposits).

4
  The Planning Commission is responsible for preparation, processing and approval of the ADP. The Budget
Management and Resource Committee (BMRC) sets the resource envelope (ministry-wise), which is communicated
to the line ministries and agencies by the Finance Division through the budget circulars. It is important to indicate
here that ministries/agencies then decide on splitting the overall budget ceilings into development and non-
development budget.
          The Programming Division allocates funds to single-year ADP in consultation with line ministries and
          agencies (within the resource envelope).
          The Programming Division, line ministries and agencies, and ERD set project-wise allocations for the
          ADP.
          Following analysis of resource demands (put forward by the line ministries and agencies through the ADP
          Call Circular) by the Programming Division and the Sector Divisions, the Government (the Planning
          Commission) determines the size of the ADP (or the Development Budget).
      Following approval of the ADP by the NEC, the Finance Division integrates the Development Budget
          (ADP) and Revenue Budget and tables the National Budget to the Parliament for appropriation.
7.      The VAT Improvement Program is included in the Annual Development Plan and
the development budget of the government.5 Since the VAT Improvement Program is being
managed by the National Board of Revenue which is an agency of the Internal Resources
Division of the Ministry of Finance, it is anticipated that the risks of delays with Ministry of
Finance approvals will be reduced. Also since the VIP is a key component of the IMF program,
for the initial years of the program it is anticipated to be accorded due priority in the budget.
With NBR being a department directly under the MOF it should not face bottlenecks and the
Ministry of Finance has a strong ownership of the program which will facilitate implementation.
The question of whether there will be adequate funds available in the budget is also greatly
dependent on whether there was sound budgeting prepared at the time of the planning and
approval of the program. The program costs were included as part of the program expenditure
framework and have been approved by the Executive Committee of the National Economic
Council (ECNEC) chaired by the Prime Minister, and shown below in Table 3. Technical
assistance was provided to the VAT implementation team during the preparation of the program
expenditure framework (which includes contingencies), largely from the IMF resident adviser
and international consultancy support financed by DFID and IFC to support the preparation of
the program. Furthermore, changes to the expenditure framework within the overall envelope of
the program can be accommodated two times during the course of implementation.


                    2012/13       2013/ 14      2014/ 15     2015/ 16      2016/ 17      2017/18       2018/19          Total
VAT Wing,
                                       6.00        44.34         11.35          4.32          3.81                      69.82
NBR
ERD and ACC                                          0.95           0.5           0.5          0.5           0.5         2.95
Cabinet
                         0.05                                                                                            0.05
Division PPA
TOTAL                    0.05          6.00        45.29         11.85          4.82          4.31           0.5        72.82

8.      In order to continue to receive timely fund releases during implementation, the
VAT implementation team will need to submit accounts statements. The late release of
government and development-partner funds to implementing agencies in other cases is often a
result of the weak capacity to meet fund release requirements. This can be mitigated against by
building the capacity in the VIP to prepare these required statements. The budget execution
rates show that for the development budget in particular, actual expenditures falls short of the
budget; implying there can be bottle necks during implementation. The centralized structure

5
  There are five funding sources classified in the development budget: (a) Government of Bangladesh funds; (b) Reimbursable
Project Aid (RPA) which flows through the GoB systems: The expenditure of these types of projects is initially incurred by GoB
and is subsequently reimbursed by the donor and credited to the government bank account (c) Reimbursable Project Aid (RPA):
RPA is an accounting arrangement under which the donor provides funds into a special bank account at the Bangladesh Bank
(central bank) or at a commercial bank. (d) Direct Project Aid (DPA): in this case, the donor has direct control over project
expenditure and disbursements are directly made by the donor and (e) Treasury Model: where GoB and development partner
funds are channeled through the Treasury system of budgetary allocations to the Consolidated Fund and expenditure will be
processed through the existing treasury system of the government. The VIP is expected to use the Treasury Model. Under this
arrangement, the payment of program funds will be made through the consolidated fund where IDA fund will be transferred
from a single treasury accounts maintained with the central Bank. The disbursement of IDA fund will be made in accordance
with agreed disbursement arrangements.
and lengthy bureaucracy for making payments against budget allocations (through the District
Accounts Offices, Controller General of Accounts and Treasury offices) is one contributing
factor to the slow disbursement of development and non-salary recurrent budgets. Furthermore,
there have also been cases of cash shortages which have restricted fund releases at levels below
budgets; which are more often than not borne by the recipients under the development budget
although it has also impacted the revenue budget. The planned activities of government
organizations therefore face a risk of not receiving the full budgetary allocation.

9.     The budget and accounts classification system is comprehensive and allows for a
highly disaggregated accounting of expenditures. Although the chart of accounts has a 13-
digit account and budget code comprising of 4 segments (which is used for budgeting,
accounting and reporting) it is not based on the international standard classification of the
functions of government (COFOG) or the IMG’s Government Fiscal Standards Manual 2001.
Whilst budget codes are available at a departmental level, accounting codes are issued at the pay
point level. This difference in codes used for budget and accounting poses potential
impediments for accurate and transparent budget execution and reporting. A new chart of
accounts is under preparation (GFSM 2001 compliant, the structure proposed has 4 segments:
organization, project, fund, economic) it has not yet been introduced, but is anticipated to be
introduced during the course of the program implementation.

10.    There have been considerable efforts made to introduce an automated management
information system to capture all expenditure transactions through the integrated budget
and accounting (IBAS) system. Although IBAS is not an “integrated? system between the
budget and the accounts, it has considerably improved the accuracy and timeliness of accounts
and financial reports by computerizing accounting transactions of the central and district
government. IBAS does have some shortcomings; it does not control for commitments, or
check validity of expenditures before processing. Under SPEMP, the government has
developed the technical specifications for an enhanced information system (referred to as
IBAS++) which is being designed and implemented including expanding the operation at all
levels of accounting offices. The IBAS++ once implemented should address the current
weaknesses in terms of functionality, operations, controls, and facilitate the introduction of the
new chart of accounts.

11.     The government follows cash based accounting, but is not compliant with
international standards. The Government has yet to implement a financial reporting
framework that conforms to international (IPSAS) “cash basis? accounting standards. However,
the use of IBAS has helped bring about the generation of timely ministry-wise financial
statements within 15 days of the end of the month. In-year budget reports are prepared monthly
less than 4 weeks after the end of the period but their usefulness is undermined by reporting only
at high levels of aggregation. Despite the progress with the automated system, parallel reporting
through the aggregation of the Drawing and Disbursement Officers manual records at the
ministry level continues. A consolidated financial statement is prepared annually covering all
revenue and development expenditures of the Government after reconciliation with bank
balances. Though the final reports should be available to the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General (OCAG) for audit within six months after the end of the fiscal year, there has
been persistent delay of 8-10 months in the submission of the report.
12.     The present reporting system does not require regular monthly reporting of
development project accounts to the Finance Ministry. The NBR may have a foreign
exchange sub-account established under the TSA. Typically the Finance Division does get to see
such project accounts at the end of the first quarter and the beginning of the final quarter.
Submission of accounts at these points is a prerequisite for funds release that can only be
authorised by the Finance Ministry. Monthly accounts are available and reported regularly at the
end of each month by the CGA. For the purpose of fund release, the Project Director of the VIP
should get monthly statements from the Chief Accounts Officer of the Controller General of
Accounts and send it to IRD and FD of the MOF after reconciliation with the records maintained
at the VIP implementation team.

13.      The internal audit function is largely absent in Bangladesh, there is no internal
auditor cadre; there is a lack of relevant professional qualifications and generally a lack of
understanding of internal control frameworks. There are internal audit cells that are
established in line ministries to conduct routine transaction and compliance testing, but they do
not employ modern internal audit techniques and methodology. Furthermore, the internal audit
follow-up is minimal, the process is not tracked, monitored and recommendations are not
necessarily acted upon by senior management. The Controller General of Accounts in the
Ministry of Finance also has an Internal Control Unit, which is responsible for carrying out
annual inspections; but again both the follow up action taken by the concerned department, and
the monitoring of the follow-up within CGA remains weak. While a strategy and manual for
internal audit have been developed under SPEMP, they have not been approved by government.
The strategy recognizes the need to separate internal audit from the expenditure control wing,
and considers three options: a large scale modernization project for all line ministries,
developing internal auditors in a group of ministries or developing internal auditors in Finance
Division. Financial Procedures, Rules and Regulations are generally well defined and issued
through executive orders. Other forms of internal controls include “compliance with general
financial rules and treasury rules? during pre-audit processes i.e. at the point of payment. Since
the passage of the Public Money and Budget Management Act in 2009, two rules relating to the
have been prepared: (i) Financial Reporting under MTBF, outlining the responsibilities of chief
accounts officers in line ministries and (ii) Constitution of Budget Management Wings in all line
ministries and divisions to prepare and implement the MTBFs.

14.     There is no separate internal audit unit in NBR; the expenditure control wing in the
MoF provides the internal audit function for departments including NBR. While there are
units for “Audit? “Intelligence? and “Inspection? inside NBR and the Wings: Customs, Income
Tax and VAT but are for taxpayers and taxation, not for audit of public expenditure. For VIP,
the expenditure control wing of the MOF will carry out six monthly internal audits of the
program and will submit their report to the Secretary IRD who is also the Chairman of NBR,
who will forward the report to the audit committee. A copy of the audit report together with
management action is agreed to be shared with the Bank within one month of the receipt of the
report. Through the General Financial Rules, the Treasury Rules, the Procurement Act and
rules, and instructions issued by the Finance Division there is a comprehensive set of internal
controls that is designed, among other things, to limit expenditure to budget allocations and to
actual availability of cash resources. The internal controls are binding principles and
procedures that have to be exercised by NBR and their subordinate departments. The VIP
program expenditure processes are subject to these rules and regulations

15.     There is no real understanding of the use of the funds reported under ‘Capital’
expenditures and there is no asset management policy in place. There is a differentiation of
‘capital’ expenditures in the development budget and subsequent accounting and reporting in the
Annual Appropriation Accounts. ‘Stores management’ regulations are in place, which specify
recording of fixed assets. In general there is no clear policy for the recording, handling,
disposal, accounting treatment and overall management of fixed assets. Regulations in the
Internal Control Manual stipulate that asset registers are to be established and maintained but
those are not followed in practice and there is no physical audit of assets being undertaken
across the government. Purchasing Rules do not identify assets and all purchase information is
held in Stock Registers since this is compulsory under Purchasing Rules, but assets are not
identified as such.

16.     The state audit office is the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General (OCAG)
which has a mandate under the constitution of Bangladesh to audit the accounts of
government and public sector entities. There are ten directorates under the OCAG to conduct
audit of various natures and the Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate (FAPAD) is
responsible for audit of donor funded programs. Though time lag for annual audit is improving,
there is currently 12/15 months delay in submission of audit reports to the President who places
them before the parliament. Follow up of audit recommendations is generally weak. There is
no established mechanism to follow up on audit recommendations. Although the rule requires a
formal response to be submitted by an audited entity within 45 days from the receipt of the audit
report, this is not strictly followed. The Bank through the PFM reform program (SPEMP) is
providing technical assistance to address weaknesses facing the OCAG in certain specific areas.
                                                                            3.
17.     One of the lessons from the previous World Bank funded Technical Assistance
project with the NBR, was that there was a slow response to audit observations and a lack
of proactivity in resolving audit objections in a timely manner. To make the audit effective
for VIP, an agreement has been reached with the Office Comptroller and Auditor General’s
Office that a single audit for VIP that will be conducted by the FAPAD under an agreed TOR.
The risk mitigation includes incentivizing a timely program audit and follow up mechanism
including remedies for unresolved audit issues; which is included as one of the actions in DLI 6
to improve the fiduciary environment.

18.     The legislature’s oversight of public accounts in the form of ‘ex-post’ scrutiny is
carried out through review of audit reports on the executive branch. There are three public
finance-related committees in Bangladesh; they are the Public Accounts Committee, the
Estimates Committee and the Public Undertakings Committee. The review of government
spending is carried out mainly by the Public Accounts Committee. Its main function is to
scrutinize the irregularities and lapses in public accounts and statements of institutions as
audited by the Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General and reported to the Parliament as
required by the OCAG’s constitutional mandate. The PAC plays a principal role in resolving
audit objections.
       ii. Procurement


19.     The government has been working on public procurement reform program since
2002 and has made substantial progress in putting in place a sound legal framework. In
2002, Bangladesh established the Central Procurement Technical Unit (CPTU), and
implemented a number of public procurement policy reforms. These reforms included the
promulgation of the Public Procurement Regulations in September 2003 (PPR-2003) to guide all
procurements that used public funds. In July 2006, the Public Procurement Act 2006 (PPA-
2006 was enacted which embodied a comprehensive set of good international procurement
practices. The PPA-2006 became effective from January 31, 2008 once the government had
promulgated the Public Procurement Rules 2008 (PPR-2008).

20.     The legal framework in place embodies good international procurement practices
and contains clear provisions for: preparing formal procurement plans, ensuring value for
money, publishing contract award results, conducting annual post procurement audits,
introducing a formal grievance address system including recourse to an independent
procurement review panel. The CPTU has played an active role in formulating the legal
framework and producing the procurement documents that are needed to carry out public
procurement. The CPTU has built capacity across government through providing international
standard procurement training to procurement practitioners in government organizations. CPTU
has created a critical mass of about 25 procurement professionals and provided training to over
4,800 staff from 350 organizations. To sustain the efforts to improve public procurement
practices, and with on-going World Bank-financed technical assistance, the government has
been implementing a second phase of procurement reform since 2007, focused on the
implementation and monitoring of the Act and Rules and introducing electronic government
procurement (e-GP).

21.     The CPTU has issued standard bidding documents or request for proposals for
goods, works and services; and a standard approval process. All of these standard bidding
documents contain internationally accepted provisions. The implementing agency for the VIP is
already using these standard documents for the program expenditures. In the case of bidding
documents for IT procurements there are no standard bidding documents. The rules do allow
for customization of other international documents, such as the World Bank’s procurement
documents, which have been customized in the case of the VIP for the high-value IT
procurement for the Commercial Off-the-shelf software. In 2004, the government issued the
Public Procurement Processing and Approval Process for streamlining all public procurements
and this was subsequently embodied in PPR-2008. This specifies processing and approving
authorities with respective time-lines for different types and magnitudes of procurement. The
implementing agency of VIP will follow those timelines.

22.     The rules for comprising the bid evaluation committees (BECs) is provided for in
PPR-2008 and is being followed by the VIP implementation team and allows adequate
safeguards for the involvement of the technical experts. According to PPR-2008, a BEC
shall have at least five members with two experts from outside the procuring entity with proven
track record of experience in procurement. Depending on the type of procurement such experts
will be either from public offices and/or from professional bodies or individuals of known
probity. Individual consultants and/or representatives of consulting firms may participate as
members of the BEC. In addition, for the high value IT COTS procurement package, it was
agreed that an additional mitigating measure would be to have four independent members on the
BEC, including 2 international experts and 2 local experts.

23.     The introduction e-GP provides an opportunity to strengthen security, fair
competition, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the procurement process.
Section 65 of the Act and Rule 128 of PPR-2008 contain the provisions for e-Government
Procurement: (1) For carrying out the purposes of the Act, any or all government procurement
may be undertaken using electronic processing systems following the principles governing e-GP
as prescribed by the Government. (2) In case of procurement following e-GP, should there be
any conflict between the provisions of the e-GP rules and the provisions of these rules, then e-
GP shall prevail.? The e-Government Procurement (e-GP) is an electronic bidding system for
nationally competitive bidding which was first introduced in the Roads and Highways
Department, the Local Government Engineering Department, the Bangladesh Water
Development Board and the Rural Electrification Board. These four agencies spend a major
part of the Annual Development Program. As of June 2013, a total of around 500 e-tenders
were successfully invited by these four agencies. The government has plans to introduce 100
percent e-GP within the next 3 years in these four agencies; and has encouraged its use
elsewhere: from FY17 e-GP will be introduced in an additional 17 agencies from FY14. The
NBR as the implementing agency of VIP will use this e-GP system increasingly during the
implementation of the program for the nationally competitive tenders under the program.

24.     A detailed procurement plan has been prepared for the VIP. Rule 16(4) of PPR-
2008 states: “The procuring entity shall, for procurement under a development project or
program, prepare a total procurement plan for the entire project period in the formats prescribed
by the Government from time to time and attach the same with the Development Project
Proposal (DPP) or Technical Assistance Project Proposal (TPP).? Rule 16(5) states: “At the
beginning of each financial year a procuring entity shall update the total procurement plan and
the official cost estimates for a development project or program on an annual basis and in a
rational manner having regard to, among other things, the expected flow of funds.? Rule 16(6)
states: “At the beginning of each financial year, a procuring entity shall, for procurement under
the revenue budget, prepare only an annual procurement plan.? Rule 16(7) states: “The updated
annual procurement plan and the official cost estimates for a development project or program
and annual procurement plan for the revenue budget shall require approval of the Head of the
Procuring Entity or an officer authorized by him or her.? However, the DPP itself can only be
updated twice during the implementation period. While it ought to be the case that once the
expenditures in the Annual Development Program (ADP) are approved the availability of funds
would be automatic and fund release would follow the total procurement plan but it is not so in
practice, hence the need to ensure the timely submission of the utilization reports (referred to
above) to facilitate fund release; and to build capacity for the procurement processes so that they
can be concluded in a timely way as envisaged in the budgeting and allocation process.

25.    There are several amendments to the PPA-2006 which are not consistent with
international best procurement practice. These include: (a) allowing post bidding
negotiations with the lowest evaluated bidders; (b) submission and opening of bids in multiple
locations; (c) the use of a lottery in awards of contracts; (d) no requirement for bidders’ to
submit their qualification/experience; (e) an invitation of bids on the basis of percentage above
or below the estimated cost; and (f) the use of a single stage two envelope procurement system.
Most of these above provisions are applied in the use of decentralized small-value works
contracts. In the proposed VIP the procurement plan does not include these practices and there
is no such type of small value decentralized works contracts and hence these provisions should
not affect the program procurements.

26.      Complaints related to the procurement processes are handled under the PPR-2008as
illustrated in the flow chart below. The complaint handling mechanism has two levels; the
administrative process and the independent process. The administrative process describes the
process of handling complaints by the implementing agency. If the complainant is not satisfied
with the decision of the implementing agency then the complainant may settle the matter
through the independent process. The Review Panel is responsible for the independent process.
The Government constituted in August 2005 a Review Panel for Complaints and Appeals to
address bidders’ complaints and appeals, and increased the number of such panels to three in
April 2006. Each review panel is located in CPTU and consists of three experts (one retired
senior civil servant, one legal practitioner, and one member from the apex national trade
organization) selected from a list of qualified personnel having experience in handling
procurement matters. According to Rule 60(5) of PPR-2008 the decision of a Review Panel is
binding upon the related parties.
Flow Chart:


         Administrative process                             Independent process

  Submit complaint in writing to the concerned    If the Complainant is not satisfied with the
      officer of the Procuring Entity (PE)        written decision of the Secretary of the
                                                  concerned Ministry, the complainant may
                                                  pursue through the Review Panel.
     Within 5 working days PE shall provide
      written response to the complainant

                                                  1. A Person may appeal to a Review Panel only
 Within 3 working days to pursue to Head of       if the Person has exhausted all his or her
 PE (if not satisfied)                            options of complaints to the administrative
                                                  Process

     Within 5 working days Head of PE shall
   provide written response to the complainant


 Within 7 working days to pursue to the
 Secretary of the concerned Ministry (if not
 satisfied)


  Within 5 working days Secretary shall provide
       written response to the complainant


  Within 5 working days Procuring Entity shall
  provide written response to the complainant

                                                                           4.
                                                                           5.
27.     Given lack of familiarity of NBR with procurement and contract management
practices, key risks that have arisen in the context of other procurement that has been
found in other sectors will need to be controlled particularly during key procurement to be
conducted for VIP. This includes risks from the use of agents to lobby bid evaluation
committees, collusion, lack of processes to safeguard integrity of bid documents prior to and
during the evaluation, fraudulent claims of experience of firms undertaking key consultant
contracts, unauthorized “swapping? of key staff named in bids for other staff without equivalent
experience, and use of low quality components in the supply chain. Non-procurement related
fraud and corruption risks may emanate from manual systems in use to file and pay VAT, until
e-filing and e-payment are used in field offices. The procurement profile of the VIP is given in
the Table 4 below.
                                Table 4 Procurement Profile of VIP

                                  Nr of   Covering       Value in USD           Total      Procurement
  Item category                 contracts  years         Min      Max            USD          Method
  Integrated Tax                    1     Y1 ~ Y5         -    18,330,000      18,330,000 International
  Management System                                                                       Competitive
  (COTS)                                                                                  Bidding (ICB)
  IT Hardware, Software,            8      Y1 ~ Y5      500,000 5,000,000      21,000,000 7 ICB and 1
  Datacenter, contact center,                                                             NCB
  processing center
  management
  Office furniture,                 7      Y2 ~ Y5       50,000 3,130,000       8,150,000 NCB
  renovation and other
  utilities
  Project Management                1      Y1 ~ Y5             - 4,000,000      4,000,000 QCBS
  Consultancy
  Subtotal                          17                                         51,480,000



28.    NBR will require procurement staff and/or consultants to strengthen capacity to
manage procurements under this program. As there is no separate procurement function in
NBR and there are no procurement-related desk officers. NBR has at different times procured
computer equipment and software, for example the introduction of ASYCUDA (Automated
System for Customs Data – application software) for tariff administration, as well as under the
Reforms in Budgeting and Expenditure Control Project for revenue administration, and the
World Bank financed Economic Management Technical Assistance Program funded by the
World Bank. Previous experience indicates that there were some procurement performance
concerns in the past, and in the EMTAP project the Bank declared a mis-procurement of six
contacts since the procurement process followed by NBR was not consistent with the World
Bank’s procurement guidelines.

29.      The NBR and ERD will need more training and additional experience to help with
the international competitive bidding (ICB). The NBR will likely face the systemic issues
affecting procurement efficiency and performance in Bangladesh such as awarding and
completion of contracts within agreed timelines. In addition to adequate staffing for
procurement needs, emphasis also needs to be laid on areas of internal control, documentation,
information dissemination, administration of contract including delivery follow-up, payments,
handling complaints etc. The Economic Relations Division also will require support for the
international procurement for the third part verification entity. Through the additional support of
the services of a qualified national procurement consultant, the Economic Relations Division will
be able to draft a Request for Proposals; establish an evaluation committee and evaluate
proposals to ensure appropriate selection and contract management of this DLI verification firm.
The terms of reference and the procurement process will be agreed with the World Bank. The
program is rated as “High-Risk? from the procurement and contract administration perspective.
Several measures will be introduced to minimize these procurement risks during the
implementation of the program.

30.     Procurement remains the area at highest risk due to the prevalence and risks of
corruption. However fraud and corruption outside the procurement process – such as supply of
sub-standard goods while quoting for high quality items and bribing the officials of the
organization receiving the goods – are also common. There is also the possibility of coercive
and collusive practice by groups of bidders. There are areas of possible institutionalized
corruption in the Bangladesh scenario. If the fund is channeled through the consolidated fund
then two offices become involved in the process: NBR which is the implementing agency and
budget holder on one hand and the accounts offices (CAO, DCA, DAO and UAO) under the
CGA which scrutinize the claims for payments and disburse payments. For the implementing
agency, the distribution of budgets to field offices is a risk area of potential corruption. Delays
in preparation of bills, invoices, payment claims (especially from contractors/suppliers) is
another area of corruption. All bills payable from accounts offices are vulnerable to corrupt
practices like bribery. Large amounts of advances drawn from accounts offices, any arrear
claims of large amounts, and any large payment to suppliers or contractors is particularly
vulnerable to corruption.


      iii. Governance
37.     The prevalence and public perception of corruption in Bangladesh generally
remains high. Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index (CPI) 2013 of 177
countries ranked Bangladesh at 136th indicating a high level of perception of corruption. Some
of the perception problems may also affect the Program and the procurement processes. In the
case of the NBR there has been little high-level procurements undertaken, and here the concern
is far more due to the capacity of the staff (a referred to in the section above).
38.     The Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) as the primary anti-corruption agency in
Bangladesh remains institutionally and operationally challenged to operate under its
mandate. Bangladesh has anti-corruption, anti-money laundering and mutual legal assistance
legislation in place, and has also ratified the United Nations Convention Against Corruption in
2007.6 These laws are however still not meeting international standards and best practices, and
need to be strengthened. Bangladesh established the ACC in 2004, which is endowed with
significant formal independence in investigating and prosecuting corruption; and has some
financial independence with the recent ruling by the Minister of Finance and the Bangladesh

6
  In June 2012, Bangladesh completed its first UNCAC peer review process, which reviewed chapters III (Criminalization and
Law Enforcement) and IV (International Cooperation). The next ‘peer review’ of the UNCAC process for Bangladesh focuses
on Chapters II (Preventive Measures) and V (Asset Recovery). The review will be undertaken in 2014/15. In June 2012 ACC
and the Ministry of Law requested assistance from the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ) to prepare this up-
coming review, and improve compliance with Chapters II and V UNCAC. GIZ approached the World Bank to support this
assistance because of its extensive experience of assisting countries with their efforts to combat money laundering and recovering
the proceeds of corruption. As part of this program – which has been complemented by GIZ assistance on the other areas of the
relevant UNCAC Chapters, the World Bank designed a NLTA to support use of anti-money laundering (AML) tools to combat
corruption and bolster the recovering of stolen assets.
Bank that the ACC could retain recovered stolen assets. Under the 2008 caretaker government,
the ACC had played an active role in prosecuting cases against a large number of politicians and
bureaucrats, including the leaders of the country’s main political parties. A proposed
amendment to the Act was approved by the Parliament in November 2013, but was subsequently
declared “illegal? and “unconstitutional? by the High Court in January 2014. (The amendment
had included some changes which enhanced ACC’s standing and some of which weakened its
independence, the most damaging change as assessed by Transparency International Bangladesh
was the requirement that ACC needed to obtain approval from the executive before proceeding
with presenting cases before the judiciary against high-level officials).
39.     The ACC records indicate a high level of investigative activity but low prosecution
rate. In 2012 it had 1,520 active investigative cases, had received close to 10,000 complaints,
and opened inquiries in 1,013 of these, while referring 418 to the relevant line ministry/agency
for further investigation, and launched a first investigative report on 521. Meanwhile, also in
2012, it issued 382 final reports, and had 2,016 cases under trial – 411 cases were “stayed? based
on an order of the higher court; while it managed 42 convictions. There were 90 cases that
resulted in acquittal. Its activities in 2013 increased slightly, as it gathered a marginally higher
number of complaints, at 10,034, and lodged a higher number of first investigative reports, 550,
as well as a higher number of final reports, 409. But ACC was managing a lower number of
cases, compared to 2012, at 1,100. Even so, it pursued a higher number of cases at trial, at 2380,
achieved a higher number of convictions, 67, but saw a higher number of acquittals also, 116.
The judicial system in Bangladesh suffers from a significant lack of resources and is also
handicapped by a backlog of cases. Enforcement of anti-corruption laws and penalties is
perceived to be weak or ineffective.
40.      The ACC does not have a dedicated prosecution unit. Although section 33 of the
ACC Act 2004 states that the commission shall have its own prosecution unit consisting of the
number of prosecutors required conducting the cases to be investigated by the commission under
the law and to be tried before the special judge this is not yet in place. However, a panel has
been formed by ACC consisting eminent lawyers of the country (on retention) who are required
to serve ACC on a case-by-case basis. Bangladesh criminal justice system also lacks a career
prosecution service. All prosecutors are hired externally on a contract basis on the basis of their
qualifications. Engaging with prosecution services and therefore with the criminal justice system
is in itself creates risk, and even more so in a context where there is a lack of strong, career based
prosecution services, with operational independence. These issues, coupled with the political
issues affecting the fight against corruption in Bangladesh, makes the risk profile of the program
high.
41.     The ACC is working towards preparing a 5-year Strategic Plan which would contain both
a personnel and a training strategy; developing communications and advocacy strategy for
corruption prevention and anti-money laundering. A Strategic Planning Working Group headed
by the Chairman of the ACC has been recently established. A World Bank technical assistance
program: “Building Capacity for Compliance with Anti-Corruption Standards using Anti-Money
Laundering Tools? is currently assisting the ACC with developing a communications strategy on
anti-corruption and anti-money laundering with a modality for its implementation under ACC’s
5-year strategic plan. The first phase of the work has led the ACC to commit and nominate five
officials to work with the World Bank team in developing the communication strategy. The
ACC is receiving technical assistance from the German Development Agency. The World Bank
and the German Development Agency are working in close cooperation to support the ACC, and
in particular to improve the ACC’s own record on transparency and improving its website.

Disbursement, Flow of Funds protocols

31.    The disbursement under the program will be determined according to performance
against the disbursement-linked indicators or DLIs. Achievements of DLIs trigger Bank
disbursement to the program. DLIs for the Program as provided in Annex 1, together with the
disbursement amounts for each of the indicators and the arrangements for their verification. The
GoB will request an advance of 25 percent of the credit amount to be disbursed after the credit
becomes effective as an advance on the achievement of results in year 1 and 2.

32.     The fund flow arrangements for VIP will use government systems. The disbursement
arrangements for VIP including the activities to be managed by the Economic Relations Division
are as follows:

                               Action                                       Frequency
       1.   Upon verification and validation of results by third   Twice a year
            party, ERD requests for disbursement of funds
            from World Bank
       2.   Upon receipt of third party verification report and Upon request for the advance
            confirmation of results achieved, the Bank.         against DLIs 1 and 2.
            Disburses funds to the Treasury Single Account      When results are verified up to
            maintained with Central Bank.
                                                                twice a year.
       3.   MoF allocates funds according to the expenditure Quarterly
            framework in the DPP for NBR’s VIP; and the
            Technical Assistance Project Proforma (TPP) for
            the supporting activities of the Economic Relations
            Division
       4.   NBR and Economic Relations Division meets As and when necessary
            program expenditure from their respective
            accounts

33.     Details of agreed disbursement modalities for each DLI are provided in Annex 1.
With the exception of DLI 6 the DLIs are not time bound. Where the target for a DLI is not
achieved in any particular year/period, the related disbursement is carried over to the subsequent
year; and disbursement will be proportional to the progress towards achieving the targeted DLI
value. In case of consistent failure to achieve DLI targets within the tenure of an operation, the
corresponding credit amount will not be disbursed. On the other hand, if achievements exceed
targets, the corresponding credit amount can be fully disbursed before the end of the operation.

34.     Verification protocols for each DLI are detailed in Annex 2. Independent verification
of all the DLIs will be done by an external entity to be contracted by the Economic Relations
Division for years 2-6; and by the World Bank for the first year. The Bank will review the
verification report received from the entity and other evidence for DLIs twice a year during
Program implementation. Each year in April and October, the NBR will send the monitoring
report to the Independent Verification authority and to Economic Relations Division. The
Verification entity will send the verification report to the ERD, NBR and the World Bank. The
Bank will review and complete the DLIs verification process and issue a memo to the Country
Director to recommend disbursement against achievement of results. The VAT wing is
responsible for monitoring against the process indicators under the program and the new
automation systems will provide the data required for the results framework and disbursement
indicators.


B.      Risks and Mitigation Measures


      i. Financial Management

35.     Fund Flows and Treasury Management: The risk that the conditions for fund release
may not be met to the satisfaction of MOF; can be mitigated by strengthening the capacity of
NBR to provide the required reports. This will be done by the recruitment of an accountant staff
from the office of Controller General of Accounts to the VIP implementation team. The timely
submission of the quarterly fund utilization reports will also be incentivized by requiring this
action as a result to trigger the DLI 6 to improve the fiduciary environment. The funds flow risk
is not anticipated in the case of the Economic Relations Division as it will only handle
expenditures limited to consultancies. The CAO of Economic Relations Division can account
for the expenditure and report for its onward submission by Economic Relations Division for
fund release.

36.     Accounting and Reporting: Delays in compilation of information on actual expenditure
from PIU is considered another potential area of FM risk which may constrain NBR’s ability to
monitor and report on the progress of the program as a whole and intervene to facilitate trouble
shooting. The availability of information on program expenditure is critical for the following
purposes: (i) preparation of fund utilization report when asking for fund release from MOF (ii)
verification of fiduciary DLIs and (iii) annual audit. This can be mitigated by the Project
Director working with the Accountant in the PIU well ahead of reports becoming due for
ensuring that there is no delay encountered as far as reporting of program expenditure is
concerned.

37.     Assets management and Tracking: There is no asset management policy in place across
the government and the procurement and use of a large number of fixed assets in VIP is a
definite risk area as a large number of IT products like servers, operating systems and application
software may be purchased. Risk mitigation measure includes procurement and installation of a
fixed asset tracking software to record and manage assets procured under VIP and roll out the
system within NBR to systematically track all assets under its disposal, which is required in the
Program Action Plan.

38.     Program Audit and follow up Mechanism: Agreement has been reached that the OCAG
will entrust the responsibility for program audit to FAPAD. A TOR, covering both financial and
program performance including major procurement will be agreed between NBR and FAPAD
within 4 months of program effectiveness as agreed in the Capacity Building Action Plan. This
arrangement will be sufficient for meeting the audit requirement of this project. OCAG will
nominate a group of auditors who will be trained on specific features of the program and will be
responsible for audit throughout the VIP implementation period. Furthermore, within 4 months
of program effectiveness, IRD of NBR will constitute and operationalize the audit Committee
which will be responsible for follow up of audit objections and to facilitate resolution of
significant observations.

39.     The program audit will cover both the NBR and Economic Relations Division. The
auditor will be required to express an opinion on the program financial statement in accordance
with international standards of auditing and submit the report within six months of the end of the
fiscal year. In addition, the auditor is required to provide a detailed management letter
containing auditor observations of the internal controls and compliance with financial covenants
in the Financing Agreement. Audit reports will be shared with the Bank and NBR and ERD
within six months of the end of the fiscal year. The Bank will communicate to the Recipient on
the reported significant financial irregularities in the audit report within 15 days of the receipt of
the audit report. The IRD will coordinate with NBR for audit follow up and ensure that remedies
are implemented within an agreed time frame. ERD and NBR will communicate directly with
the Bank in respect of audit follow up issues. All significant audit findings should be resolved
before commencement of the next annual audit. The resolution of significant audit findings
within 6 months of receiving the audit report will result in the achievement of DLI 6.

40.    The OCAG audit will take into account the relevant DLI verification reports for ensuring
that program expenditure supports the results and spent for purpose intended. Summary of
Program Audit Arrangements indicated in the Table-5 below:

                             Table 5: Program Audit Arrangements


      Scope of Audit                            Responsibility    Remarks
      Financial Statement Attest Audit          OCAG              Audit of program financial
                                                                  statements
      Annual OCAG audits of accounts – OCAG                       Financial    statements and
      certification of financial statements,                      performance aspects
      opinion and observations on program
      performance of selected activities.

41.    In case of reported irregularities in the audit report or remedies undertaken by the
concerned agency appear unsatisfactory, Bank retains the right to investigate whenever it
considers necessary.


      ii. Procurement
42.    A significant amount of the program expenditures are for the procurement of ICT related
hardware, software, and services and is therefore within the procurement risk portfolio of the Tax
program. The major procurements under the program are:
 Integrated VAT Administration System (COTS) : up to USD 18.33 million
 IT Hardware, Software, Datacenter, contact center, processing center management (several
   contracts) : up to USD 21.00 million
 Office furniture, renovation and other utilities (several contracts): up to USD 8.15 million
 Project management Consultancy: up to US$ 4.00 million.

The expenditure categories therefore involve mainly procurement of IT system with related
hardware and software about 80 percent of the total program procurement (See Annex 3 –
Program Procurement Plan).

43.     For the procurement of Integrated VAT Administration System (COTS) by NBR
the following mitigating measures are proposed:

a. NBR will avail of the services of two international consultants -- one IT Systems Consultant
   and one Procurement Consultant – to assist NBR in the procurement of COTS and will be
   members of the Bid Evaluation Committee.

b. GOB will use a customized version of the Bank’s Standard Bidding Documents for
   procurement of the COTS IT system with necessary customization to make it consistent with
   the national procurement law.

c. Technical specifications will be prepared under the supervision of an international IT
   Consultant with experience in VAT administration systems.

d. The two international consultants will be included as members of the bid evaluation
   committee (BEC). The national procurement law has adequate provision to include
   consultants in the BEC.

e. In Bangladesh only the Bangladesh Computer Council (BCC), Bangladesh Bank (BB) and
   Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET) have adequate capacity to
   evaluate bids for complex IT procurement. One external resource person from BCC and
   another from BUET will be involved throughout the process of preparing specifications and
   bidding documents. The resource persons from BCC, BB and/or BUET will also be included
   as external members of the BEC.

f. Formation of the Bid evaluation Committee: The BEC will have seven members; three from
   NBR, two international consultants and two external members either from BUET, BCC or
   BB. Quorum in BEC meetings will require presence of these four resource persons (two
   international consultants and two external members).

g. Terms of reference of BEC will be agreed with the World Bank. The NBR will prepare and
   officially issue a detailed TOR for the BEC including approval of the procurement process.
   This TOR shall include the following provisions: (i) keeping the bids in safe custody at all
      times with access to BEC members only; (ii) conducting evaluation of bids by the BEC
      members themselves without delegating any task to junior or other staff under any
      circumstance; (iii) engaging all BEC members on a full-time basis at an isolated location
      (very similar to sequestering) until the evaluation is complete and the bid evaluation report
      (BER) is prepared, finalized, and signed; (iv) carrying of bids or copies of evaluation-related
      materials outside the specified office location (venue of evaluation) by any BEC member or
      any official will be strictly prohibited; (v) declaration of impartiality by each BEC member as
      per a prescribed format that will be attached to the BER; (vi) submission of BER in a sealed
      envelope by the BEC Chair directly to the approving authority, without any tier in between.

44.      Other procurement risk mitigating measures include:

             Capacity Building:


             a. As agreed in the capacity building plan, NBR will form a procurement core team
                to conduct the procurements under this program. These core team members will
                take procurement certification training arranged by CPTU.


             e-Government procurement (eGP):

             b. A web based eGP system, developed with the technical assistance of Bank, was
                successfully piloted in selected government agencies and is now being rolled out
                to a number of other agencies. The aim is to introduce eGP in all Government
                agencies that implement development projects. The eGP system is to be
                increasingly used for all national procurements but has not yet been rolled out for
                international procurements. This is included as an action to be undertaken in order
                to trigger DLI 6 to improve the fiduciary environment. The implementing agency
                under VIP should conduct 25 percent of procurement through eGP right from the
                outset and increase to 75 percent by the end of the program

             c. Fraud, corruption, collusion and coercion have been found to be major risks that
                undermine the development effectiveness of public sector procurement in
                Bangladesh. Detection and mitigation of those risks are subsequently made
                difficult and less effective as a result of obstruction. Security measures built into
                eGP create a strong barrier against fraud, corruption and coercion; and
                transparency functions built into the system make collusion and obstruction more
                difficult to carry out and easier to detect.

             Procurement monitoring:

             d. A computerized national procurement monitoring system named PROMIS,
                developed under technical assistance from Bank, is successfully being used by
                four pilot agencies of the Government (i.e. Roads and Highway Department,
                Local Government Engineering Department, Bangladesh Water Development
      Board and Rural Electrification Board). It is possible, using PROMIS, to monitor
      both the progress of procurement processing as well as procurement risks to
      individual projects that those agencies are implementing. This makes it possible
      to adopt control measures at an early stage before procurement issues become
      difficult to manage.

   e. As stated above, PROMIS is a national system owned by the Government. NBR
      will use this system and will share with Bank specified reports generated by the
      system at specified intervals. PROMIS key procurement performance indicators
      are attached in Annex 05. Provision of the procurement performance indicators to
      the Bank is a requirement under the Program Action Plan.

ii. Bid evaluation committee:

   a. It is recommended that for high value (greater than US$2 million) international
      procurements (a) the Government will prepare a seven member panel comprising
      of qualified persons including two international experts, one representative from
      the Bangladesh Computer Council (BCC) and one representative from the
      Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), (b) For other
      procurements there will be separate BECs and there will be at least two external
      members in each BEC who will be experts in the particular class of procurement
      for which the BEC is constituted.

   Preparation of specifications:

   b. While PPA-2006 and PPR-2008 do not contain any guidelines about how to
      prepare appropriate specifications for goods, services and works that will be
      procured, and do not contain any provision for forming committees to prepare
      such specifications, Rule 4(6) of PPR-2008 does state that “the procuring entity
      may, if necessary, seek the assistance of specialists from outside the procuring
      entity at the time of preparing the bidding document?.

   c. It is recommended that qualified international IT technical experts shall either
      prepare or review the technical specifications for all high value IT procurements
      and the Project Management Consultancy contracts, under the program.

   Complaint handling mechanism:

   d. While PPA-2006 and PPR-2008 have adequate provisions for procurement
      complaint handling, complaints in reality are not handled appropriately. In
      addition the implementing agency does not have any credible database for
      recording and following up on procurement complaints.

   e. A system for handling complaints and a database should be established for
      recording, monitoring and following up on all procurement complaints under the
                program in NBR. The salient features of the system will be an oversight of a
                complaint database, a standard protocol with appropriate triggers for carrying out
                investigations, and actions taken against involved parties. The system will be
                developed and managed by the implementing agency.


      iii. Governance
42.     Under the Program's legal documents, the ERD and NBR are formally committed to the
obligations under the Anti-Corruption Guidelines for Program-for-Results operations (ACG).
The government has agreed to implement the Program in accordance with the ACG as follows:
         a)      Debarment list of firms and individuals: Companies and individuals debarred by
         the Bank and Central Procurement Technical Unit (CPTU) will be posted and updated
         regularly on the CPTU and the ERD and NBR websites with a link to the current list
         available on the World Bank external website. This will include the list of temporarily
         suspended firms and individuals. The single large IT procurement for NBR (estimated to
         be over US $10 million) will state that the tender will comply with ACG on the
         procurement bidding documents.
         b)      Sharing information on fraud and corruption allegations and investigations with
         the Bank: The ERD has agreed to report any credible and material fraud-and-corruption
         allegations regarding the Program as part of the overall program reporting requirements
         to the Bank, and will bring all sources of information together into one report from the
         Anti-Corruption Commission, the National Board of Revenue and the Comptroller and
         Auditor General. The Bank will inform the ERD about similar allegations that it
         receives. The ERD has also agreed that any allegation of fraud and corruption will be
         investigated as per existing law and persons or entities debarred or suspended by the
         Bank will not be awarded any contract under the Program during the debarment or
         suspension period.
         c)      Investigation of fraud and corruption allegations: For the program, fraud and
         corruption complaints may be channeled through updated and current audit reports of
         CAG, complaints made to the Internal Resources Division as well as to the ACC, and
         from the procurement complaints system being developed.
43.    Under the Bangladesh Civil Servants Conduct Rules of 1979 and Disciplinary and
Appeal Rules of 1985 for civil servants the primary responsibility for investigation of corruption
is with the departmental inquiry committee that is operational in each ministry. The law also
permits the Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) to investigate corruption allegations that it
chooses to.
44.    The Bank’s right to investigate allegations regarding the Program's activities and
expenditures, and the related access to needed persons, information, and documents will be
observed, and the Bank will initiate investigation at any point it considers necessary. The ERD
and the Bank have agreed, depending upon the nature of fraud and corruption, to pursue a range
of remedies within an agreed time frame.
45.    For the Program, given the range of possible types of fraud and corruption risk, all key
agencies agree it would be important to clarify roles and responsibilities over the intake,
tracking/monitoring, hand-off, and disposition of complaints around fraud and corruption, i.e.,
who takes care of what, until a fraud and corruption issue is resolved. The agreed modalities are:
ERD will write to the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General, ACC and NBR on a
quarterly basis to request them to share information against the agreed template on issues of
fraud and corruption. The entities will respond within 10 business days to ERD. The ERD will
deliver a report on fraud and corruption issues under the Program to the Bank every 6 months,
not later than 31 December and 30 June annually. ERD will maintain a database of the
information provided and will ensure that access to this database is restricted to authorized
personnel only. ERD will use this database to formulate the reports provided to the Bank every 6
months.
46.    To both assist in the roll-out of the VAT program, and to build program management
capacity in NBR, an international management consultant firm with deep experience in helping
national agencies roll-out VAT programs is being hired. The bid evaluation committee
overseeing procurement of this contract will screen closely for such experience and will require
the winning bidder to obtain prior approval from the Project Director, VAT Wing and the World
Bank before key staff identified in the bid submitted can be changed during the contract’s
execution. Technical assistance is also to be provided to the ACC to strengthen its capacity to
manage case files and develop an electronic filing system.
47.    Other governance and accountability mechanisms include: (a) the Comptroller and
Auditor General’s annual audit, where the detection of fraud and corruption and holding the
ministry or department accountable is part of the audit process; (b) the Right to Information Act,
which requires any public entity to proactively disclose information of general interest and to
respond to requests for information within a specified time, or face a judicial investigation and
possible fine; (c) the procurement grievance redress system, which records and responds to
complaints relating to a specific sector; and (d) the requirement for the DLI verification to be
undertaken by an independent entity.
48.       To control fraud and corruption risks identified in Para 53, NBR is ensuring facilities
for locking and controlling the bid documents prior to and during the evaluation will be available
to reduce tampering of bids. Given the critical importance of the Management Consultancy
contract that will control parameters of support to NBR by a firm, the Bank will closely review
the terms of reference to be established for the contract, to ensure that the experience required for
this job - previous VAT implementations – is highlighted. The bid evaluation committee will
also be instructed to conduct reference checks both formal and informal through networks of the
Bank and the committee. NBR will also ensure that the proposed consultants cannot be
substituted without approval from the Evaluation Team or the PD. An Energy Star rating for
hardware will also be required for all IT equipment to be procured, including desktops/laptops,
printers, etc., to ensure that lower quality equipment will not be procurement, and that equipment
will come from reputable vendors. This, and other measures, may also help to prevent collusion
with local firms. A pre-bid presentation to introduce the WB ACG at the pre bid meeting, and
distribution of the same to all vendors who have requested documents will put provisions of the
ACG out front and educate the vendors about the importance of following the rules on the large
procurement, as well as that of the regular IT procurement.


C.     Summary of Capacity Building of Risk Mitigation Measures
45.     Fiduciary risk mitigating measures to be included in the capacity building plan are
summarized in the Table 7 below. The DLI 6 actions are provided in the Annex 1 which shows
the entire disbursement table. In addition several measures to mitigate against risks are included
in the program action plan as follows:

                  Table 6: Program Action Plan Risk Mitigation Measures

 Action description                     DLI     Date              Responsible     Completion
                                                                  party           Measurement
 Form a 7 member tender                   ×        Within 1       NBR             Formal notification
 evaluation committee for IT                       month of                       of tender evaluation
 procurements with at least one                    program                        committee
 expert from the Bangladesh                      effectiveness                    composition and
 Computer Council and one from                                                    agreed TORs.
 the Bangladesh University of                                                     Verification of bid
 Engineering and Technology and 2                                                 evaluation
 international experts for all                                                    committee
 internationally competitive IT                                                   evaluation report
 procurements. The terms of                                                       and meeting
 reference for the tender evaluation                                              minutes by
 committee to be agreed with the                                                  independent
 Bank.                                                                            verification entity.

                                                                                  DLI 1.1.1 and 1.2.2
                                                                                  as “agreed
                                                                                  procurement
                                                                                  process?
 Install a fixed asset tracking                  Within 1 year    NBR             Notification to the
 software to record, track and                    of program                      Bank that software
 manage assets procured under the                effectiveness                    is being
 Program in VAT Wing of NBR,                                                      implemented.
 and train staff in its use.
 Provide report on key procurement                 Within 6       NBR             Notification and
 performance indicators using                     months of                       independent
 national procurement monitoring                   program                        verification by third
 system named PROMIS developed                   effectiveness                    party verification
 and maintained by CPTU                                                           entity.
 To facilitate reporting and                       Within 3       NBR, ERD        Notification and
 monitoring of the disposition of                 months of                       independent
 Fraud and Corruption complaints,                  program                        verification by third
 the ERD will collate all such                   effectiveness                    party verification
 complaints, and compile these into                                               entity.
 reports that will be provided to the
 Bank every six months, based on a
 format agreed with the Bank.
 Appointment of a focal person
Action description                    DLI   Date   Responsible   Completion
                                                   party         Measurement
within the ERD to trouble-shoot
fund release, and program
reporting issues including handling
of complaints and serious financial
irregularities. A TOR for the
person will be agreed with the
Bank.
                            Table 7: Program Action Plan Risk Mitigation Measures


Action description                                             Date            Responsible   Completion
                                                                               party         Measurement

Agree a standard terms of reference for the audit to be          Within 4      NBR           TOR submitted and
carried out by FAPAD.                                           months of                    independent
                                                               effectiveness                 verification
A group of auditors to be identified and trained by the
Bank in program audit.
Reconstitute and operationalize the audit committee in IRD       Within 4      NBR and       Notification of
of the Ministry of Finance; which will be responsible for       months of      IRD           Committee meetings
following up on significant audit irregularities and to          program                     and Minutes; and
facilitate the process to implement audit and other review     effectiveness                 independent
recommendations.                                                                             verification

Form a procurement core team (minimum 3 people) in               Within 3      NBR and       Notification and
NBR to conduct procurements under this program. The             months of      CPTU          attendance and
core team members will undergo procurement certification         program                     certification records
training arranged by the Central Procurement Technical         effectiveness                 of CPTU, and
Unit (CPTU). Prepare a procurement training plan for                                         independent
procurement core team in staffs.                                                             verification.
                                                                                             Procurement training
                                                                                             plan submitted.

International technical expertise is used to prepare or          Within 3      NBR           Notification and
review the technical specifications for all IT procurements.    months of                    independent
                                                                 program                     verification
                                                               effectiveness
                         Table 7: Program Action Plan Risk Mitigation Measures


Action description                                     Date            Responsible   Completion
                                                                       party         Measurement

Technical assistance capacity building program to be     Within 6      ACC and       Notification and
developed to strengthen ACC’s management of records     months of      ERD           independent
and ability to keep and track cases electronically.      program                     verification
                                                       effectiveness
Implementation Support Plan
A. Reviewing Implementation Progress

46.       The Bank team will conduct twice yearly implementation support missions. These will
target:

          i. Monitoring and Evaluation: Review of the results framework, the verification
               protocols and provide technical inputs.
          ii. Program action plan, capacity building plan. Provide the necessary training and
               support during implementation of the Program and review progress with these
               actions.
          iii. Support the implementation of the agreed anti-corruption reporting measures under
               the program and provide guidance in resolving any issues identified;
          iv. Review of procurement performance from annual performance assessments and
               provide procurement training and guidance on procurement to NBR;
          v. Financial Management: Review the fund utilization report and the assessment results
               reports as the basis for disbursements, audit reports, and on measures to address any
               financial irregularities in the audit report and monitoring their implementation;


B.    Resolving Implementation Issues and Institutional Capacity Building

47.    Risk-mitigation measures and actions to enhance capacity and performance of the NBR
form the backbone of the program action plan and respond to these issues. Activities are to be
undertaken at both central (NBR) and project implementation level (PIU) to build capacity to
address the issues identified in this assessment. The implementation of these results will be
monitored by Bank teams during the biannual implementation support missions.


C.    Monitoring the Performance of Fiduciary Systems and Audit Reports

48.     Most of Bank’s implementation support team members (fiduciary, safeguards, and
Governance and Anti-Corruption), including the Task Team Leader, are either based in the
Bangladesh Country Office or in the Region. This will ensure timely, efficient and effective
implementation support to the program. Formal implementation support missions and field visits
will be carried out semi-annually, or as deemed necessary.

          PAP and Capacity Building        Environment Specialist              4 SWs
                                           Social Specialist, FM,
                                           Procurement Specialist              4 SWs
          Fiscal flows                     Economist                           5 SWs

          e-Government and Citizen         Public Sector /Governance
          engagement                       Specialist                          4 SWs
D.    Monitoring of Changes in Fiduciary Risks to the Program

49.    The frequency and breadth of fiduciary systems implementation support missions,
expected to be twice a year in the beginning, may be varied in response to changes in the risks to
the program. It is expected that as implementation progresses, substantial improvements in
procurement and financial management capacities will reduce risks and may justify a reduced
supervision schedule. This will be determined by the Bank’s fiduciary systems team which will
continue to monitor compliance with the provisions of legal covenants.
                Annex 1: Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification Protocols

                  Total     As % of       DLI                                Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                Financin      Total      Baseline        Year 1          Year 2          Year 3         Year 4        Year 5    Year 6
                    g       Financin
                                                         2013/14         2014/15         2015/16        2016/17       2017/18   2018/19
                Allocated      g
                 to DLI     Amount
DLI 1.1: VAT                           VAT             1.1.1           1.1.2            1.1.3         1.1.4
Implementatio                          Implementatio   Vendor          At least         At least      At least 500
n Plan on                              n Plan          signed a        40,000           50,000        audit staff
Track                                  approved by     contract        taxpayers        monthly       trained on
                                       Minister of     providing       active VAT       VAT           COTS audit
                                       Finance         COTS VAT        taxpayers        returns are   modules
                                                       administratio   are registered   processed
                                                       n software.     in the COTS      by VAT
                                                                       VAT              Wing per
                                                                       database         month
Allocated US$
                  16.5         28                            7               4              4.5             1            0         0
million
DLI 1.2                                VAT             1.2.1           1.2.2            1.2.3         1.2.4
                                       Implementatio   Project         The              At least      At least 80
                                       n Plan          Management      following        50,000        percent of
                                       approved by     Consultants     administrativ    VAT           refunds
                                       Minister of     signed a        e support        payments      processed
                                       Finance         contract with   contracts        are           and disposed
                                                       vendor          signed: (a)      processed     of by VAT
                                                                       data center,     per month     administratio
                                                                       (b) contact      by VAT        n within 3
                                                                       center, (c)      Wing for 6    months.
                                                                       processing       consecutiv
                  Total     As % of     DLI                       Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                Financin      Total    Baseline   Year 1      Year 2          Year 3         Year 4      Year 5       Year 6
                    g       Financin              2013/14     2014/15         2015/16        2016/17     2017/18      2018/19
                Allocated      g
                 to DLI     Amount
                                                            center and       e months
                                                            (d) other IT
                                                            infrastructure
                                                            .
Allocated
                  16.5         28                    5            6              4.5            1           0             0
amount:
DLI 2:                                                                       2.1           2.2
Number of                                                                    Baseline      Baseline +   Baseline +   Baseline +
registered                                                                   established   15,000       30,000       30,000
active VAT                                                                   for number
taxpayers                                                                    of VAT
(thousands)                                                                  active
                                                                             taxpayers
                                                                             under new
                                                                             Law
Allocated
                    7          12                                                 1             3           3            0
amount:
DLI 3:                                                                       3.1           3.2          Baseline +   Baseline +
Number of                                                                    Baseline      Baseline +   10,000       10,000
taxpayers who                                                                established   4,000
filed on-line                                                                for number
                                                                             of VAT
                                                                             active
                                                                             taxpayers
                                                                             who file on
                                                                             line under
                                                                             new Law
                  Total     As % of     DLI                             Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                Financin      Total    Baseline     Year 1          Year 2        Year 3        Year 4          Year 5        Year 6
                    g       Financin                2013/14         2014/15       2015/16       2016/17         2017/18       2018/19
                Allocated      g
                 to DLI     Amount
Allocated
                    6          10                                                    1              2               3             0
amount:
DLI 4:                                                                          4.1           4.2
Percent of                                                                      Baseline      20 percent of    50 percent    50 percent
VAT Large                                                                       established   Large            of large      of large
Taxpayer Unit                                                                   for           Taxpayers        Taxpayers     Taxpayers
taxpayers who                                                                   percentage    pay on line      pay on line   pay on line
paid on-line                                                                    of Large
                                                                                Taxpayer
                                                                                Unit VAT
                                                                                taxpayers
                                                                                who pay on
                                                                                line
Allocated
                    6          10                                                    1              2               3             0
amount:
DLI 5-                                            Tax collection Tax            Tax           Tax collection   Tax           Tax
Greater                                           disclosed      collection     collection    disclosed        collection    collection
transparency                                                     disclosed      disclosed     Taxpayer         disclosed     disclosed
                                                  Baseline                                    satisfaction
                                                  taxpayer       Taxpayer       Contact       disclosed        Contact       Taxpayer
                                                  satisfaction   satisfaction   center and                     center and    satisfaction
                                                  disclosed      disclosed      Processing    Contact          Processing    disclosed
                                                                                center        center and       center
                                                                                performanc    Processing       Contact       Contact
                                                                                e disclosed   center           center        center and
                                                                                              Contact          performanc    Processing
                                                                                              center           e disclosed   center
              Total     As % of     DLI                              Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
            Financin      Total    Baseline     Year 1           Year 2         Year 3          Year 4          Year 5        Year 6
                g       Financin                2013/14          2014/15        2015/16         2016/17         2017/18       2018/19
            Allocated      g
             to DLI     Amount
                                                                                             performance                     Contact
                                                                                             disclosed                       center
                                                                                                                             performanc
                                                                                                                             e disclosed




Allocated
                3          5                       0.5              0.5            0.5            0.5              0.5           0.5
amount:
DLI 6-                                        6.1
Fiduciary
                                              At least 25      At least 50     At least 75   At least 75       At least 75   At least 75
Actions                                       percent of       percent of      percent of    percent of        percent of    percent of
                                              Program NCB      Program         Program       Program NCB       Program       Program
                                              contracts are    NCB             NCB           contracts are     NCB           NCB
                                              done through     contracts are   contracts     done through      contracts     contracts
                                              e-GP             done through    are done      e-GP              are done      are done
                                                               e-GP            through e-    All significant   through e-    through e-
                                                                               GP            audit             GP            GP
                                              Submit
                                              quarterly fund   All             All           objections        All           All
                                              utilization      significant     significant   resolved in 6     significant   significant
                                              report to        audit           audit         months            audit         audit
                                              Finance          objections      objections    Submit            objections    objections
                                              Division and     resolved in 6   resolved in   quarterly fund    resolved in   resolved in
               Total     As % of     DLI                             Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
             Financin      Total    Baseline     Year 1          Year 2          Year 3          Year 4         Year 5         Year 6
                 g       Financin                2013/14         2014/15         2015/16         2016/17        2017/18        2018/19
             Allocated      g
              to DLI     Amount
                                               complete fund   months.          6 months       utilization     6 months       6 months
                                               release                                         reports to      Submit         Submit
                                               processes                                       Finance         quarterly      quarterly
                                                               Submit           Submit
                                               after each                                      Division and    fund           fund
                                                               quarterly fund   quarterly
                                               quarter.                                        complete fund   utilization    utilization
                                                               utilization      fund
                                                                                               release         reports to     reports to
                                                               reports to       utilization
                                                                                               processes       Finance        Finance
                                                               Finance          reports to
                                                                                               after each      Division       Division
                                                               Division and     Finance
                                                                                               quarter.        and            and
                                                               complete         Division
                                                               fund release     and                            complete       complete
                                                               processes        complete                       fund release   fund release
                                                               after each       fund release                   processes      processes
                                                               quarter.         processes                      after each     after each
                                                                                after each                     quarter.       quarter.
                                                                                quarter.
Allocated
                 5          8                       1                1               1              1               1              0
amount:
Total
Financing       60         100                     13.5            11.5            13.5            10.5           10.5            0.5
Allocated:
#   Disbursement        Definition/           Scalability of
                                                                Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
    Linked              Description of        Disbursemen
    Indicator           achievement           ts                     Data        Verification                     Procedure
                                              (Yes/No)         source/agency        Entity
1   VAT                 Annual plan is on     No               NBR prepares     Private firm     World Bank hires third party contractor
    Implementation      track (agreed                          bi-annual        or individuals   who reviews and verifies reports for the
    Plan is on track    milestones                             reports and                       verification of 1.1.1 and 1.2.1. ERD hires
                        achieved)                              submits to the                    third party contractor who reviews and
                                                               ERD and Third                     verifies reports for all other indicators.
                                                               Party                             Third Party submits its draft verification
                                                               Verification                      report to the NBR, ERD and the World
                                                               Entity                            Bank simultaneously and neither party is
                                                                                                 allowed to modify the report apart from
                                                                                                 correcting factual errors. World Bank seeks
                                                                                                 comments from IMF and IFC.
2   Number of new       Once new VAT is       Yes              NBR prepares     Private firm     ERD hires third party contractor who
    registered active   open for                               reports and                       reviews and verifies reports. Third Party
    VAT taxpayers       registration;                          submits to the                    submits its draft verification report to the,
                        registered VAT                         World Bank                        NBR, ERD and the World Bank
                        taxpayers that file                    and ERD and                       simultaneously and neither party is allowed
                        returns.                               Third Party                       to modify the report apart from correcting
                                                               Verification                      factual errors. World Bank reviews and
                                                               Entity                            makes recommendation to Country
                                                                                                 Director.
3   Number of           Number of             Yes              NBR prepares     Private firm     ERD hires third party contractor who
    taxpayers who       registered VAT                         reports and                       reviews and verifies reports. Third Party
    file on-line        taxpayers who file                     submits to the                    submits its draft verification report to the,
                        returns on line                        World Bank                        NBR, ERD and the World Bank
                                                               and ERD and                       simultaneously and neither party is allowed
                                                               Third Party                       to modify the report apart from correcting
                                                               Verification                      factual errors. World Bank reviews and
#   Disbursement      Definition/           Scalability of
                                                              Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
    Linked            Description of        Disbursemen
    Indicator         achievement           ts                    Data        Verification                   Procedure
                                            (Yes/No)         source/agency      Entity
                                                             Entity                          makes recommendation to Country
                                                                                             Director.
4   Percentage of     Percentage of         Yes              NBR prepares     Private firm   ERD hires third party contractor who
    large taxpayers   registered VAT                         reports and                     reviews and verifies reports. Third Party
    who pay on-line   taxpayers in the                       submits to the                  submits its report to the, NBR, ERD and the
                      Large Taxpayer                         World Bank                      World Bank simultaneously and neither
                      category who pay                       and ERD                         party is allowed to modify the report apart
                      VAT on line                            and/or Third                    from correcting factual errors. World Bank
                                                             Party                           reviews and makes recommendation to
                                                             Verification                    Country Director.
                                                             Entity
5   Increased         Review of            No                NBR prepares     Private firm   ERD hires third party contractor who
    transparency      compliance against                     reports and                     reviews and verifies reports. Third Party
                      Proactive Disclosure                   submits to the                  submits its report to the, NBR, ERD and the
                      Rules and additional                   World Bank                      World Bank simultaneously and neither
                      disclosures on                         and ERD                         party is allowed to modify the report apart
                      website                                and/or Third                    from correcting factual errors. World Bank
                                                             Party                           reviews and makes recommendation to
                                                             Verification                    Country Director.
                                                             Entity
6   Fiduciary         All measures agreed   No               NBR prepares     Private firm   ERD hires third party contractor who
    measures          to in PAP for                          reports and                     reviews and verifies reports. Third Party
    completed         fiduciary measures                     submits to the                  submits its report to the, NBR, ERD and the
                      have been                              World Bank                      World Bank simultaneously and neither
                      undertaken in                          and ERD                         party is allowed to modify the report apart
                      implementing                           and/or Third                    from correcting factual errors. World Bank
                      agency                                 Party                           reviews and makes recommendation to
                                                             Verification                    Country Director.
#   Disbursement   Definition/      Scalability of
                                                      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
    Linked         Description of   Disbursemen
    Indicator      achievement      ts                    Data        Verification                   Procedure
                                    (Yes/No)         source/agency      Entity
                                                     Entity
                                            Annex 3: Program Procurement Arrangement
            Description of Procurement
                                                                                                  Indicative Dates
             Package as per DPP/ TPP                       Procurement Source
Package                                                                       Estimated
                                            Unit   Quantity Method &     of
  No.                                                                           Cost Not Used Invitation Signing Completion
                      GOODS                                   (Type)   Funds              in     for        of
                                                                                                                 of Contract
                                                                                        GOODS Tender Contract

  1                      2                   3        4         5         6        7       8        9       10         11

 GD1      Furniture for VAT Offices          Set      1       NCB       GoB      1.57            14-May 14-Aug       14-Nov

          Generators and Air Conditioners
 GD2                                        Lot       1       NCB       GoB      2.70            14-May 14-Aug       14-Nov
          for VAT Offices

          Desktop Computer and Related
          Equipment for VAT Offices /
 GD3                                        Lot       1        ICB       PA      4.49            14-Jan   14-May     14-Aug
          Call Centre NBR Taxpayer
          Services Team

          Data Centre and Network
 GD 4                                       Lot           1   NCB        PA      3.37            14-Jan   14-May     14-Aug
          Equipment

                                                                                                 15-Sep- 01 Nov’
 GD4      Project Vehicles                  Lot       1       NCB       GoB      0.24                            Dec’2013
                                                                                                   13       13

 GD5      Contact Center Equipment          Lot       1       NCB        PA      0.05            14-Jan   14-May     14-Aug

 GD6      Software VAT Offices              Lot       1       NCB        PA      0.40            14-Jan   14-May     14-Aug
  GD7      Software Data Center           Lot       1        ICB       PA      0.44              14-Jan   14-May   14-Aug

  GD8      Software Contact Center        Unit      1       NCB        PA      0.06              14-Jan   14-May   14-Aug

  GD9      Tax Integrated System          Unit      1        ICB       PA      18.33            13-Aug    13-Dec   15-Dec

Total Value of Goods Procurement                                                 31.63



             Description of Procurement
                                                                                              Indicative Dates
              Package as per DPP/ TPP                    Procurement Source
 Package                                                                    Estimated
                                          Unit   Quantity Method &     of
   No.                                                                        Cost Not Used Invitation Signing Completion
                      WORKS                                 (Type)   Funds              in     for        of
                                                                                                               of Contract
                                                                                      GOODS Tender Contract

  WD1      Refurbishment                  Lump     NA        ICB      GoB      3.13       -    March’14 May’14     April’15



             Description of Procurement
                                                                                                Indicative Dates
              Package as per DPP/ TPP                    Procurement Source
 Package                                                                    Estimated
                                          Unit   Quantity Method &     of
   No.           NONCONSULTING                                                Cost Invitation Invitation Signing Completion
                                                            (Type)   Funds                       for        of
                   SERVICES                                                           for EOI                    of Contract
                                                                                               Tender Contract
          Data Center Management
   SD1                                    number   1         OCB       PA   1.47             14-Jan   14-May   14-Aug
          (Outsourced)


   SD2     Network Bandwidth Service      number   1       OTM (NCT)   PA   5.06             14-Jan   14-May   14-Aug


          Contact Center Management
   SD3                                    number   1          ICB      PA   0.58             14-Jan   14-May   14-Aug
          (Outsourced)


          IT Managed Services (
   SD4                                    number   1          ICB      PA   4.55
          Outsourced)

          Processing Centre Management
  SD 5                                    number   1          ICB      PA   0.99             14-Jan   14-May   1-Aug
          (Outsourced)

          Consultants                                                       4.06
  SD 6                                    number             QCBS      PA           13-Sep   13-Dec   13-Mar   15-Dec
          Project Team Consultancy                     1

Total Value of Services Procurement                                         16.72

Total Value of the Program Procurement:                                     51.48
                         Annex 4: Expenditure Framework, Consolidated Program Expenditures, US$ million 2014-2018


Funder Classification     Sub-category    2013/14    2014/15     2015/16      2016/17     2017/18     Total         BDT
                                                                                                                    Lakh
                                                                                                                    Total

GoB        Capital        Furniture                  2.79                                             2.79          2207

                          IT hardware                0.17                                             0.17          137

                          Vehicles        0.18       0.01        0.01         0.01        0.01        0.24          188

           Goods and      Goods           0.00       4.20        0.70         0.26        0.26        5.43          4288
           Services

                          Office                     3.09                                             3.09          2440
                          Refurbishment

           Contingency    price           0.01       0.82        0.06         0.02        0.02        0.94          741

                          physical        0.00       0.21        0.01         0.01        0.01        0.23          185

Subtotal                                  0.21       11.29       0.79         0.30        0.30        12.89         10185

IDA        Capital        Furniture                  0.00                                             0.00          0.08

                          generators                    1.67                                             1.67       1320

                          IT hardware                   3.97        2.32         0.75        0.33        7.38       5828

                          IT software        2.70       13.31       2.93         0.05                    18.98      14995
           Goods and     Consulting    0.57   2.29    1.14                  4.00    3163
           Services

                         Other goods          0.91    0.10                  1.01    798

                         IT services   1.50   3.65    2.86    2.86   2.86   13.71   10831

                         Training      0.50   4.25    0.25                  5.00    3950

           Contingency   Price         0.42   2.40    0.77    0.29   0.25   4.14    3271

                         physical      0.11   0.60    0.19    0.07   0.06   1.04    818

Subtotal                               5.80   33.05   10.56   4.01   3.50   56.93   44973

NBR expenditures total                 6.00   44.34   11.35   4.32   3.81   69.82   55159

IDA        Goods and     Consulting           0.5     1       1      0.5    3.00    2370
           Services

ERD expenditures total                        0.5     1       1      0.5    3.00    2370

Total                                   6     44.84   12.35   5.32   4.31   72.82   170217
                              Annex 5: PROMIS Indicators
SN       Indicator            Process Indicator             Performance Data
         Category

     Invitation for Bid   Advertisement of Bid         1. Percentage of Invitation for
                          opportunities in newspaper      Bid (IFT) published in
                                                          newspaper

                          Advertisement of Bid         2. Percentage of Invitation for
                          opportunities in CPTU’s         Bid (above threshold)
                          website                         advertised in CPTU’s
1                                                         website

                          Bids following GoB           3. Percentage of Bids
                          procurement Rules               following GoB
                                                          procurement Rules

                          Bid following Development    4. Percentage of Bids
                          Partner Rules                   following Development
                                                          Partner Rules

     Bid Submission       Multiple locations           5. Percentage of Bids allowed
                          submission Bids                 to submit in multiple
                                                          locations

                          Bid preparation time in      6. Average number of days
                          open Bidding method             between publishing of
                                                          advertisement and Bid
                                                          submission deadline

                          Bid time compliance          7. Percentage of Bids having
2                                                         sufficient Bid submission
                                                          time

                          Sale of Bid documents        8. Average number of Bidders
                                                          purchased Bid documents

                          Bidder Participation         9. Average number of Bidders
                                                          submitted Bids

                          Bidder Participation Index   10. Ratio of number of Bid
                                                         submission and number of
SN       Indicator        Process Indicator          Performance Data
         Category

                                                  Bid document sold


     Bid Opening     Bid Opening Committee      11. Percentage of cases BOC
     Committee (BOC) formation                    included at least ONE
     and Bid                                      member from BEC
     Evaluation
     Committee(BEC) Bid Evaluation Committee    12. Percentage of cases BEC
                     formation                    formed by Contract
3
                                                  Approving Authority

                      External member in BEC    13. Percentage of cases BEC
                                                  included TWO external
                                                  members outside the
                                                  procuring entity

     Bid Evaluation   Bid evaluation time       14. Average number of days
                                                  between Bid opening and
                                                  completion of evaluation

                      Compliance of Bid         15. Percentage of cases Bid
                      evaluation time             evaluation has been
                                                  completed within timeline

4                     Bid Acceptance            16. Average number of
                                                  responsive Bids

                      Re-Bidding                17. Percentage of cases BEC
                                                  recommended for re-
                                                  Bidding

                      Bid Cancellation          18. Percentage of cases where
                                                  Bid process cancelled

     Bid Evaluation   Bid Evaluation Approval   19. Average number of days
     Report (BER)     time                        taken between submission
5    approval                                     of Bid Evaluation and
                                                  approval of contract
                                                  (contract signing date)
SN      Indicator         Process Indicator           Performance Data
        Category

                      Compliance of financial    20. Average number of Bids
                      delegation                   approved by the proper
                                                   financial delegated
                                                   authority

                      Submission of evaluation   21. Percentage of cases BEC
                      report to appropriate        submitted report directly to
                      authority                    the contract approving
                                                   authority

                      BER approval compliance    22. Percentage of cases
                                                   contract award decision
                                                   made within timeline by
                                                   Contract Approving
                                                   Authority

                      Additional review of BER   23. Percentage of cases BER
                                                   reviewed by
                                                   person/committee other
                                                   than the Contract
                                                   Approving Authority

                      Higher tier approval       24. Percentage of Bids
                                                   approved by higher tier
                                                   than the Contract
                                                   Approving Authority

     Contract Award   Time for issuance of NOA   25. Average number of days
                      to Bidder                    between final approval and
                                                   Notification of Award
                                                   (NOA)
6
                      Bid processing lead time   26. Average number of days
                                                     between Bid opening and
                                                     Notification of award
                                                     (NOA)
SN       Indicator           Process Indicator            Performance Data
         Category

                        Total Bid processing time    27. Average number of days
                                                         between Invitation for Bid
                                                         (IFT) and Notification of
                                                         Award

                        Publication of award         28. Percentage of Contract
                        information                      awards published in
                                                         CPTU’s website

                        Efficiency in Contract       29. Percentage of contracts
                        Award                            awarded within initial Bid
                                                         validity period

     Delivery/Complet   Delivery time                30. Percentage of Contracts
     ion                                                 completed/ delivered
                                                         within the original
                                                         schedule as mentioned in
                                                         the contract

                        Liquidated damage            31. Percentage of Contracts
7
                                                         having liquidated damage
                                                         imposed for delayed
                                                         delivery/completion

                        Completion rate              32. Percentage of Contracts
                                                         fully completed and
                                                         accepted

     Payment            Payment release compliance   33. Average number of days
                                                         taken to release payment

                        Late payment                 34. Percentage of cases
                                                         (considering each
8                                                        installment as a case) with
                                                         delayed payment

                        Interest paid for delayed    35. Percentage of Contracts
                        payment                          where interest for delayed
                                                         payments was made
 SN        Indicator            Process Indicator              Performance Data
           Category

      Complaints           Bid procedure complaints      36. Percentage of Bid
                                                             procedures with
                                                             complaints

                           Resolution of complaints      37. Percentage of complaints
                           with award modification           resulting in modification
                                                             of award
 9
                           Resolution of complaints      38. Percentage of cases
                                                             complaints have been
                                                             resolved

                           Independent Review Panel      39. Percentage of cases
                                                             review panel’s decision
                                                             upheld

      Contract             Contract                      40. Percentage of contract
 10
      amendments           Amendment/variation               amendments/variations

      Contract dispute     Unresolved Disputes           41. Percentage of Contracts
 11
      resolution                                             with unresolved disputes

      F&C                  Fraud & Corruption            42. Percentage of cases F&C
 12
                                                             detected

      Procurement          Procurement training          43. Average number of
      Management                                             trained procurement staff
      Capacity*                                              in each procuring entity

                                                         44. Percentage of procuring
                                                             entity which has at least
 13                                                          ONE trained/certified
                                                             procurement staff

                                                         45. Total number of
                                                             procurement persons in
                                                             the organization with
                                                             procurement training.

*Note1: Procurement training means detailed training either on goods and services or works and
services or a combination of these with an approximate duration of 80 hrs. (10 working days)
Note2: Results of all indicators will be generated for agency wise, ICB and NCB wise and
financial delegation as per PPR.
                                  Glossary

   Acronym   Full Name
ACC          Anti-Corruption Commission
CGA          of Accounts Controller General
VIP          Revenue Mobilization Program
FAPAD        Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate
FM           Financial Management
MoF          Ministry of Finance
NBR          National Board of Revenue
OCAG         Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General
PAC          Public Accounts Committee of Parliament
RTI          Right to Information
SPEMP        Strengthening Public Expenditure Management Program
DOSA         Dollar Special Account
PFM          Public Financial Management
SFYP         Sixth Five Year Plan
CPTU         Central Procurement Technical Unit
PVIP         Procurement Risk Mitigation Plan
CAO          Chief Accounts Officer
TSA          Treasury Single Account
IBAS         Integrated Budgeting and Accounting System
