                                                   REPORT NO: 89252




                 UNITED MEXICAN STATES

                     STATE OF OAXACA




           FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT OF THE

OAXACA WATER AND SANITATION SECTOR MODERNIZATION PROGRAM




                   Prepared by the World Bank

                          March, 2014
The Assessment of Fiduciary Systems of the Oaxaca Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Program
(P145578) has been prepared by Irina Luca (Lead Procurement Specialist, LCSPT), Diomedes Berroa
(Senior Operations Officer, LCSPT), Xiomara Morel (Senior Financial Management Specialist, LCSFM),
Dmitri Gourfinkel (Financial Management Specialist, LCSFM), Lisa Bhansali, Regional Adviser for
Governance/Anti-corruption (LCSOS), Gabriel Peñaloza (Procurement Specialist, LSCPT), and Dora
García (Procurement Specialist, consultant, LCSPT).




                                                2
                         ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADOSAPACO   Administración Directa de Obras y Servicios de Agua Potable y Alcantarillado de la
            Ciudad de Oaxaca
            (Direct Administration of Drinking Water and Sewerage Works and Services of the
            City of Oaxaca)
APAZU       Programa de Agua Potable, Alcantarillado, y Saneamiento en las Zonas Urbanas
            (Water, Sewerage, and Drainage in Urban Areas Program)
ASEO        Auditoría Superior del Estado de Oaxaca
            (State Supreme Audit Institution)
ASF         Auditoría Superior de la Federación
            (Federal Supreme Audit Institution)
ATI         Access to Information
BANOBRAS    Banco Nacional de Obras y Servicios Públicos
            (National Bank of Public Works and Services)
CEA         Comisión Estatal del Agua
            (State Water Commission)
CONAC       Consejo Nacional de Armonización Contable
            (National Council of Accounting Harmonization)
CONAGUA     Comisión Nacional de Agua
            (National Water Commission)
F/C         Fraud and Corruption
FM          Financial Management
FMIS        Financial Management Information System
GoO         Government of Oaxaca
GRP         Governmental Resource Planning
IPF         Investment Project Financing
IVA         Independent Verification Agent
LAASSP      Ley de Adquisiciones, Arrendamientos y Servicios del Sector Público
            (Law of Acquisitions, Leases and Services of the Public Sector)
LOPSRM      Ley de Obras Públicas y Servicios Relacionados con las Mismas
            (Law of Public Works and Related Services)
PFM         Public Financial Management
PAP         Program Action Plan
PforR       Program for Results
RBA         Risk Based Approach
SAPAO       Servicios de Agua Potable y Alcantarillado de Oaxaca
            (Water supply and sewerage services of Oaxaca)
SCTG        Secretaría de la Contraloría y Transparencia Gubernamental del Estado de Oaxaca
            (Secretariat of the Comptroller and Governmental Transparency of the State of
            Oaxaca)
SEFIN       Secretaría de Finanzas del Estado de Oaxaca
            (Secretariat of Finance of the State of Oaxaca)
SFP         Secretaría de la Función Pública
            (Secretariat of the Public Function)
SHCP        Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público
            (Federal Ministry of Finance)
SINFRA      Secretaría de las Infraestructuras y el Ordenamiento Territorial Sustentable del
            Estado de Oaxaca
            (Secretariat of the Infrastructures and the Sustainable Territorial Planning of the State




                                              3
          of Oaxaca)
SINPRES   Sistema Integral de Presupuesto
          (Budgetary Integral System)
TA        Technical Assistance
WSS       Water Supply and Sanitation




                                            4
                                                               UNITED MEXICAN STATES

               OAXACA WATER AND SANITATION SECTOR MODERNIZATION PROGRAM

                                                      FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT

                                                                                  Contents




I.          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................................................................................ 6

II.         BACKGROUND AND PROGRAM LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS....................................... 7
       A.      Background ................................................................................................................................................ 7
       B.      Legal Framework ....................................................................................................................................... 8
       C.      Institutional arrangements ........................................................................................................................ 9

III.        PROGRAM FIDUCIARY PERFORMANCE ................................................................................................. 10
       A.      Planning and budgeting .......................................................................................................................... 11
       B.      Budget Execution – Procurement ............................................................................................................ 12
       C.      Transparency ........................................................................................................................................... 17
       D.      Accounting and financial reporting ......................................................................................................... 17
       E.      Treasury management and funds flow .................................................................................................... 18
       F.      Internal controls and internal audit ......................................................................................................... 19
       G.      Control systems in procurement .............................................................................................................. 20
       H.      Program audit.......................................................................................................................................... 22

IV.         FRAUD ANDCORRUPTION RISKS ........................................................................................................... 22

V.          FIDUCIARY RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES ................................................................................... 23

VI.         IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT ................................................................................................................ 24
       Annex 1: Program Action Plan .......................................................................................................................... 25
                                                               MEXICO

            OAXACA WATER AND SANITATION SECTOR MODERNIZATION PROGRAM

                                          FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT



       I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The fiduciary systems supporting the MAS Oaxaca Program provide reasonable assurance that the
Program funds will be used for the purposes intended with due attention to the principles of economy,
efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability, given the fiduciary arrangements among the
implementing and executing entities of the Program. These arrangements include key elements for an
adequate implementation of the Program and are addressing risks, including of fraud and corruption, and
define how the risks would be mitigated during implementation of the Program. Based on the fiduciary
risks identified as part of the fiduciary systems assessment, the overall fiduciary risk after mitigating
measures is Substantial, and the salient aspects of the fiduciary systems assessment are summarized
below and described in the sections following this Executive Summary.

Public Financial Management of the Mexican Federal administration relies on open and orderly Financial
Management (FM) systems based on a strong legal framework, policies, and procedures for execution of
public expenditures. These FM country systems are partially replicated in the State of Oaxaca and, in
particular, in the Secretariat of Finance (Secretaria de Finanzas, SEFIN), which will be coordinating the
overall implementation of the Program, and in the executing entities, the State Water Commission
(Comision Estatal de Agua, CEA) and the Oaxaca Metropolitan Area Water Utility (SAPAO), which will
be responsible for carrying out technical activities under the Program. Although SEFIN has limited
experience in managing Bank-financed operations, and CEA and SAPAO have no such experience, the
overall conclusion of the FM assessment is that SEFIN, CEA and SAPAO 1 have suitable financial
management arrangements, which include the key elements for an adequate implementation of the
Program, such as: (i) a formal process of budget planning and execution based on comprehensive legal
and normative frameworks; (ii) the approval of the State Expenditures Budget on an annual basis by the
State Legislature; (iii) an integrated budgeting and accounting system (SINPRES), which allows for the
management and control of financial resources; (iv) organizational structures with adequate segregation
of duties, documented in the appropriate Functions and Organizational Manuals, and (v) experienced
staff.

Moreover, BANOBRAS, which will be the legal borrower, will provide implementation support and
oversight to SEFIN, drawing on its many years of experience in the implementation of Bank-financed
projects. Given the proposed implementation arrangements for the Program, and to ensure adequate
planning, managing, control and generation of relevant and reliable financial information under it, the
assessment identified areas for strengthening of the systems and institutional capacity of SEFIN, CEA and
SAPAO.

Likewise, the procurement system provides reasonable assurance that the fiduciary principles of
transparency, economy efficiency and integrity will be met under the Program. It also provides an
adequate mechanism to ensure the right of appeal in individual bidding processes. The applicable


1
    When SAPAO is referred, consider that the assessment was carried out for the entity formerly named ADOSAPACO.




                                                                     6
procurement procedures both Federal and State are enshrined in the Article 134 of the Constitution of the
United Mexican States that defines the principles governing procurement at national level, mandating that
resources for procurement of goods, works and services be administered with efficiency, effectiveness,
and probity. Competitive bidding is identified as the default method. The agencies in charge of
procurement under the Program, CEA and SAPAO have reasonable capacity built on their historic
experience of conducting similar programs consisting mostly of small works contracts and related
services. The assessment has identified however some risks that if addressed can increase the ability of
the Program to deliver timely and quality services to the Program beneficiaries: delays in budget
allocation of federal and state programs, especially for the APAZU, challenges to competition, contract
implementation issues that increase the transactions cost of procurement and result in less optimal
outcomes.

The proposed actions to mitigate the fiduciary risks identified during the assessment and performance
indicators to monitor their implementation are included in the Program Action Plan (Annex 1) and are
attached to this assessment. The actions included in the PAP are consistent with the federal and state
financial management and procurement systems contributing to their further strengthening.

      II. BACKGROUND AND PROGRAM LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

         A.       Background

The Bank operation, called Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Modernization Program (MAS2 Oaxaca),
is using a hybrid Program for Results (PforR) / Investment Project Financing (IPF) financial instrument,
the latter funding a Technical Assistance (TA) Component supporting the achievement of the
Development Objective of the Program. The use of both instruments is complying with the requirements
of OP/BP 9.00 and OP/BP 10.00 respectively.

Through this operation, the Bank will support a portion of the Government of Oaxaca’s (GoO) Water
Supply and Sanitation (WSS) program focusing on (i) the modernization of the WSS sector institutional
framework, financed through the State’s own financing stream, and, (ii) the improvement of service
quality and financial sustainability of water utilities in selected urban areas, financed through the Water,
Sewerage, and Drainage in Urban Areas Program (Programa de Agua Potable, Alcantarillado, y
Saneamiento en las Zonas Urbanas, APAZU) of the National Water Commission (Comisión Nacional de
Agua, CONAGUA).

Through the PforR instrument complemented by the TA Component, the Bank will support an integrated
set of institutional reforms, institutional strengthening activities and investments in participating
institutions to achieve the Program’s objectives. These Program’s activities have been structured in four
Results Areas: (i) Modernization of the legal and regulatory framework of the WSS sector in the State, (ii)
Improvement of water services in Oaxaca Metropolitan Area, (iii) Improvement of water services in
secondary towns, and (iv) Improvement of information in rural areas.

For Results Areas 2 and 3, the Program will finance the state contribution for the APAZU, which is a
well-established federal governmental program channeled through CONAGUA to the eligible State Water
Commissions and local water utilities. APAZU operates based on annually revised Operation Rules
(Reglas de Operación) issued by CONAGUA.




2
    Modernización del sector Agua potable y Saneamiento de Oaxaca (MAS Oaxaca)




                                                      7
         B.          Legal Framework

The MAS Oaxaca Program will be subject to an ample set of legal and regulatory financial management
and procurement arrangements.

With respect to the financial management arrangements, the following Laws and regulations are relevant:
(a) the annual Expenditure Budget Act and Public Revenue Law, (b) the State Budget and Fiscal
Responsibility Law, (c) the Fiscal Coordination Law, and (d) the General Law on Government
Accounting. Each of these legal considerations have been taken into account in the Program FM
arrangements, and their impact on the Program are described within each of the dimensions (budget,
accounting, internal controls, transparency, external oversight) discussed in the performance section of
this assessment.

With regard to the procurement arrangements, article 134 of the Constitution of the United Mexican
States establishes the applicable principles that rule procurement at national level (Federal or State),
determining that resources for procurement of goods, works and services must be administered with
efficiency, effectiveness, and probity to satisfy their objectives. This article determines that, as a rule,
procurement shall be carried out through open competitive bidding procedures. Eligible activities under
the MAS Oaxaca Program will be procured observing two different procurement legal frameworks: (i)
Result Areas 2 and 3 – Federal legislation and APAZU operation rules, and (ii) Result Areas 1 and 4 -
Oaxaca State legislation.

In the case of those contracts financed with federal proceeds (such is the case of APAZU- Result Areas 2
and 3 of the Program3), the applicable law for civil works and related services is the Law of Public Works
and Related Services (LOPSRM)4; and for goods and services, the Law of Acquisitions, Leases and
Services of the Public Sector (LAASSP)5, complemented with their respective Regulations6 and General
Application Administrative Manuals7.

For contracts financed with Oaxaca’s State resources (Result Areas 1 and 48), the regulatory framework is
set out in the Law on Public Works and Related Services of the State of Oaxaca9 and Law for
Acquisitions, Leases and Services of the State of Oaxaca10.

Both the Federal and State legislation distinguish between consulting services related to civil works and
other types of consulting services.

The Federal system has developed regulations promoting open competition, transparency, publication of
all tenders, through a federal electronic platform CompraNet, which is publically accessible. For
procurement of civil works and goods, national competitive process is the procurement method by default
while other less competitive processes can be exceptionally used (contract amounts under determined
thresholds or specific exceptions determined by law). However, the total value of awards under these less


3
  Civil works, consulting services and goods
4
  Published in the Official Journal of the Federation (Diario Oficial de la Federación) 01/04/2000, most recent amendments 04/09/2012.
5
  Published in the Official Journal of the Federation (Diario Oficial de la Federación) 01/04/2000, most recent amendments 01/16/2012
6
  Published in the Official Journal of the Federation (Diario Oficial de la Federación) 07/28/2010
7
  Published in the Official Journal of the Federation (Diario Oficial de la Federación) 08/09/2010, most recent amendments 11/21/12
8
  Exclusively consulting services
9
  Published in the Official Newspaper of the State of Oaxaca (Periódico Oficial del Estado de Oaxaca) 09/11/2001, most recent amendments
12/30/2008
10
   Published in the Official Newspaper of the State of Oaxaca (Periódico Oficial del Estado de Oaxaca) 04/19/2008, most recent amendments
02/09/2013




                                                                   8
competitive methods (restrictive invitation to at least 3 suppliers or contractors and direct award) cannot
exceed 30% of the annual budget for works, goods and services. As a rule for consulting services,
invitation to at least 3 consultants is the applicable procedure and merit point evaluation is mandatory.

While noting that the same general constitutional principles apply to Oaxaca’s procurement legal
framework, there are certain differences between the Federal and the State procurement systems that may
have effect on the way the government of Oaxaca will carry out procurement procedures with Federal or
with State resources. For the purpose of the Program, only those differences that may have impact on the
Program will be further mentioned, fundamentally referred to consulting services considered for Result
Areas 1 and 4 of the Program.

An important difference between the Federal and the State legal framework is the procurement method to
be used. In the case of procurement of consulting services not related to civil works, State legislation
considers consulting services equal to any other service and the default method is competitive bidding,
except if the estimated amount of the contract is below the annually established threshold for competitive
bidding11. Merit point evaluation is not permitted and award is to the lowest evaluated bid. In the case of
procurement of consulting services related to civil works, direct award is endorsed by law almost as a
default method, nevertheless information obtained during the assessment notes that this has not been the
rule for procurement of consulting services in the executing agencies and that invitation to at least three
consultants is generally the applied method.

Another discrepancy is that under Oaxaca’s legal system State financed contracts are awarded to those
companies or persons already registered in rosters (padrones) administrated by the Secretariat of the
Infrastructures and the Sustainable Territorial Planning (Secretaría de Infraestructura, SINFRA)
applicable to consulting services related to civil works-, and by the Secretariat of Administration
(Secretaría de Administración) - for any other type of consulting service; thus procurement of consulting
services subject to Oaxaca’s legal regulations will require registration in the State Contractor Register for
contract award purposes.

         C.         Institutional arrangements

Due to the legal framework for international indebtness for the Mexican States, the legal borrower of the
loan will be Banco Nacional de Obras y Servicios Públicos (BANOBRAS), which, in turn, will on lend to
the State of Oaxaca the proceeds of the loan. Given that the borrower itself is BANOBRAS, the Federal
Ministry of Finance (SHCP) will not designate a financial agent, and BANOBRAS would be responsible
for managing and transferring loan proceeds to the Secretariat of Finance of the State of Oaxaca
(Secretaría de Finanzas – SEFIN), while providing overall implementation support and oversight,
including the fiduciary aspects of the Program.

Implementation of the Program involves three government entities SEFIN, CEA and the Oaxaca
Metropolitan Area Water Utility (SAPAO12, formerly ADOSAPACO). SEFIN will be the responsible
entity for the overall coordination and implementation of the MAS Oaxaca Operation. SEFIN will
coordinate the technical implementation of the Program activities with the two other executing entities:
CEA and SAPAO on the implementation of their respective activities financed through the Program.
While Result Area 1 will be implemented by both CEA and SAPAO, Result Area 2 will be executed by
SAPAO and Result Areas 3 and 4 will be executed by CEA.


11
   This threshold was approximately USD140 thousand in 2013.
12
   On October 31, 2013 the State congress approved the law creating SAPAO, an autonomous State water utility, replacing ADOSAPACO, a
State department. When SAPAO is referred, consider that the assessment was carried out for the entity formerly named ADOSAPACO.




                                                                   9
The MAS Oaxaca Program, implementing agencies, eligible activities and applicable legal framework for
procurement activities, can be summarized as follows:

                      Table 1: Implementing agencies, eligible activities and legal framework

                                                                  IBRD/
                                               Implementing      APAZU                        Legal   Types of
           MAS Oaxaca Program                                                    TOTAL
                                                  agency         (federal                   Framework Activities
                                                               counterpart)
           1. Modernization of the State’s
           sector legal and regulatory         CEA/SAPAO          4.5 M/-         4.5 M         State   Consulting
           framework
                                                                                                         Civil
                                                                                                        works,
           2. Improvement of water services                                                  Federal
                                                 SAPAO         8.5 M/8.5 M        17 M                 ,related
           in the Oaxaca Metropolitan Area                                                  (APAZU)
                                                                                                     consulting
 Program                                                                                             and goods
                                                                                                     Civil works
           3. Improvement of water services       CEA                                        Federal   related
                                                                30 M/30 M         60 M
           in secondary towns                                                               (APAZU) consulting
                                                                                                     and goods
           4. Improvement of information in                                                             Consulting
                                                  CEA              2 M/-           2M           State
           rural areas                                                                                   Goods
                                 Total (US$)                   45M/38.5 M        83.5 M

Institutional arrangements are embedded within the existing institutional framework of GoO’s WSS
sector and only limited adjustments have been made to the existing structure to strengthen inter-
institutional coordination, results reporting, and verification. Hence, from the fiduciary perspective, the
Administrative Units of SEFIN, CEA, and SAPAO will be responsible for using the existing institutional
planning, budgeting, procurement and accounting processes and systems to implement the Program with
the additional mitigating measures or actions as recommended in the Program Action Plan (PAP), to
strengthen inter-institutional coordination, results reporting and verification.

It is worth mentioning that, based on the recently approve transformation of Administración Directa de
Obras y Servicios de Agua Potable y Alcantarillado de la Ciudad de Oaxaca (ADOSAPACO) to
SAPAO, as an independent governmental agency with its own legal personality, which allows it to
receive the funds and process payments directly, without administrative intervention of SINFRA, SAPAO
is now in position to take on the responsibilities of fiduciary implementation for its technical activities.
However, it should be noted that the current SAPAO’s institutional capacity is still limited, and, thus, it
should be strengthen, mainly through hiring qualified staff and carrying out staff training in budgeting,
governmental accounting, internal controls, and operation of SINPRES in those modules which currently
staff from SAPAO does not have experienced, as documented in the PAP, during the first semester of the
implementation of the MAS Oaxaca Program.

    III. PROGRAM FIDUCIARY PERFORMANCE

This section summarizes the adequacy of the key elements of the State Fiduciary (Public Financial
Management (PFM) and Procurement) systems taking into account the institutional arrangements to carry
out the FM and procurement responsibilities for the Program. The section is organized to describe the
strengths and areas in need of improvements to support the Program in the different fiduciary dimensions
being evaluated as part of this integrated assessment.




                                                        10
       A.       Planning and budgeting

The Program’s Results Areas 2 and 3 will finance the state contribution for the APAZU. According to the
Operations Rules of the APAZU program, once the technical implementation Annexes of the
Coordination Agreements between CONAGUA and participating States are signed (expected by March
31 of each year), and the State contribution is transferred to a designated banking account, administered
by the State Secretariat of Finance, CONAGUA transfers a certain percentage, which could vary between
40 and 80%,depending on the type of activity to be financed, of the program’s federal contribution to the
same designated account. However, the major obstacles for the program implementation in various States
including in the case of Oaxaca historically have been delays in signing of the Expedientes Tecnicos as
well as transfers of the local State contribution. Specifically, in CY13, the Annexes were signed and the
State funds were transferred in August 2013 (five months after the due date). This could have negative
impact on the timing and quality of the program outputs and outcomes, as all program funds should be
dully incurred by the State by December 31 of each year. It is worth mentioning that due to the systematic
delay in the implementation of APAZU by several States (not only Oaxaca), the Operation Rules could
eventually include a grace period for program’s execution of three month for certain FYs (but it was not a
case for the FY13).

The MAS Oaxaca Operation’s budget for all activities, including the Program and TA Component, will
be embedded in the standard budgetary procedures of the State executive branch, including planning,
formulation, execution, monitoring and control. Hence the MAS Oaxaca Operation will be subject to the
annual Expenditure Budget Act and Public Revenue Law, the State Budget and Fiscal Responsibility
Law, the Fiscal Coordination Law, as well as the General Law on Government Accounting

The budget formulation and execution for all implementing entities will be carried out: (i) based on the
budget classifications (e.g. administrative, functional, and economic), which were already harmonized
with those used at the federal level in compliance with the General Law on Government Accounting; (ii)
through the Budgetary Integral System (Sistema Integral de Presupuesto, SINPRES), which is an
integrated Financial Management Information System (FMIS), developed internally by SEFIN and used
by the entire State executive branch, including SEFIN, CEA, and SAPAO. This system includes several
modules, such as budget formulation and execution, accounting, and public debt, among others.
Moreover, the MAS Oaxaca Program funds would be earmarked with a specific code ( clave de
financiamiento) at both federal and state levels in order to allow its prompt identification.

However, it should be noted that one area for improvement identified in the process of budget formulation
and execution is that the revenues and treasury management are not included in SINPRES. While State
public revenues are monitored and control through SAP Governmental Resource Planning (GRP) system;
the payments made by the public entities are processed internally by each governmental entity without
reporting these transactions in the budget module of SINPRES. Nevertheless, a suitable control and filing
systems for all supporting documentation are in place, which is also subject to internal and external audits
by the Secretariat of the Comptroller and Governmental Transparency of the State of Oaxaca (Secretaría
de la Contraloría y Transparencia Gubernamental, SCTG) and the State Supreme Audit Institution
(Auditoría Superior del Estado de Oaxaca, ASEO). Hence, it was agreed with SEFIN to ensure that
SINPRES would produce Program consolidated financial reports, including the information on payment
to the Program’s consultants, providers, and final beneficiaries.

Both the Federal and the State procurement laws establish that public entities must prepare annual
procurement plans (one for works and related services and another for goods and services in general) and
their corresponding budget. The actions considered in these procurement plans may be subsequently




                                                    11
modified, suspended or cancelled without responsibility for the entity, as long as valid reasons support
these modifications.

Differences in provisions regarding approval and publishing of procurement plans (PP) at the Federal and
State level are shown in the following chart:

                              Table 2: Procurement plans at Federal and State level


                                                Federal                               State of Oaxaca
                                                                         PP for goods and services in general
                                                                         (establishing priorities) must be sent
                                                                         to SEFIN by the responsible entity,
                                  Reviewed by procurement                on a date that SEFIN will establish
                                  committees and approved by             annually.
                                  the head of the corresponding          PP for works and services related to
Approval of procurement plans
                                  public entity or by the                works must be sent to SEFIN, at the
                                  administrative head of the             latest, the last day of March.
                                  entity.                                PPs are considered to be of
                                                                         informative nature. SEFIN will
                                                                         approve actions to be financed under
                                                                         the assigned budget.
                                  PPs must be published in
  Publishing of procurement                                              No provisions for publishing of PPs
                                  CompraNet by January 31 of
            plans                                                        are established by law.
                                  each year.
                                  Updating of PPs, if applicable,
                                  must     be    published     in
Publishing of modifications to                                           No provisions for publishing of
                                  CompraNet on a monthly basis
      procurement plans                                                  updates in PPs are established by law.
                                  (within the last 5 days of the
                                  month).

As the Program will mainly finance procurement related to a federal program (APAZU), procurement
actions that the State of Oaxaca plans to undertake with resources from this (and any other federal
program), must be reflected in a procurement plan as established in the Federal procurement laws
(LOPSRM and LAASSP). Thus, planned procurement for CEA’s and SAPAO’s participation in APAZU
must be published in CompraNet in their corresponding PPs involving federal programs, and follow
regulations regarding updates to these PPs.

Procurement planning is based on an approved Annual Operating Plan ( Plan Operativo Annual, POA)
which consists of a list of civil works considered in each program with their corresponding estimated
budget.

       B.       Budget Execution – Procurement

During the assessment, an important gap was noted between budget considered in CEA’s 2012 POA for
two of its Federal Programs and contracts effectively awarded, evidencing a need to establish mechanisms
that may improve procurement planning and execution in procurement procedures. Data obtained is
shown in the following chart:




                                                       12
            Table 3: CEA's Annual Operating Plan FOR prossapYs AND Agua Limpia Programs (2012)

                                                                                     % of programmed
       Program               Programmed Budget           Total contract amount       budget effectively
                                                                                         executed

     PROSSAPyS                 $236,119,859.47              $69,840,856.88                29.58%


   AGUA LIMPIA                  $5,111,669.00               $2,904,485.38                 56.82%


One of the reasons of low budget execution is the fact that the budget for Federal programs is assigned
late in the calendar year due to late signing of the Expedientes Tecnicos with CONAGUA, causing the
majority of procurement procedures to be carried out in the last quarter of the year with; among others,
the following consequences on the procurement process and in contract management: (i) reduced time to
carry out procedures, (ii) lack of sufficient competition due to reduced periods for presentation of bids,
(iii) contracts with insufficient execution time that lead to constant contract amendments and (iv) planned
procurement cannot be executed as foreseen and the unused assigned federal resources that are not spent
before the end of the fiscal year must be returned to the Federation.

The PAP provides for actions to address these challenges, inter alia to ensure that Expedientes Tecnicos
are submitted on time triggering the timely release of the budget and that the bidding documents are ready
when budget is released.

               1.   The procurement profile

The procurement profile under the Program is generally consistent with the procurement currently carried
out by the agencies: CEA and SAPAO under the ongoing national program. The bulk of procurement
carried out by both implementing agencies (CEA and SAPAO) will be for small and standardized
contracts. The order of magnitude is provided in the table and narrative below that captures the current
procurement experience of both implementing agencies. Given the level of complexity and the size of the
contracts it is not expected that they will attract international competition. The majority of the funds are
allocated to civil works contracts. Consultants contract mostly focus on supervision of the civil works.
Strategic, complex consulting contracts are procured under the TA Component and follow Bank
Guidelines.

CEA Under the Program, CEA will procure: (i) works for improvement of water services in secondary
towns, (ii) consulting services for supervision and the modernization of the legal and regulatory
framework in the state water sector and (iii) relatively small goods contracts (e.g. vehicles, computers and
topographic equipment).

These procurement activities build on the existing CEA experience. During 2012, CEA awarded 180
contracts for a total amount of approximately USD 37,000,000; distributed as shown in the following
chart:




                                                    13
                                         Table 4: Procurement carried out by CEA (2012)

                 Procurement                                                                         Average
                                    Number of                 Total contract amount
                   category                           %                                        %     contract
                                    Contracts                         USD
                                                                                                       USD
                   Works                118          65.6                   32,134,990       87.12    272,330
                 Consultants             61          33.8                    4,597,512        12.4    75,.369
                   Goods                 1            0.6                      154,156        0.42   154,1566
                                        180          100                    36,886,659        100     204,926

In CEA, civil works represent 66% of the total number of contracts and 87% of the total amount of
procurement. While there was one large contract of about USD15,000,000, the majority of contracts are
between USD155 thousand and USD538 thousand. Procurement of goods has been marginal.

SAPAO. Under the program SAPAO will carry out civil works to improve the water services in the
Oaxaca Metropolitan Area, associated consulting services and some good contracts (chemicals, small
equipment).

The program work under the project builds on the current SAPAO procurement activities. Procurement
during the period 2011-2012 was exclusively for 96 civil works contracts, for a total amount of
approximately USD 13,000,000 per year. Average contract amount does not generally exceed USD 260
thousand. Last year they started do their own procurement for consultants (previously conducted by
SINFRA).

Although SAPAO has institutional capacity for procurement, the lack of recent experience in
implementing CONAGUA programs or carrying out the procurement cycle as a whole13 must be taken
into account. This executing entity must ensure the knowledge and proficiency on federal procurement
legislation and the use of CompraNet for a more efficient performance of the procurement procedures to
be required for the PforR Program. Capacity building actions are going to be carried out under the TA
component to support this objective.

SEFIN. Under the Program, SEFIN will be responsible for procurement of some activities within the TA
Component, which will mainly include contracts for consulting services. World Bank guidelines and
procedures will be applicable.

SEFIN is currently the executing agency in a World Bank grant, so program work under the Operation
builds on recent current SEFIN procurement activities. Areas responsible for procurement of consulting
services received training in 2013 on World Bank procurement guidelines and have had support for this
type of procurement by an independent consultant. This experience will be useful for the execution of the
mentioned TA Component.

During 2012, SEFIN carried out 61 procurement procedures for the selection and employment of
consultants for a total amount of approximately USD 9,000,000 (Local and Federal systems for
procurement of consulting services). Average amount for SEFIN’s consultant services contracts generally
does not exceed USD 150,000.



13
     Before the transformation of ADOSAPACO to SAPAO, procurement actions were shared with SINFRA.




                                                                 14
  Operational arrangements of the executing agencies – CEA, SAPAO, and SEFIN - were analyzed during
  the assessment period. The results of this analysis are summarized as follows:

                             Table 5: Operational arrangements of the executing agencies

                                         CEA                       SAPAO                       SEFIN
                                  Departamento de
            Area within the                                                                Departamento de
                                  Precios Unitarios,          Departamento de
          entity responsible                                                                  Recursos
                                    Licitaciones y            Control de Obra
           for procurement                                                                   Financieros
                                      Contratos
             Number of
                                            6                          6                          3
          procurement staff
                                 Type: Civil Works
                                                                                      Type: Consulting
                                 and related
                                                           Type: Civil Works          services
                                 consulting services
            Experience in                                  Framework: Federal         Framework: State,
                                 Framework: Federal,
            procurement                                    and State                  Federal and external
                                  State and external
                                                                                      credit financing
                                   credit financing
                                                                                      (IBRD)
                                        (IADB)
          Recent experience
           implementing
                                           Yes                        No                    Not applicable
            CONAGUA
             programs

                                        (2012)                                               (2012)
                                                                (2011-2012)
          Procurement by              CB – 18%                                          Only consulting
                                                                  CB - 6%
         method during the            I3 – 36%                                              services
                                                                  I3 - 79%
         reviewed period (i)      Sole source – 35%                                        I3 – 17%
                                                              Sole source - 15%
                                  IADB short list –                                    Sole source – 83%
                                         11%

        (i) CB – competitive bidding. I3 – Invitation to at least three suppliers or contractors
                 2.   Competition in the Program procurement procedures

  Based on the sample assessed there is room for increased competition with improved results on prices and
  quality and delivery of services under the Program. It was noted that less competitive procurement
  processes (restrictive invitations and direct contracting) constitute the method of procurement for an
  important part of the number of contracts and contract amount of the executing agencies as illustrated in
  the Box below.

   In CEA, during 2012, procurement by invitation to at least three contractors accounted for 36% of the
   number of contracts and 23.4% of total contract amount, and direct award represented 35% of the
   number of contracts and 4.5% of total contract amount. For the period 2011-2012, SAPAO (formerly
   ADOSAPACO) awarded more than 90% of its contracts (that represent 57% of total contract amount)
   using less competitive procurement procedures.
3.
4. Although, as mentioned, most of the executing agencies’ contracts are for small works of minor
   complexity and magnitude and, generally, for amounts below the thresholds established for open
   competitive bidding, the rule for Federal financed programs is that the total value of the processes
   awarded under less competitive methods cannot exceed 30% of the annual budget for procurement



                                                         15
Key causes identified are:

    •   Under restricted invitation procedures only three contractors are invited to quote, while both
        Federal and State legislation establish three to be the minimum and not the maximum of
        invitations. As most contracts are of similar scope and there is an important number of local or
        national contractors that could execute the required works, extending invitations to participate to
        a greater number of contractors would increase competition and transparency in these less
        competitive procedures and may result in more competitive prices. The PAP addresses this issue
        making recommendations to further enhance and monitor the competition.

    •   Multiple contracts with similar purposes (same type and characteristics of works and within a
        common geographical area in the State) are procured separately (either by restricted invitation or
        direct award), when the possibility could be the consolidation of needs in a sole competitive
        bidding procedure, divided in lots if appropriate. The PAP supports the use of consolidation and
        “slice and package” approaches that will form also the object of the capacity building activities to
        be financed under the Program.

    •   Budgetary constraints within the fiscal year and late budget allocation lead to fragmentation of
        contracts and limited competition in an effort to fit within the time limits and financial resources
        available.

    •   Civil works contracts funded through Federal programs are always awarded using a merit point
        evaluation format (established by SINFRA) with common criteria for all contracts, regardless of
        their complexity or size. There is lack of justification for the defined criterion, taking into account
        that the majority of contracts are for small and standardized civil works. This practice could
        generate disproportionality between the low value and low complexity of the activities and the
        evaluation requirements.

    •   Federal procurement legislation, applicable to Federal programs, does not establish the use of
        merit point evaluation for contracts estimated to cost below USD 1.5 million.

    •   In order to enhance transparency and efficiency in these procurement procedures, the “binary”
        (lowest evaluated bid) evaluation method should be applicable for lower value contracts,
        consistent with the Federal law that requires that such contracts less than USD 1.5 mil be subject
        to a “binary” evaluation method.

               3.   Efficiency in contract management

Constant and prolonged deferrals of award notification in procedures carried out by CEA were observed
as a result of delays in the internal process for obtaining the official signature in the contract award
document, and resulting in the reduction of execution periods of the contracts. Minor modifications in this
administrative process (for example: delegation of signature of the contract award document within the
entity’s procurement area) could enhance efficiency in the procurement process and avoid reduced
contract execution periods and possible future contract amendments.

Mostly as a result of budget-related issues, execution deadlines are reduced artificially in the contracts.
This action leads to multiple contract amendments during execution in order to extend the original
contract deadline. Procurement procedures and contract management efficiency could be greatly




                                                     16
improved in this sense with the budget-related actions included in the Program PAP to ensure that budget
is released on time.

       C.       Transparency

SEFIN posts an ample set of information on its web site (www.finanzasoaxaca.gob.mx) on a regular
basis, including the documentation classified according to the following structure: (i) legal framework,
which include a complete set of legal and normative documents, including Laws, By laws, and other
relevant guidelines on public finances, procurement and financial management; (ii) budget and
accounting manuals, including annual budget classifications. (iii) financial reports, which includes, the
annual State Public accounts (Cuenta Pública del Estado de Oaxaca), quarterly reports on public debt,
and quarterly financial reports (starting in 2013); (iv) accounting harmonization information, including
disclosure of financial information required by the General Law on Governmental Accounting, as well as
the relevant normative documents issued by the National Council of Accounting Harmonization (Consejo
Nacional de Armonización Contable , CONAC), which, in turn, were ratified by SEFIN at the State level;
(v) annual credit ratings reports of all big three agencies; and (vi) relevant information on the State annual
budget. Therefore, taking into account that the Program will mainly finance the APAZU, which is an
existing federal program, its financial information will be regularly reported in the financial reports
mentioned above.

Despite the information published by SEFIN, it should be noted that the information published by CEA,
and SAPAO on their web pages is not as comprehensive and updated as that published in SEFIN’s web
page. Moreover, more than one month after the general elections in the State, SAPAO’s web page was
still temporarily suspended, as it is usual with most of Oaxaca’s public entities’ web pages in order to
minimize the influence of the public program financed by the government over election results.

Transparency in procurement at the Federal level (federal entity procurement or state entity procurement
with federal resources) is enhanced by the mandatory use of CompraNet in all procedures. CompraNet
(www.compranet.gob.mx) is an electronic public procurement information system that, among other
applications, publishes free public information regarding all stages of all the procurement procedures
carried out by public entities when estimated contract amount is over MX$20,000 (approximately USD
1,500). These include procedures by open competitive bidding, invitation to at least three suppliers or
contractors and direct awards. Information in CompraNet is updated on a daily basis.

At the State level, the GoO site includes a transparency webpage “Ventanilla única de acceso a la
información” (www.infopublica.oaxaca.gob.mx) posting information regarding contracts of the State
Government entities. Notwithstanding, this information refers only to concluded procedures during a
period of time (generally on a six month or yearly basis) and includes only data on: object of contract,
contract amount, awarded supplier, contractor or consultant, and contract time frames.

As the Program will mainly finance procurement to be carried out under federal legislation, as APAZU is
a federal program, the use of CompraNet will be mandatory, thus information of procurement procedures
within APAZU must be published and will be publicly available.

       D.       Accounting and financial reporting

The accounting records of the MAS Oaxaca Operation are subject to compliance with the General Law on
Governmental Accounting based on the harmonized chart of accounts and financial reporting standards
issued by CONAC. Moreover, MAS Oaxaca Program’s accounting will be also recorded and monitored
through the same system (SINPRES). This system allowed recording of all transactions for budgeting and
accounting effects, as well as preparation of financial and budget reports in real time. All MAS Oaxaca



                                                     17
Program’s supporting documentation will be appropriately maintained to facilitate ex post reviews and
the annual external audits.

As mentioned above, SEFIN publishes on its web page on regularly basis three different kind of reports,
including: (i) relevant quarterly information of the complete list of public debt contracted by the State,
including the information on the amounts, outstanding balances, interest rates, maturity dates, financial
source from where the capital and debt service will be paid; (ii) quarterly detailed information on
economic and financial situation of public finances, revenues, expenditures, federal transfers to the State
and municipalities, financial statements (which only includes balance sheet), as well as a very detailed
progress report on use of federal transfers; (iii) annual report, including detailed information on economic
and financial situation of the State, public revenues, budget reports by sector and different classifications,
consolidated financial statements (balance sheet and statement of changes in net assets) and their notes.

The Program consolidated financial reports will be generated by SINPRES, and will include information
according to the budget economic classification by implementing entity, and Results Areas under the
Program.

       E.       Treasury management and funds flow

The treasury management system is decentralized and it is not integrated into SINPRES. As a result,
SEFIN has limited control and information on payments to final Program’s beneficiaries processed by
each implementing entity. Moreover, the Program flow of funds is also affected by the delays in: (i)
process of signing of the Expedientes Tecnicos of the Coordination Agreement between CONAGUA and
SEFIN; and (ii) availability and transferring of the State contributions to the Program designated banking
account, administrated by SEFIN. While the timely signing of the Expedientes Tecnicos and the transfers
of local funds would be addressed by the fact that part of the Operation will finance the State contribution
to the APAZU program, strengthening of the treasury management system has been included in the
Advisory Services for Strengthening Public Sector Management RAS (P129050). This initiative includes,
among others, the development of the conceptual model and functional design of a new integrated FMIS
as part of the Strengthening of the Financial Administration and Performance Management System.
Nevertheless, this initiative does not include implementation of the new FMIS and its closing date is
October 31, 2014. Hence, in order to ensure the Program’s flow of funds is properly controlled and
monitored, including the records of payments to the final beneficiaries of the expenditures to be financed
by the MAS Oaxaca Program it was agreed that all Program’s payments would be centrally processed by
the SEFIN’s Treasury unit.

The primary disbursement method for the Program will be advances to a Program account in US$ to be
administered by BANOBRAS, which, in turn, will be channeling the funds through SEFIN. The
description of the funds flow is presented in the following diagram:




                                                     18
                               Figure 1: Flow of Funds




    •   The Bank advances the authorized amount into Program account, administered by BANOBRAS,
        which, in turn transfers the advanced amount to SEFIN.
    •   CEA, SAPAO, and SEFIN execute the Program activities, and request SEFIN’s Treasury unit to
        process payments to Program’s consultants and providers.
    •   CEA and SAPAO report results to SEFIN, which submits these results to Independent
        Verification Agent (IVA).
    •   IVA verifies and valid the results, and submits its report back to SEFIN.
    •   SEFIN formally submits the report to BANOBRAS, and requests documentation of the advances
        and refund of the remaining funds after achievement of the DLIs.
    •   BANOBRAS, based on the DLI Verification Protocol, requests documentation of the advance
        and remaining funds based on the achieved and validated results.
    •   The Bank disburses the remaining funds to the Program account.

        F.      Internal controls and internal audit

The Government of Oaxaca issued on September 25, 2010 an internal control regulation applicable to all
the public sector entities across the State. Although this regulation is somewhat basic, it is aligned with
the norm issued by the Federal Government on internal controls, and to some extent to best international
practices, namely, the Internal Control Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Committee (COSO).

Among other aspects, the Oaxaca internal control regulation establishes that the head of each public entity
is responsible for maintaining an adequate internal control environment, along with a suitable risk
management system. In other words, the responsibility relies within each entity, reason why it is quite
relevant to make sure that the entities that will implement the MAS Oaxaca Program have established



                                                     19
adequate measures on this regard, specially, because on risk management, which is a concept quite new
for all levels of the Mexican Public Sector.

In this regards, it is worth mentioning that, in addition to the Operational Guidelines of the Internal
Control Committees, issued by the SCTG on September 18, 2010, the recently approved reform
(November 2013) to the Organic Law of Executive Branch (Ley Orgánica del Poder Ejecutivo del Estado
de Oaxaca) includes in its article 47.XXXII a new responsibility of the SCTG to manage and coordinate
the creation and operation of the internal control units within each governmental agency of the executive
branch. In this regards, the head of SCTG confirmed during appraisal that the Internal Control Units
within SEFIN and SAPAO were already created, while the CEA’s Internal Control Unit is about to be
created prior to negotiations. The main objective of the Internal Control Units would be the design,
implementation, and evaluation of the internal control systems within each implementing agency.

On the other hand, all Program implementing entities have a solid operational set of guidelines, which
includes Internal Bylaws, Function and Organizational Manuals, including clear segregation of main FM-
related functions. Nevertheless, some of these manuals have been in the process of updating for the past
few years. Thus, some of the entities have parallel organizational structures that were not formally
approved as yet. Moreover, due to the recent legal transformation of ADOSAPACO into SAPAO, its
administrative structure and manuals are being revised and updated, with the objective to ensure that the
entity would have sufficient institutional capacity to implement the Program, and take on the
administrative functions which used to be supported by SINFRA in the case of ADOSAPACO.

In terms of internal audit, the SCTG, which, similar to the Secretariat of the Public Function (Secretaría
de la Función Pública , SFP) at the federal level, is in charge of the internal audit function of the State of
Oaxaca, has also issued a set of guidelines and manuals of procedures that are mainly focused in the
administrative parts of the audit process. However, it appears that the Government is pursuing the
performance of audits under Risk Based Approach (RBA), which, from the methodological perspective, is
at a very early and basic stage. Moreover, as result of the assessment it was noted that no system for
control and timely follow-up on internal audit findings and implementation of recommendations is
currently in place. Therefore, it is recommended to evaluate the possibility to finance with local
counterpart funds activities towards: (i) strengthening of SCTG’s methodologies and systems for
conducting audits under a RBA; (ii) development and implementation of an automated system that would
allow monitoring and timely follow-up on findings resulting from internal audits conducted by SCTG.

       G.       Control systems in procurement
               1.    Federal level

Definition and division of roles and responsibilities for procurement, both for the contracting procedure
and the administration of contracts, is set in the General Application Administrative Manuals for
procurement (one for works and related services and another for goods and services in general) issued by
the Secretaría de la Función Pública (SFP). Additionally, in particular, each entity must establish
responsible areas and hierarchical levels according to their own policies, bases and guidelines.

The General Application Administrative Manuals establish for each particular stage of the procurement
process which area or areas within the entity will be responsible of carrying out the necessary actions for
the fulfillment of the legal or normative provisions required for each of these stages.

At the federal level, exceptions to public competitive bidding for contract amounts above the established
thresholds must pass through a legally established procurement committee (its structure, functions and
responsibilities are established in the law) and be supported by justification of a circumstance of




                                                     20
exception specifically provided for in the law. Exceptions to public competitive bidding for contract
amounts below the thresholds cannot surpass 30% of the entity’s annual budget for procurement of works
and related services or goods and services in general.

Amendments to public works contracts that do not surpass 25% of the original contract amount or of the
execution period agreed in the contract - and that do not involve substantial changes to the original project
- may be undertaken at the entity’s sole responsibility. In dully justified cases where amendments need to
be over 25% of original contract amount or execution period, previous authorization must be issued by
SFP

SFP is authorized by law to verify, at any moment of the procurement process or during contract
execution, that actions have been carried out by the contracting entities according to all legal provisions.
               2.   State level

The legal framework of the State of Oaxaca includes specific provisions for control mechanisms by the
SCTG on procurement performed by State entities (regardless of whether procurement is with State or
Federal resources):

    •   Pre-bidding period: 5 business days before scheduled publication of the public bid notice or
        issuing of invitations to participate, entities must send all bidding documents to the SCTG for
        review, opinion and approval. If SCTG has any comments, the entity is notified and has a new 3
        day period to make the necessary adjustments or changes. Procurement process may not begin
        until there is a positive reply form SCTG.

    •   Bidding period: SCTG participates in all stages of the public events during the procurement
        process (clarification meetings, opening of bids, and notice of award).

    •   Post-bidding period: within 15 days after contract signature, entities must send the SCTG
        documentary evidence of all proceedings during the procurement process, a copy of the contract
        and of the securities provided by the contractor/supplier. Additionally, 10 days after finalization
        of contract, SCTG must receive a copy of the official document that certifies completion of the
        works. This provision also applies to contract amendments.

At the State level, exceptions to public competitive bidding for contract amounts above the established
thresholds are authorized by the Head of the entity who must issue an agreement that supports and
justifies the circumstance of exception specifically provided for in the law.

Neither the Federal Government nor the Government of the State of Oaxaca has formally defined model
bidding documents. Both Federal and Oaxaca procurement legislation provide the minimum content that
bidding documents and contracts must observe, and each public entity may draft its own according to
these legal provisions. Legal provisions at both levels require that bidding documents furnish all
information necessary for a prospective bidder to prepare a bid.

However, in the case of procurement of works or works-related services both CEA and SAPAO currently
use general model bidding documents (templates) provided by SINFRA for procedures subject to either
Federal law or State law. These documents also include a model contract. In this sense they can be
considered, in practice, model documents.




                                                     21
       H.       Program audit

APAZU, as a federal government program implemented at sub-national level, is subject to multiple levels
of external audit. Hence, in case of the State of Oaxaca, the program is audited on periodic basis by the
Federal Supreme Audit Institution (Auditoría Superior de la Federación ,ASF), SFP, ASEO, and SCTG.

The external audit function at the State level, based on the Constitution of the State of Oaxaca and the
Supreme Audit Law (Ley de Fiscalización Superior , LFS), is a responsibility of the ASEO, which, in
turn, is mapped to the State legislative branch. According to the articles 3 and 4 of the LFS, ASEO has
budget, technical and management independence from the state Congress and its main mandate is to audit
the use of public funds at the state and municipal levels, including all public entities of the three branches
of the Governments and Municipalities, as well as any person or firm that has spent public funds during
the audited period. Even though, the ASEO has a solid legal and normative background, as well as a
strong coordination with the Supreme Audit Institution at the Federal level (Auditoría Superior de la
Federación), it is also characterized by (i) limited annual budget (approximately US$5 million for the
CY12); (ii) large audit universe (more than 680 public entities); (iii) high staff turnover; and (iv) non-
competitive salaries. All these factors eventually have impacted the institutional capacity, quality and
scope of audits conducted by ASEO. Hence, the Bank’s FM team is evaluating the possibility of
providing a technical assistance to the ASEO in order to ensure that the institution has sufficient capacity
to conduct annual audits of both Program and the TA component based on the Terms of Reference
acceptable to the Bank in the future.

In the meanwhile, the Program financial audit would be performed by a private firm and based on ToRs
acceptable to the Bank. The financial audit of the Program will cover one fiscal year of the borrower,
except that the first audit may cover from the effectiveness of the Program and up to the end of the second
fiscal year of the borrower.

    IV. FRAUD ANDCORRUPTION RISKS

Overall, the fiduciary framework is deemed sound and strong enough to prevent, detect, investigate and
sanction Fraud and Corruption (F/C) under the Program. Yet some issues or concerns exist such as the
limited market reflecting a specific community of vendors in Oaxaca and the resulting reluctance by
bidders to submit complaints about the procurement process for fear of retribution (e.g. that they will not
be invited to participate in future bidding processes if one company complains against another). There is
no whistleblower protection or incentive provided for bidders who come forward with a complaint.
Despite limited experience in managing Bank-financed projects, both CEA and SAPAO were evaluated to
be suitable for the implementation of this operation, but include which raises risks that are addressed
through other mechanisms, including the TA component for institutional strengthening.

One of the preventive risk management measures for F/C risks that support greater social accountability
for this Program is the existence of an Access to Information (ATI) Law and institutional capacity for its
implementation, both at the state and federal level. Public access to key fiscal information is strong in
Mexico as a general matter and most budgetary and financial information is available through the
Internet, in accordance with both State and Federal Transparency and ATI legislation. By law, each public
entity is required to publish information about their regulatory framework, budget, and financial reports
on-line. Furthermore, CompraNet, a web-based, on-line procurement system using a variety of hardware
and software, is used as a platform to disclose information about procurement requirements and
government suppliers. Any information regarding the disqualification of suppliers or contractors by the
Federal Secretariat of Public Administration (SFP ) is also made available on this site. It should be noted,
however, that many of the entities' websites include outdated information and are not regularly




                                                     22
maintained; this weakness could be strengthened by greater management attention to such issues under
the Program.

All bidding processes, according to the Law of State Expenditures, must go through SINFRA. Bidders
may submit complaints regarding procurement processes to the SFP, either directly or through
CompraNet within a period of six working days from the date of the alleged wrongdoing. Alternatively,
because the SFP has established a coordination agreement with the Comptroller's Office (Contraloría),
bidders can submit their claim to the Comptroller General’s Office as well. It typically takes the SFP 45
days to respond to a complaint, depending on whether it has been received directly or from the
Comptroller's Office. Sanctions often involve a disqualification from future bidding processes for periods
ranging from 3 months to 5 years and are dependent on the intentional nature of the offense; the gravity of
infringement; and the conditions of the offender.

    V. FIDUCIARY RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES

As described in the Executive Summary, the overall fiduciary risk after mitigating measures is
Substantial, and the identified risks have been addressed with mitigating measures which are included in
the PAP. The specific FM and procurement risks within the different assessed dimensions of the
assessment are described below.

Main financial management risks & mitigating measures

The main FM risks for the Program and identified during the assessment are: (i) decentralized treasury
management system, which is not currently integrated into the institutional FMIS; (ii) limited information
on payments to final beneficiaries processed by each co-implementing entity (CEA and SAPAO) in
SEFIN; (iii) major delays in the APAZU s annual flow of funds and overall implementation of program
activities; (iv) a well-established internal control function in each of the implementing entities; (v) limited
institutional capacity of all implementing entities in terms of internal controls and risk management; (vi)
lack of automated system to follow-up on findings raised from internal audits conducted by SCTG; (vii)
limited institutional capacity of the State Supreme Audit Institution in terms of financial and human
resources.

Some of the proposed mitigating actions to addresse the identified FM risks have been addressed by the
implementing entities before appraisal, such as the case of the centralization of cash management and
payments to Program beneficiaries by SEFIN, and the creation of the Internal Control Units in each of the
implementing entities. Other actions will take a longer term and have been addressed in the PAP such as
the integration of consolidated financial reports for the Program, the prompt updates of the Program
financial execution for all executing entities, and the strengthening of SAPAO.

Main procurement risks & mitigating measures

The procurement system provides reasonable assurance that the fiduciary principles of transparency,
economy efficiency and integrity will be met under the Program. It also provides an adequate mechanism
to ensure the right of appeal in individual bidding processes.

The applicable procurement procedures both Federal and State are enshrined in the Article 134 of the
Constitution of the United Mexican States that defines the principles governing procurement at national
level, mandating that resources for procurement of goods, works and services be administered with
efficiency, effectiveness, and probity. Competitive bidding is identified as the default method.




                                                      23
The agencies in charge of procurement under the Program have reasonable capacity built on their historic
experience of conducting similar programs consisting mostly of small works contracts and related
supervision services.

The assessment has identified however some risks that if addressed can increase the ability of the
Program to deliver timely and quality services to the program beneficiaries: delays in budget allocation of
federal and state programs, challenges to competition, contract implementation issues that increase the
transactions cost of procurement and result in less optimal outcomes

Late procurement due to delays in budget allocation for federal programs may be mitigated assuring that,
when budget becomes available, all the necessary master plans, bidding documents and sample contracts
are ready initiate contracting procedures.

Actions that include a wider use of open competitive bidding for a greater amount of contracts (even if
below the threshold) and application of “slice and package” procedures can diminish risks related to
issues that challenge competition. Transparency in procurement can be enhanced with the insertion of
SAPAO’s procurement procedures in CompraNet, adding to the use of State contractors/suppliers
registries for participation in procurement for the Program and extending invitation to more than three
contractors/suppliers in restricted invitation procedures, when feasible.

SAPAO institutional capacity for procurement in Federal Programs can be increased with training on
federal procurement framework and in the use of CompraNet, both provided, free of charge, by the SFP to
entities that register as purchasing units in this procurement information system.

The proposed actions to mitigate these risks and performance indicators to monitor their implementation
are included in the Program’s PAP and are fully consistent with the federal and state procurement systems
contributing to their further strengthening.

    VI. IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT

The fiduciary team will monitor the implementation progress of the PAP fiduciary actions and will help
the implementing entities to achieve the expected results of the Program through continued joint
implementation support field missions, expected at least two staff weeks in the first year of
implementation, and adjust the implementation support plan accordingly for the remaining of the
Program.

The team will also monitor the changes in the fiduciary risks to the Program and, as relevant, will monitor
the compliance of the fiduciary legal provisions/covenants. There will also be a monitoring of the
Program performance through desk review of Progress Reports and financial audits of the Program.

Other technical assistance activities to strengthen institutional capacity for internal controls and external
oversight to the State oversight institutions (i.e. SCTG and ASEO) may be undertaken in parallel through
other Bank’s sources of financing and instruments during the implementation of the Program, however,
this technical assistance will not be monitored as part of the Program.




                                                     24
                                                                  Annex 1: Program Action Plan

                                                                                     Legal
                           Description of Measure                              DLI                Date            Respons.           Compliance Measure
                                                                                     Cov.
Building the capacity of the Program’s institutions
    Ensure that SAPAO has the necessary institutional capacity to
    implement the Program in accordance with its fiduciary
    arrangements:
                                                                                                                              Inclusion of SAPAO in
a) (i) It will obtain certification as a purchasing unit in CompraNet.
                                                                                                                               CompraNet’s registry of
    (ii) It will have access to all SINPRES modules from its offices.                                                          purchasing units.
    (iii) Personnel will be trained, through the means stipulated by the
                                                                                                                              Certification of SAPAO personnel
    Civil Service Secretariat, in the use of CompraNet as a purchasing
                                                                                                                               as CompraNet users, and evidence
    unit.
                                                                                              Three months                     of training in federal regulations
    (iv) Personnel will be trained in federal regulations for public
                                                                                             after Program’s                   for public contracting, government
1 contracting (works, goods and services), through courses offered by                                             SAPAO
                                                                                              effectiveness                    accounting, budget and use of
    the Civil Service Secretariat or by specialized third parties officially
                                                                                                   date                        SINPRES.
    certified in this subject.
                                                                                                                              SAPAO has the institutional
    (v) Personnel will be trained, through the means provided by
                                                                                                                               access code to SINPRES.
    SEFIN, in matters concerning government accounting, budget and
    use of SINPRES.                                                                                                           SAPAO has the necessary
    (vi) SEFIN will approve the internal regulations and organizational                                                        administrative structure to ensure
    manual.                                                                                                                    the Program’s sustainability.
    (vii) The Administrative Unit will be strengthened in terms of
    human resources.
                                                                                                  During
    Ensure that the SCTG’s internal control Delegations in SEFIN,
                                                                                                Program’s         SEFIN/
    CEA and SAPAO, in accordance with the recent modification of the                                                          Existence of a work program in the
2                                                                                                duration,         CEA/
    State of Oaxaca’s Executive Authority, are operating during the                                                            Delegations of each entity.
                                                                                             starting July 1,     SAPAO
    Program’s implementation.
                                                                                                   2015
Strengthening the Program’s systems
    Promote competition, efficiency, transparency and economy in the                                                       Official institutional report on the
    procurement procedures (contracting of goods, services, works and                                                       State Government’s transparency
    works-related services) of CEA and SAPAO:                                                At end of each                 website, detailing the procedures
    a)        The annual program of works and work-related services,                             year of                    conducted under the Program.
3                                                                                                               CEA/SAPAO
    and 100% of contracting procedures (public bidding, invitation to at                        Program                    Information on CompraNet report
    least three suppliers, and direct award) conducted for the Program                         execution                    regarding procedures that have
    and financed by the federal budget are inputted in CompraNet, as                                                        been concluded and that are being
    required by the applicable regulation.                                                                                  supervised by the corresponding
     b)        At least 70% of the Program’s total amount for contracting                                     purchasing unit.
     public works and related services is conducted by means of public                                       Results of audits conducted.
     bidding.
    c)         In all cases of smaller works costing less than $20 million
     pesos, the “binary” criteria will be used to evaluate bids; evaluations
     using points and percentages will be used only for more complex
     and/or larger works.
     d)        In cases where various small works of the same type,
     which may be executed by contractors with the same specialization
     and experience, are scheduled to be contracted, consolidated
     contracting will be conducted by means of batch bidding (these may
     be awarded to one or several contractors). When this modality is not
     used simultaneously for bids that include similar contracts,
     justification must be provided and recorded.
      e)       In at least 50% of procedures in which invitations are
     issued to at least three contractors, the invitation to participate is
     extended to more than three contractors meeting the requirements of
     timely response, skills, experience and specialization for the
     planned contracting, with the aim of including the larger number of
     those contained in the internal lists and those who have expressed
     interest in participating through CompraNet.
    Ensure that CEA and SAPAO keep their Internet portals updated                   30 days after
    (including financial information) on a quarterly basis, in accordance            end of each             Notification to SEFIN about link
                                                                                                     CEA/     in Internet portal.
4   with the regulation of the National Council for the Harmonization                four-month
                                                                                                    SAPAO
    of Accounting Standards (Consejo Nacional de Armonización                       period of the
    Contable [CONAC]), in terms of transparency.                                      Program




                                                                               26
