                                                                                          89275
        Information Note: The World Bank’s Harmonized List of Fragile Situations

The World Bank’s Fragile, Conflict and Violence Group (formally the Center on Conflict,
Security and Development CCSD) annually releases the Harmonized List of Fragile Situations.
The first such list was compiled in fiscal year 2006 and has gone through a series of changes in
terms of classification from the Low Income Countries Under Stress List (LICUS) (2006-2009),
to the Fragile States List (2010) to the now Harmonized list of Fragile Situations (2011-2014).
The concept and the list have evolved as the World Bank’s understanding of the development
challenges in countries affected by violence and instability has matured. This reference
document provides a brief historical overview of the progression of the list to date, as well as
some notes on current limitations of the FCS list, and possible future directions.


                                           Contents

            1. Historical Context
            2. Historical Classification Systems (by Fiscal Year)
                   a. Low Income Countries Under Stress List (2006-08)
                   b. Fragile States List (2009-10)
            3. Current Harmonized List of Fragile Situations (2011-2014)
            4. Critiques and future adaptation
            5. Frequently Asked Questions & Additional Notes
            6. Additional Resources
            7. List of acronyms
            8. Contact Information



Historical Context

The World Bank coined the term “LICUS” in November 2001 when it established a task force to
examine the challenges faced by low-income countries with particularly weak policies,
institutions, and governance. The task force recommended that the Bank maintain a more
consistent engagement in LICUS, and that it improve the quality of its political and economic
analysis, policy advice and dialogue, capacity-building programs, frameworks for donor
coordination, and aid delivery mechanisms. Following the presentation of the task force’s report
to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors in June 2002, the LICUS initiative was formally
launched in the Bank. In October 2002, the Bank set up a special unit in the Operational Policy
and Country Services (OPCS) Vice Presidency to coordinate LICUS implementation.1 This unit


1
 Evaluation of World Bank Support to Low Income Under Stress Countries:
http://imagebank.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2013/12/11/000356161_20131211143926/Re
ndered/PDF/821920IEGAppro00Box379862B00PUBLIC0.pdf
was the first to develop the list methodology, meant to be used as guidance for which countries
would receive the additional engagement described above.

Through ongoing consultation with partner countries and increased coordination with regional
development banks, the acronym LICUS was increasingly regarded as a Bank-centric term and
common language with clients and partners was found in the term “fragile states”. The new term
was accompanied by an expanded definition which included countries with peace-keeping and
peace-building missions and introduced the concept of “harmonizing” (averaging) CPIA scores
from the World Bank with those of regional development banks to reflect a global and regional
perspective in the classification (see details below).

In 2011, the World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development (hereafter
WDR 2011) called for a paradigm shift in the development community’s work on FCS. The
report concluded that violence and other challenges plaguing FCS cannot be resolved by short-
term or partial solutions in the absence of institutions that provide people with security, justice,
and economic opportunities. This paradigm is based on the following findings: (a) violence takes
many forms, is often recurrent, and can mutate over time; (b) successful transitions have
involved the creation of “inclusive enough” coalitions and early and convincing “signaling” of
intent through concrete and credible actions; (c) building capable and legitimate institutions to
deliver citizen security, address injustice, and create employment is key to breaking these cycles
of violence; and (d) responding to these priorities requires much greater partnership and
discipline by external actors, and revised procedures to permit greater speed, allow for longer
engagements, and better manage the inevitable risks inherent in assisting FCS.2

In an effort to operationalize the WDR 2011, the Center on Conflict, Security and Development
was created (July 2011), with a presence in Nairobi and Washington DC under the OPCS VP.
This unit currently has managed the World Bank’s Harmonized List of Fragile Situations since
then and will continue to do so when it evolves into the Fragile, Conflict and Violence Group,
July 1, 2014.

Historical Classification Systems (by Fiscal Year)

                   Low Income Countries Under Stress List (2006-08)3

      i.       LICUS countries were identified by weak CPIA ratings.
      ii.      They covered a spectrum of fragility and included: countries with deteriorating
               governance, states in prolonged political crisis, post-conflict transition countries and
               those undergoing gradual but still fragile reform processes.



2
    Operationalizing the 2011 World Development Report: Conflict, Security and Development
3
    FY06-08 LICUS lists
       iii.      The Bank defined LICUS as (i) low income countries with overall CPIA and
                 governance average of the CPIA ratings of 3.2 or less, (ii) non-member territories and
                 IDA-eligible countries without CPIA data.
       iv.       “Severe” LICUS countries had the lowest CPIA score within this grouping.
       v.        The “marginal” LICUS group scores are on the edge of what was considered LICUS
                 and were included on the list for monitoring purposes only.
       vi.       The LICUS list was an internal document, and was not publically disclosed. The
                 LICUS lists from these years have been made available on a case by case basis for
                 research.

                    Fragile States list (2009-10)

i.            In 2009, the LICUS List became the Fragile States list.
ii.           The Fragile States list followed the same format as the LICUS list, with categorization
              as: (i) Core Fragile States score lowest within the grouping, with CPIA score of 3.0 or
              lower, and (ii) Marginal Fragile States have scores between 3.0 and 3.25.4
iii.          The categorization as core or marginal was an internal operational categorization (mainly
              relating to staffing benefits).5


Current Harmonized List of Fragile Situations (2011-2014)

              a. In FY11, reflecting consultations with clients and partners, the name of the Fragile
                 States list was changed to create the Harmonized List of Fragile Situations.
              b. ‘Fragile situations’ include countries or territories with (i) a harmonized CPIA
                 country rating of 3.2 or less, and/or (ii) the presence of a UN and/or peace-keeping or
                 political/peace-building mission during the past three years.
              c. The list includes only IDA eligible countries and non-member or inactive
                 territories/countries without CPIA data.
              d. The list excludes IBRD countries (for which the CPIA scores are not publically
                 disclosed); unless there is the presence of a peace-keeping or political/peacebuilding
                 mission – for which the country will be listed on the harmonized list with the
                 exclusion of its CPIA score.
              e. The ‘harmonization’ comes from averaging the World Bank CPIA scores with those
                 of relevant regional development banks’ (African Development Bank and Asian
                 Development Bank) ratings to arrive at a harmonized rating of 3.2 or lower.6



4
  FY09-10 Fragile States Lists.
5
  FY10 Fragile States List.
6
  Through averaging the CPIA scores, the harmonized score is recorded to up to 3 decimal places. Thus, the
threshold is in effect 3.200, as only states with scores of 3.200 or less are included.
         f. Political and Peace-Building Missions are specifically defined as the presence of a
            UN and/or regional (for example: AU, EU, OAS) peace-building and political
            mission in this country in the last three years.7
         g. Peace-keeping Missions are specifically defined as the presence of a UN and/or
            regional (for example: AU, EU, NATO) peace-keeping operation in this country in
            the last three years,8 with the exclusion of all border monitoring operations (for
            example UNMOGIP in India and Pakistan or UNFICYP in Cyprus).
         h. The Harmonized List of Fragile Situations is released both internally and externally
            annually, a practice which began in 2009 (see below)

An evolving concept, current critiques and future adaptations

The limitations of using the CPIA score to underpin the fragile situations list have been well
documented within the World Bank. In the recent Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) reporting
on the World Bank’s operationalization of the WDR 2011 and engagement with fragile states ,9
IEG concluded that “The assumption that the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
(CPIA), which was designed primarily as an instrument to determine entitlements under the
Performance-Based Allocation system, works equally well for FCS classification has proved to
be problematic in recent years with the emergence of new drivers of fragility and conflict.” The
report recommends that the World Bank “[develop] a more suitable and accurate mechanism to
classify FCS….”

Discrete classification systems tend not to capture the nuances, fluid nature and multi-
dimensional complexities of the concepts of state fragility, conflict or instability. While the
original intent of the list was a monitoring tool to guide Bank engagement with clients with
unique development challenges, it has been acknowledged (see the management response to the
IEG report) that definitions built on the CPIA and peacekeeping missions are insufficient to the
task. The current direction of analysis underpinning the fragility list aims to include more multi-
dimensional approaches to identifying fragile situations so as to provide better guidance of
relevance to the wider Bank group.




7
  Sources: UN DPKO website, AU website, EU website.
8
  Sources: UNDPKO website, AU website, EU website, OSCE website
9
  Independent Evaluation Group. 2013. World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected
States : An Independent Evaluation. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16999 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO
                                      List of Acronyms



ADB      Asian Development Bank
AfDB     African Development Bank
AU      African Union
CCSD    Center on Conflict, Security and Development
CPIA    Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
DPA     UN Department of Political Affairs
DPKO    UN Department for Peace-keeping Operations
EU      European Union
FCS     Fragile and Conflict Affected Situations
IDA     International Development Association
IBRD    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
LICUS   Low Income Countries Under Stress
NATO    North Atlantic Treaty Organization
OECD    Organization for Economic Co-ordination and Development
OPCFC   Operational Policy and Country Services Fragile and Conflict Situations
OPSFC   Operational Policy and Services Fragile and Conflict Situations
OSCE    Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
WDR     World Development Report




                            Please reach out to our team with any other
                                       queries you may have

                          Nadia Piffaretti (npiffaretti@worldbank.org)

                          Laura Ralston (lralston@worldbank.org)

                          Khadija Shaikh (kshaikh@worldbank.org)
