                                                                                         89290
                             Mozambique PFM for Results Program

                       Annex 5: Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment


1.     In preparation for the PFM for Results Program, a Fiduciary Systems Assessment
(FSA) covering financial management (FM), procurement, and fraud and corruption was
conducted. The principles governing fiduciary management for Program-for-Results are set out in
OP 9.00. In line with the PforR Guidance Note, the FSA reviews the adequacy of the applicable
rules, procedures, and oversight mechanisms for the Program and the effectiveness of their
implementation by the concerned agencies (including both the capacity and the performance). The
conclusion of the assessment is that the Program fiduciary systems meet OP 9.00 requirements,
and provide a reasonable basis for this PforR operation. However, the current risk-rating is
“substantial?, which requires specific mitigation measures (see summary Table 1).

2.     The Program Technical Assessment sets out the scope of the Program. The key features
relevant to the integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment are:

(a) The Program uses the Government’s financial and fiduciary systems; and
(b) The program itself has been designed to improve the fiduciary performance of selected sub-
    sectors in health and education.

3.    Five key risks have been identified in the Program fiduciary systems, which could
undermine the achievement of the results supported by the Program:

(a) Firstly, the operational expenditures of the program could be spent without complying with
    internal rules and controls governing them; this could lead to inefficient, ineffective,
    uneconomical or unethical spending;
(b) Secondly, there is a risk of poor value for money in the procurement of critical gap-filling
    medicines, using the performance allocations provided under the program;
(c) Thirdly, poor supply chain functioning increases risks associated with the theft or diversion of
    medicines for resale;
(d) Fourthly, direct grants made available to primary schools are vulnerable to being used for
    purposes other than those intended;
(e) Finally, in both sectors, there is a risk that the system for identifying, reporting, investigating
    and prosecuting cases of fraud and corruption, while formally in place, may not function
    effectively in practice. This could lead to: under-detection of potential F&C cases, delays in the
    treatment of complaints or allegations of fraud and corruption, and limited prosecutions.

Specific Risks and Mitigation Measures

4.       Program financing and expenditure framework. Financing for the Program will be
provided through the Government’s annual budget. Most budget lines included in the expenditure
framework will be identified and monitored through the Government financial management
information system (e-SISTAFE). However, expenditures on education, youth and technology
services are currently combined under as single budget code, of which around 85 percent are
education expenditures. DLI 7 requires the creation of a classification of education expenditures at
district level that that distinguishes between primary schools, secondary schools, and other services.
This will improve the transparency, relevance and effectiveness of budget classification.

                                                  1
Financing Framework

5.      Assessment of the Financing Framework: Bank financing will contribute to the
Government’s PFM for results program budget and funds. These will be disbursed to sector
ministries and agencies through the treasury system. High budget execution levels in health and
education sectors indicate that this system of releases is functioning well. Given the Treasury’s role
in managing the program, as well as the political costs associated with the essential activities in two
social sectors, the availability of financial resources to meet most of the program’s operational
requirements is not seen as a significant risk.

6.      Procedures for routing funds from the Ministry of Finance to the respective sector ministry
to support Program financed activities (performance allocations and capacity development) have
been detailed in the program operations manual. Clear steps and timeframes will ensure funds are
directed appropriately and in a timely manner.

Expenditure Framework

7.       Table A5.1 presents the program expenditure framework:

Table A5.1 Expenditure Framework
                                                                                                   US$ Millions
Description                                                    FY14            FY15           FY16           Total
1. Storage and distribution of medicines
  Operational costs*                                             1.2              1.3            1.4           3.9
  Performance based allocations - purchase of
                                                                 4.0              4.0            3.0          11.0
  critical medicines
  Other performance based allocations at central,
                                                                 1.5              3.3            5.8          10.6
  provincial and district levels
2. District Education Management
  Operational costs**                                           22.9             23.8          25.0           71.7
  Performance based allocations - school funds                     -              1.2          12.1           13.3
  Other performance based allocations at central,
                                                                 2.5              3.5            2.3           8.3
  provincial, and district levels

3. Capacity development and Systems
                                                                 1.8              2.2            4.0           8.0
   Strengthening (Health, education, MoF)

4. Program coordination and operational costs
                                                                 0.8              1.5            1.5           3.8
   (MoF)
                                                                 34.7            40.8           55.1         130.6
*Storage and distribution costs only cover cost from the Recipient’s central to provincial levels. Spending at provincial
level and below is currently co-mingled with other expenditures in the chart of accounts. The costs of personnel
working directly on storage and distribution that are not covered by the Recipient’s health sector common funds are
included.
** Recurrent costs of District Services for Education, Youth and Technology (SDEJT), including, but not limited to,
personnel costs, office supplies, mission travel, fuel and workshops.

8.     Assessment of the Expenditure Framework: The Government has a well-developed
budgeting process which includes a medium-term outlook and program expenditures largely
comprised of existing budget lines on the recurrent budget of health and education ministries.



                                                           2
However, weaknesses in its implementation create a risk that spending will not be efficient. In the
case of the PFM for results program, two main issues are at stake.

(a) Poor targeting of performance allocations and capacity development provided under the
    program to achieve results. The operations manual and implementation arrangements mitigate
    this risk as they require that a clear link is made between the results pursued by the Program,
    and the performance allocations and capacity development activities that would be supported
    (Annex 1 Table A1.1.1 gives an overview of performance allocations and capacity
    development). The focus and structure of the performance allocations as well as the
    effectiveness and continuing relevance of capacity development activities will be reviewed
    annually and adjusted as needed. An early mid-term review will take place, during which the
    relevance and connection to program results of the capacity development activities will be a
    particular area of focus. In addition, performance allocations and capacity development
    activities will be made public and disseminated in the relevant sectors, in order to further
    incentivize change and encourage stakeholders to report any abuse through the complaint
    handling mechanisms described later in this Annex.
(b) Inefficient use of operating expenses. The program expenditures include significant amounts
    allocated for operational costs, which are essential for the smooth delivery of pharmaceuticals to
    points of service delivery, as well as for the proper functioning of schools. Evidence from other
    contexts as well as from Mozambique points to the risk that these operating expenses will be
    spent inefficiently or misappropriated. This is why one of the core objectives of the program is
    to increase the efficiency of operating expenditures. All DLIs will contribute to this overall
    objective, some directly by increasing outputs for a given level of inputs, others indirectly by
    strengthening transparency, voice and accountability mechanisms. The program will strengthen
    the institutional capacity of respective internal auditors in health and education sectors to
    increase compliance with internal controls.

Program implementation framework

9.      Program implementation framework: Implementation of the PFM for Results Program at
the central level will involve the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of
Health, and CMAM. At the local level, it will involve the provincial medicines warehouses, district
directorates of planning and finance, other district level offices, such as SDJETs, as well as school
councils and health centers. Capacity development activities to strengthen public sector
management will be provided through the Program, and will help ensure effective team working
within sectors, and learning across sectors.

Financial Management Framework

10.      Assessment of Financial Management Framework: The “SISTAFE? PFM law and the
combination of the e-SISTAFE information system and well-established manual procedures in
districts where e-SISTAFE cannot be rolled out due to lack of power and commercial bank branches
provides a solid overall basis for the financial management of the program. However, weaknesses
remain in the implementation of this financial management framework, some of which could affect
the achievement of results under the program. In turn, the PFM for results program provides an
opportunity to address critical system weaknesses. This section summarizes key financial



                                                  3
management strengths and weaknesses, their potential impact on program results and proposed
mitigating measures.

(a) Budgeting and accounting: The government’s budgeting and accounting systems are
    appropriate for purposes of planning, monitoring and reporting on the financial execution of the
    program. The government’s budgeting and accounting classification allows the proper recording
    of transactions and their presentation in financial statements. Nevertheless, a specific issue is the
    limited number of classifiers used at the district level for the education sector. The Program has
    a DLI to enable the classification of education expenditures separately by various levels of
    schools and other sub-sectors included in the Servicos Distritais de Educação Juventude e
    Tecnologia (SDEJT). In addition, around one third of districts do not currently have on-line
    access to e-SISTAFE. This presents a relatively modest constraint, in that such districts are
    unable to access real-time budgetary information. Instead, they must rely on paper based
    systems, with entry of information into the electronic system at the nearest institution with
    access. This causes some delays and raises risks data integrity. However, the procedures for
    reconciling manual and electronic records are well-established and reasonably sound. This
    should not significantly affect the budgeting, monitoring or reporting of program spending.

(b) Treasury and funds flow: This is an area where the e-SISTAFE controls are robust and
    operating efficiently. The only significant weakness relates to cash transfers for the payment of
    salaries for education personnel and school funds in districts that are not connected to e-
    SISTAFE and do not have commercial banks. Spot checks will be included in the terms of
    reference of the Program audit in order to verify funds flow integrity.

(c) Internal controls: The Government’s e-SISTAFE, to be used for Program transactions, has
    built-in controls to ensure segregation of duties, where different personnel are responsible for
    entering the commitments, verifying their validity, and approving payments and funds are
    electronically transferred to the recipients’ bank accounts. e-Folha is the payroll system linked
    to e-SISTAFE and e-CAF is the census of human resource data. Although these systems have
    certain limitations in terms of their roll-out, maintenance, and consistent use to capture data, the
    potential impact of these weaknesses on the program will vary depending on the sector.

  i.   In the health sector, audits undertaken for the ProSaúde common fund have identified
       fiduciary risks, including discrepancies in procurement processes, missing or incomplete
       supporting documentation, and unauthorized expenditures. However, follow-up
       investigations have not found proven acts of fraud or corruption. The main impact of these
       internal control weaknesses on the program would pertain to the diversion of essential
       medicines due to poor supply-chain management. Reasonable inventory management and
       logistics management systems and standard operating procedures are in place for storage
       and distribution of medicines in the health sector, but adherence to these systems and
       procedures is inconsistent. In terms of mitigation measures, a series of partner driven PFM
       action plans have been put in place over the past two years, with variable levels of
       implementation. In April 2013, the Ministry of Health presented its own PFM action plan
       demonstrating an increased willingness to take ownership of PFM issues and to identify
       more realistic priorities for action. The Government health sector action plan includes
       critical actions on the medicine supply chain that are supported by the Program, including
       through the six health sector DLIs.



                                                   4
 ii.    The assessment has determined that financial management capacity and internal controls are
        stronger in the education than in the health sector. Nevertheless, fiduciary challenges remain
        due to the decentralization of financial authority to district governments and schools, where
        financial management capacity is weaker. This could lead to the unaccountable use of
        school funds, identified as a significant issue for the program. The possibility also exists
        that system-level controls, particularly over payroll, could be circumvented by collusion
        among staff. In November 2012, the Ministry identified the fraudulent duplicate payments
        of salaries for three relatively junior staff working at the Central level in the Ministry. The
        total amount involved was estimated to be $185,000. While payroll controls could not
        prevent the collusion and falsification of documents, detection controls played their role and
        the Ministry identified the discrepancy through third party confirmation, with the
        commercial bank in charge of payroll disbursement. The three civil servants involved have
        been suspended and would remain so until the conclusion of the investigation. Detection
        controls were effective in this case, for a problem occurring and managed at the central
        level. However, limited controls exist over teacher absenteeism, which goes undetected at
        school and district level and does not result in salary deductions.

(d) Internal audit: Four internal audit entities will have oversight over program implementation:
    the General Inspectorate of Finance (IGF), the General Inspectorate of Education (IGE), the
    General Inspectorate of Health (IGS) and the CMAM internal audit unit. Overall, the internal
    oversight system, which is coordinated by IGF, has made very significant progress in recent
    years. It has developed its staffing, operational independence and exposure to professional risk-
    based internal audit techniques. While it retains a focus on compliance with administrative and
    financial procedures and a strong investigative orientation, it has also started to produce audits
    on operational and value-for-money issues. The program will leverage the existing strengths of
    the internal oversight system and contribute to continue strengthening capacity where needed,
    including on staffing and the auditing of performance information.

   i.   The capacity of IGF has increased substantially since 2005, both in terms of numbers
        of auditors (it now has 115) and in terms of their professionalism. Its operational
        independence is strong, both formally and in practice, and it produces around 80 audits per
        annum. The IGF has received World Bank training on risk-based internal auditing
        techniques, and has shared this approach with a number of sector internal audit units. IGF
        audits follow procedures defined in a well-designed audit manual. It has put in place a
        systematized database to track audit recommendations and their follow-up, throughout
        government. While more progress could be made to continue shifting the IGF audit focus
        from compliance with administrative and financial procedures to operational performance,
        the IGF has become a robust public sector internal audit entity.

 ii.    The Education General Inspectorate is a smaller entity than the IGF (15 inspectors at
        central level and a further 105 at provincial level); it is mostly focused on administrative and
        financial matters. It has also benefited from World Bank provided training on risk based
        internal audit, and follows adequate planning and audit execution procedures.

 iii.   The Health General Inspectorate has 21 inspectors at the center and a further 62 based in
        provinces. It has suffered from changes in leadership over recent years and did not benefit
        from the training in risk-based internal audit techniques. In 2012, the Health Inspectorate



                                                   5
       conducted 27 audits, most of which focused on compliance with financial and administrative
       matters.

 iv.   The IGS is complemented by the CMAM Internal Audit Unit, which is of recent creation.
       While it only comprises two staff, they are highly specialized in pharmaceuticals logistics
       and administration. The Program will contribute to the strengthening of the CMAM internal
       audit unit by providing resources for the recruitment of additional auditors. It will also help
       the health and education internal audit entities to focus their audit work-plan on key
       Program risks.

(e) External audit: Tribunal Administrativo has the constitutional mandate to audit the general
    government accounts. The Tribunal Administrativo has been auditing various Bank-financed
    projects for last three years and the timeliness and quality of audit reports has been improved to
    a satisfactory level (and often superior to the performance of private sector audit firms in
    Mozambique). Based on this existing relationship, no challenges are foreseen in the Tribunal
    Administrativo rendering a separate audit opinion on the Program financial statements. Specific
    tests for high fiduciary-risk will be agreed as part of the audit terms of reference. The Tribunal
    Administrativo also has experience of performance auditing, reflecting their ability to audit the
    performance data to validate achievement of DLIs under the Program. The Tribunal
    Administrativo is receiving substantial capacity development support through: (i) a common
    fund to support their Corporate Plan of Action; (ii) strengthening of districts audits under
    National Decentralized Planning and Finance Program, and; (iii) an IDF grant by the Bank to
    support their certification program.

11.    The weaknesses in the FM systems’ performance could have a material impact on the
intended program results in the following three areas:

(a) Irregular use of operating expenses at central, provincial and district levels. The program
    expenditures include a significant amount of operating expenses relating to: (a) the storage and
    distribution of medicines; (b) district education management; (c) performance-based allocations
    spent to improve staff mobility, operating conditions, and supplies; (d) capacity development
    activities (hiring of consultants, travel and workshops) and; (e) program coordination. These
    expenses will include payment of utilities bills, travel tickets, per diems, fuel, maintenance of
    offices and vehicles, general office supplies, hiring of consultants, etc. Given the weaknesses in
    internal controls identified above, there is a risk that these expenses will be incurred without
    complying with Government regulations. In some cases, this could lead to fraudulent or corrupt
    use of these resources. The program will address this risk directly through DLI 3 on school
    based councils (to create the mechanisms for greater social accountability), DLI 8 on budget
    classification (to increase the transparency of operating expenditures in the education sector)
    and DLI 9 on inspections (to increase vertical accountability). In addition, the program will
    build the capacity of the finance, health and education general inspectorates, and mobilize them
    to verify compliance with internal controls throughout the program scope. The terms of
    reference of the external auditor of the program, the Tribunal Administrativo, will include a
    second degree review of the work of internal audit on the quality of internal controls in the
    program. Should the risk of fraudulent or corrupt use of these expenses materialize, the
    complaints handling mechanisms described in the section below will come into play.




                                                  6
(b) Unaccountable use of school funds: Approximately 37 percent of schools do not have
    complete financial records, in part, due to lack of clear communication on documentation
    requirements, and inadequate orientation of school councils and staff. As FM capacity is weak
    at district and school levels, there is a risk of unaccountable use of school funds. The Program
    will directly address this through a number of DLIs, including enhanced accountability to school
    councils for the use of school funds. Capacity development and improved representation on
    school councils will improve their ability to monitor use of funds and hold school directors and
    staff to account and strengthened school supervision; (iii) revision of school council guidelines
    to simplify financial documentation needs; (iv) internal audit units in the Ministry of Finance
    and Ministry of Education will also be strengthened, and enforce adherence to revised
    regulations; and (v) finally, the Program will also mitigate these risks by deepening the coverage
    of external audit ToRs. These will include review of expenditure documentation and lists of
    payments (with recipients disclosed) for a sample of primary schools visited. For schools that
    carry cash on the premises, the auditors will perform spot cash counts to assess the level of
    controls and verify the physical safety of cash.

(c) Diversion of essential medicines due to poor supply-chain management. An assessment of
    medicines procurement and supply chain management system undertaken in February 2011
    found shortcomings that included: (i) poor information accuracy and flow between the central,
    provincial and district levels of the supply chain; (ii) ad-hoc distribution of medicines from
    provinces downwards to districts and health units; (iii) fragmented management responsibility;
    and (iv) weak capacity in a system that does not function as a unified supply chain. Program
    DLIs specifically target improved information accuracy and flow, and better inventory
    management and storage. CMAM has recently re-established an internal audit unit, and
    disseminated audit standards to for provinces, districts and health units. The internal audit unit
    will undertake semi-annual supervisions of all provinces, and selected districts and health units
    as part of the program. Poor supply chain functioning increases risks associated with the theft
    or diversion of medicines for resale on the black market. The Program DLIs all contribute to the
    improved integrity of the supply chain, and directly mitigate against such risks. The Program
    will also support increased capacity of internal auditors to supervise supply chain units against
    audit guidelines and standards. The internal audit units will undertake initial assessment of
    progress against DLIs. These assessments will be verified by the Tribunal Administrativo.

Procurement Framework

12.     Assessment of Procurement Framework: The program has a relatively modest procurement
profile compared to the total estimate of expenditures. Besides petty purchases of operational
nature, the program will undertake procurements of: (a) critical medicines amounting to a maximum
of US$ 9.2 million; (b) consultants and equipment for the capacity development and systems
strengthening,1 and; (c) small works and equipment supported by performance based allocations.
The bulk of these procurements including (a) and (b) will be managed by two agencies at the central
level - CMAM and DNT. Small works and equipment under the performance-based allocations will
be managed by respective agencies at central, provincial, and district levels, but the individual
procurements involved are likely to be very small. None of the planned procurements, based on


1
 Out of US$ 8 million for the capacity development and systems strengthening, a significant proportion is expected to be spent on
non-procurable items such as incremental staff salaries, logistics of training workshops including travel and accommodation of
participants etc.

                                                               7
their estimated value at this time, will require review or approval by the Operational Procurement
Review Committee.2

13.     Poor selection of, failure to secure competitive prices for, or poor quality of medicines
could reduce the efficiency of pharmaceutical procurement. The Department of Pharmacy is
responsible for developing an essential medicines list (EML) that includes cost-effective medicines
that are relevant to the treatment and prevention needs of Mozambique. The current list was last
revised in 2010. CMAM may only procure medicines that are included on the EML. USAID is
currently supporting the Department of Pharmacy to revise the process for producing the EML, and
to update the current list. The table of performance based allocations developed by MISAU
currently includes allocations to the Department of Pharmacy conditional on the revision and
publication of a new EML during the period of the Program. USAID is also providing technical
assistance to improve procurement practices in the Ministry of Health and in CMAM (two long-
term and three short-term technical assistance placements to support procedure strengthening and
monitoring). This will help to ensure that procurement is well targeted, relevant and effective. The
National Medicines Quality Control Laboratory (Laboratorio Nacional de Controle de Qualidade
de Medicamentos (LNCQM) under the Department of Pharmacy) is responsible for ensuring the
quality of medicines. The LNCQM is receiving technical support from the US Government to
achieve accreditation to international standards (e.g. ISO 17025). A protocol will be agreed between
the Bank and the Government to ensure that all consignments of medicines financed with Program
funds will be sampled for quality testing by a laboratory that meets international standards.3

14.     The Program will improve the quality, timeliness and flow of information in the
pharmaceutical supply chain. This will support improved procurement forecasting and supply
planning. The ToRs of the Program external audit will include specific audit tests to prevent and
detect the key procurement practice risks (e.g. verifying that products procured are listed on the
Essential Medicines List and benchmarking procurement prices against relevant international
comparisons).

15.    The Program Coordination Team under DNT will engage a Procurement Specialist for
the program. The Procurement Specialist will coordinate the procurement of consultants and
necessary equipment for capacity building and systems strengthening activities under the program.
In addition, s/he will collaborate with respective UGEAs to provide advice for all other
procurements done under the program by health and education entities or PFM institutions.

16.      Procurements under the program are following government procedures. These
procedures were introduced in 2005 and updated in 2010, and are generally in accordance with
international standards. However, while the procurement framework is relatively robust,
implementation and enforcement remain weak, particularly at provincial and municipal levels.4 The
Unidade Funcional de Supervisão das Acquisições (UFSA) was created as the central procurement
institution. It is responsible for capacity-development, supervision, collecting and disseminating

2
  High value medicines procurements – such as those for HIV, TB and malaria – are currently undertaken by external agencies and
then delivered to CMAM for distribution. CMAM has confirmed that single medicines procurements by the Ministry of Health do
not breach OPRC review thresholds.
3
  The LNCQM, with support from the US government, aims to achieve accreditation in 2016. The Department of Pharmacy currently
works with accredited laboratories in Vietnam and Portugal for quality assurance testing. The GFATM Procurement and Supply-
chain Management Plan for Round 9 Phase 2 Funding (15 March 2013) has similarly agreed a protocol for the quality testing of
medicines procured directly by MISAU.
4
  Global Integrity Report, 2007; cited in Transparency International, 2007.

                                                              8
public procurement information. The capacity of UFSA is low, and it has difficulty delivering on its
mandate. Decentralized Unidades Gestoras Executoras de Acquisições (UGEA) were established in
2007, and are responsible for the management and execution of procurements at central, provincial
and district levels. They also generally struggle with quantitative and qualitative capacity issues. In
Mozambique, the procurement market is well developed although there is a perception that a
substantial part of the private sector shies away from public procurement because of perceived
corruption and/or cumbersome procedures.

17.     Competitive bidding and direct contracting (single-source) are commonly used
procurement methods for goods and works and World Bank standard bidding documents are
commonly used. A domestic margin of preference of 10 per cent for works, and 15 per cent for
goods, is mandatory. Given the likely size of any individual works or goods procurement under the
program, almost all will go through the national bidding and therefore, the domestic preference will
not be a concern.

18.     The 2008 CPAR update found several procurement areas in need of improvement,
which remain relevant: (i) a more robust management information system is needed that allows
UGEAs to systematically report procurement information; (ii) an effective complaint-handling
mechanism to disclose abuse of the systems and allow for effective remedies, while maintaining the
efficiency of the process; and (iii) the adoption of a more strategic/sustainable approach to capacity
development, including strategic plans and development of a specific professional career and
certification procedure within the public service for procurement specialists. In 2008 the
Government rejected a proposal for an independent complaint-handling mechanism, and to date no
progress has been made.

19.     The UGEA in the Ministry of Health has overall responsibility for procurement, and
reports to the deputy national director of logistic services. The UGEA receives specialized
support from the Department of Infrastructure and Equipment and from the Central Warehouse for
Medicines and Medical Supplies (Central de Medicamentos e Artigos Medico - CMAM). The
UGEA senior management team and procurement staff have only recently assumed their positions
and have limited experience. Procurement delays are common due to poor management and poor
quality of technical inputs. UN agencies are commonly used for procuring pharmaceuticals,
vaccines, and consumable health goods. There are no known cases of mis-procurement or incidents
for breach of procurement integrity. There is a risk of diversion of medicines along the supply
chain, although there is some evidence from central warehouse survey data to suggest that rates are
low in comparison to other countries in sub-Saharan Africa. General weaknesses in the performance
of the supply chain are being addressed directly through the Program DLIs (better information flow,
improved inventory management and increased supervision), and support from a number of other
development partners is also in place (particularly from the US Government and the GFATM).

20.     Procurement in the Ministry of Education is well organized at central level, but to a
much lesser extent at decentralized levels. Procurement issues at these levels are encountered
across the entire procurement process, including poor technical support for writing specifications,
doing bid evaluations and contract management. Issues can be summarized as general poor
procurement process management, poor transparency, and poor quality outputs. These risks will be
mitigated by supervision, capacity development activities and hand-holding support at appropriate
decentralized levels.



                                                  9
21.     The Procurement Decree 15/2010 has a complaints-handling mechanism against
proposed selections or contract awards. This allows complainants to file against the purchasing
authority. This mechanism is rarely used because of a perceived lack of legitimacy: (i) it is not
independent; (ii) it is not transparent, as there are no dedicated institutional arrangements, protocols,
or procedures; and (iii) it has no enforcement mechanism. To date the Ministry of Education has
reported three contract award complaints over the last two years, and none have been successful.
The new Procurement Decree (2010) establishes an anti-corruption framework, as well as rules for
debarment of companies found guilty of violating procurement regulations. To date, only a few
fraud cases have been reported, and no cases of corruption, collusion or coercion under this new
regime. The team will ensure that reporting on allegations of fraud and corruption related to
procurement are also collated with other allegations of fraud and corruption pertaining to the
program, and shared with the Bank on a biannually.

22.     The PFM for Results Program provides an opportunity to further strengthen
procurement practices in the health and education sectors, and to complement activities
supported by other partners. The Program Coordination Team (PCT), with support from the
Bank, will ensure that the Program Operational Manual includes good practice guidelines for
procurement. The PCT procurement specialist and support team will work with sectors to: (i)
identify weaknesses and capacity needs of all implementing agencies; (ii) advise PFM Working
Teams on developing procurement capacity development and systems reform packages for their
sector, that complement and build on existing support; (iii) assist each implementing sector to
implement capacity-development packages; (iv) support development of procurement plans,
monitor procurement plan implementation and delays, and provide timely feedback to address
delays and improve planning; (v) provide feedback to emerging problems and coach on improved
practices; and (vi) supervise capacity-development activities, assess progress, and report back to
PFM Working Teams for corrective measures if needed. The results of these actions are meant to
support the design, implementation and monitoring of a basic program procurement performance
mechanism as well as the design, implementation, monitoring and auditing of an appeals and
complaints-handling mechanism.5

Table A5.2: Procurement Support Services to be provided under the Program
 Client                                      Support service provided
 Program Management Committee                Strategic advice
 Program Coordination Team and its           Support on planning, procurement resource
 procurement specialist and support team     management, hand-holding procurement
 UFSA & staff responsible for design,        Support on procurement design, planning,
 supervision, and training of the UGEAs      human resources, monitoring, and supervision
 UGEAs at all levels                         Hand-holding support, training, mentoring,
                                             monitoring, and backstopping service

23.     According to Transparency International, public procurement is one of the areas most
affected by corruption in Mozambique. Procurement laws are not fully enforced, creating many
opportunities for abuse. 6 Common corruption schemes in public procurement include kickbacks,
collusion bidding, false or duplicate invoices by contractors, manipulation of bidding process by
public officials, and purchase for personal use.7 These issues are addressed in the next section.
5
  Procurement performance is defined by the service delivery aspects: time, place, price, quality and satisfaction of the beneficiary.
6
  Global Integrity Report, 2007; cited in Transparency International, 2012
7
  USAID, 2005, cited in Transparency International, 2012

                                                                  10
Anti-fraud and corruption laws and institutions

24.     This fiduciary assessment has identified a number of financial management and
procurement weaknesses, which may have implications for fraud and corruption. For financial
management these weaknesses include: (1) limited staff and capacity in FM, especially in the health
sector and at local level; (2) low level of compliance with regulations, especially at lower levels of
government; (3) potential diversion of program resources reserved for incentivizing performance to
routine activities; (4) weak record-keeping for school funds; and (5) inconsistent adherence to
procedures for storage and distribution of medicines increasing the risks of theft or diversion of
medicines for resale on the black market. For procurement, the risks identified are the following: (1)
violation of payment controls for procurement contracts in the health sector; (2) weaker
implementation of procurement framework, especially at lower levels; and (3) weak complaints
handling mechanism.

25.     The PforR program will address these weaknesses and potential risks through a
number of mitigation measures, which are either embedded in the DLIs; in the Plan of Action
(Annex 8); included in the TOR of the external audit which will be carried out by the Tribunal
Administrativo; or listed in Tables 5.2 and 5.3 of the fiduciary assessment (Integrated Fiduciary
Risk Mitigation Strategy; and Recommended Fiduciary Performance Indicators respectively).
Through the DLIs and planned inputs, the program focuses on strengthening several mechanisms
that will contribute to the reduction of some of the cited fiduciary risks, and consequently the fraud
and corruption risks.

26.      Anti-fraud and corruption measures in Mozambique are established through various
laws and regulations (including an outdated penal code; more recent anti-corruption laws;
and a Defense of the Economy Law from 1982). The Anti-Corruption Law, adopted in 2004 (Law
No. 6/2004 dated June 17 and Decree No. 22/2005)8 and limited to corruption involving bribes, is
being revised and strengthened. The Anti-Corruption Package, adopted by the Council of Ministers
in July 2011, and submitted to Parliament for approval in December 2011, is yet to be approved in
its entirety. Nonetheless, some important anti-corruption legislative pieces have been recently been
approved, including (i) Whistle-blower and Witness Protection Law, which came into effect
December 13, 2012; (ii) Public Probity Law, which includes conflict of interest and asset
declaration requirements; (iii) Organic Law of Prosecution Service, which allows the Anti-
Corruption Agency (Gabinete Central de Luta contra a Corrupção - GCCC) to investigate and
prosecute corruption crimes, including embezzlement, illicit enrichment, and conflict of interest.
The amendment of Anti-Corruption Agency competences is already in effect, but whistle-blower
and witness protection legislation will take time and resources to be fully implemented. If fully
implemented, then new legislation would provide Mozambique a strong anti-corruption framework
consistent with best practices.
Figure A5.1: Anti-Corruption Complaints Mechanisms




8
 Law No 1/79 dated January 11 and Law No 9/87 dated September 19 covered anti-corruption issues before the revised legislation in
2004-05.

                                                              11
27.     There are multiple avenues available to citizens to launch a complaint with respect to a
suspected case of corruption (see Figure A5.1). According to the Anti-Corruption Law (Law No
6/2004), complaints can be received by any administrative authority and the police, and not just the
Attorney General or the GCCC. The complaints received by GCCC or Attorney General may come
in writing, either anonymously or signed; in person, or through a hotline (linha verde). In addition,
dedicated staff within GCCC takes note of all corruption allegations published by the media, and
document these for potential investigation. The GCCC is mandated to document actions taken in
regards to these complaints, and proceed to their investigation if appropriate. The Tribunal
Administrativo (which will be in charge of external auditing of the program) is also required to
inform GCCC of any activity suspected of fraud and corruption they may have encountered during
the course of an audit. Public officials can present complaints on fraud and corruption to the internal
audit’s offices in their respective ministries, or to their superiors who must, in turn, submit it to the
GCCC.

28.     The GCCC, established in 2005, has the primary responsibility for the Government’s
effort to fight corruption. GCCC is located in the Office of the Attorney General in the Ministry
of Justice. The GCCC investigates complaints through its offices located in Maputo (capital city,
southern region), Beira (central region), and Nampula (northern region). The Secretaria
Permanente Distrital collects complaints at district level (directly and from various administrative

                                                   12
offices). S/he addresses those within his/her purview. Others are sent for action to Secretaria
Permanente Provincial, from where fraud and corruption related complaints are sent to GCCC. The
GCCC keeps track of complaints received, actions taken on each of them, as well as their
conclusion. An annual report is submitted to parliament summarizing all anti-corruption activities,
including status of corruption investigations by province and by type. Key challenges faced by
GCCC include: (i) capacity constraints (personnel, equipment, training, lack of software for
analysis); and (ii) coordination issues with other agencies on which they depend for their
investigations, such as financial auditing.

29.     In 2011, the GCCC handled 677 cases of corruption or theft of state property, a slight
increase over the previous year. Of these, further investigation led to 214 charges and 81
prosecutions. Complaints related to fraud and corruption are broken down in to the following
categories: illicit payments; misappropriation of funds; theft of goods, medicines and fuel and other
infractions. The Public Prosecution Service is in charge of prosecutions, but their performance in
successfully prosecuting cases of alleged corruption among government officials has been weak.
There is no specific information for conviction rates in 2011, as court proceedings are very slow.
However, for the 5-year period, 2006-2011, 163 individuals were convicted for corruption offences
or theft of state property.

30.     This fiduciary assessment has also looked into the existing complaint handling
mechanisms in place at Program level in both health and education sectors in order to detect
possible cases of fraud and corruption. Public institutions collect information thorough the
complaints’ books and complaint boxes (livros de reclamações e caixas de reclamações) placed in
their premises. Other complaints are registered through whistleblowing mechanisms by stakeholders
(employees, recipients of services delivered by public institutions, commercial banks, contractors,
media, and oversight agencies) in the form of verbal information in public domain or press reports
etc. The Central Office for Combating Corruption (GCCC) follows up these complaints based on
whistleblowing information. In general, the principle followed is that service complaints are
managed at the administrative levels, but notified upwards, directly or through superiors, to GCCC
where there are suspicions of criminal activity. The processes for opening, recording, classifying
and routing different kinds of complaints are set out in laws and regulations. All complaints are
supposed to be recorded, and a semi-annual report is made to the Council of Ministers by the
Ministry of Public Administration, broken down by type of complaint and sector. 9 The report also
summarizes how complaints were followed up. For example, the report for second semester of 2012
identifies that 873,583 petitions (775,167 at the central level) were received in total (across all
sectors), out of which 754,036 (659,468 at the central level) were treated and concluded.
Nevertheless, the existing complaint handling mechanisms, in practice, do not ensure that all
complaints are followed-up and that in each case the complainant is informed of the outcome of
those actions, including possible investigations of fraud and corruption allegations.

31.      The health and education sectors have established protest mechanisms available at all
layers of management, including the facility level. However, there is need for greater
dissemination of information on the existence of complaint books and boxes at health and education
facilities, their importance, and the guarantee of confidentiality for the information provided. The
users can also utilize free telephone lines (linhas verde) especially dedicated to complaints for
health and education sectors, respectively. These telephone lines are advertised through the radio
and the press. In addition to the complaint boxes and telephone lines, health service users can also
9
    The Bank team has reports for 4 years up to 2010 on file.

                                                                13
refer to the 117 Users’ Desks located in health organizations to register complaints. In the education
sector, the Program will support strengthening the School Councils’ Guidelines in this particular
respect, and encourage opening of complaint box by a sub-committee of the school council (under
oath of confidentiality with respect to fraud and corruption). Complaints books will also be
maintained, with separate columns to record complaint redress actions and communication with the
complainant in the end. The dissemination of improved guidelines for school councils under the
Program will emphasize the practical aspects of the complaint handling at the school level.
Supervision by SDEJTs will confirm compliance with the new guidelines in this respect. When a
complaint related to fraud and corruption is made, the school council will send all the relevant
information to Secretaria Permanente Distrital for necessary action/investigation.

32.    Corruption related complaints are collected by the Provincial Inspectorates, and in
turn, collated by the General Inspectorates (IGS and IGE) at central level. For example, the
IGS publishes an annual report of the complaints received, broken down by category and provinces.
Actions taken are also recorded. In addition to the complaints system, IGS audits also serve as
another means of detecting cases of fraud and corruption. The 2012 IGS report indicates that a total
of 314 infractions were detected through all channels, of which, 302 were sanctioned, leading in
some cases to suspension of civil servants.

33.    The following areas will be strengthened by the Program to ensure that the system
improves its efficacy: (i) ensure that all administrative offices have complaints boxes and books
available and that the process for handling complaints is transparent; (ii) support to the government
to improve functioning of the linhas verde; (iii) provide support to inspectors, ensuring they have
enough resources to conduct audits and collect complaints timely and adequately; (iv) support
dissemination of information on the complaints handling system.

34.    The Bank has agreed the following measures with the Government: (i) sharing
information on material and credible allegations of fraud and corruption, and the related
process of investigation, with the Bank. Complaints collected by the respective Inspectorates will
be aggregated with the complaints handled by GCCC. The PCT (DNT) will share all compiled
material and credible allegations, coming from GCCC and the Inspectorates, with the World Bank
on a semi-annual basis. The Program will also work with the Government to ensure that the anti-
corruption and governance regulations for PforR financing are met, including strengthening
complaint handling and reporting procedures, particularly in sectors; (ii) excluding companies that
have been debarred by the Bank or on the temporary suspension list for any contracts
financed by the PforR Program. The Program procurement is coordinated primarily by two
agencies: CMAM for medicines and PCT (DNT) for systems strengthening and capacity
development. Both of these agencies will have the list of debarred companies by the Bank and the
temporary suspension list to ensure these are excluded. They will be responsible for sharing the list
with any entity responsible for procurement in the Program and for updating it every six months. In
addition, the PFM for results sector working groups will also be provided the list of debarred firms
and the temporary suspension list to ensure that contracts under performance-based allocations or
operational expenses do not go to any of the firms on these lists; (iii) ensuring the right of the
Bank’s Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) to launch an independent investigation of any fraud and
corruption complaint received regarding this operation; and (iv) receiving necessary cooperation
from government authorities and appropriate institutions to conduct such an investigation.




                                                 14
Program Management

35.       A number of cross-cutting issues related to program management have been introduced:
(a) Program coordination and capacity development: The Program, through the Program
    Coordination Team, will recruit an adequately qualified FM Manager to assist and coordinate
    with the respective Departments of Administration and Finance (DAFs) of the sector ministries
    as well as to further train government staff as necessary. The Program financial reports will be
    prepared by PCT on a cash-basis in accordance with the Government requirements. Use of the
    e-SISTAFE will help obtain real-time information on the networked institutions, while the cash
    advances will provide an indication of the expenditures made by other entities not connected to
    the system. The documentation of advanced funds will be incorporated in e-SISTAFE, before
    generation of the quarterly and annual financial reports.
      The program also includes significant resources for systems strengthening and capacity
      development which will be available to all entities involved in program implementation in the
      areas of financial management, procurement and transparency. They will be complemented by
      other Bank and development partner operations that support capacity development in the health
      and education sector.
(b) Disbursements: Program disbursements by the Bank will be based on achievement of agreed
    results. Each DLI is taken as a withdrawal category, for the purposes of disbursement, as set out
    in Table A5.3 below:

      Table A5.3: Withdrawal Categories

                     Category                           Disbursement Linked           Amount of the
           (Disbursement Linked Indicator)            Result and Corresponding           Financing
                                                                Value*                Allocated (US$)
       (1) Average availability of a tracer set of   Increased average availability      3,993,056
       essential maternal and reproductive health    from 78.6% to 88%
       medicines at health facility level (DLI 1)
       (2) Number of provinces achieving the         Increased number of                 6,770,833
       minimum acceptable score of compliance        compliant provinces to 8
       with standards for stock management,
       warehousing, and distribution of
       medicines, as assessed by the CMAM
       Internal Audit Unit (DLI 2)

       (3) Proportion of Complete Primary            - School Councils’ Manual           9,000,000
       Schools that comply with defined, agreed      revised, approved and
       and disseminated standards for                distributed to all Complete
       transparency and accountability (DLI 3)       Primary Schools
                                                     - Increased proportion of
                                                     Complete Primary Schools
                                                     meeting standards for council
                                                     elections, school development
                                                     plan approval, and display of
                                                     development plan, budget and
                                                     expenditures to 60%
       (4) Proportion of treatment sites with a      Decreased stock-outs from           3,356,481
       stock-out of key ARVs at the end of each      27% to 21%

                                                      15
     month (final stock value) (DLI 4)
     (5) Proportion of districts for which CMAM    District reporting increased        6,134,259
     receives logistics information through the    from 73.5% to 87%
     SIMAM system (DLI 5)
     (6) Fill rate of approved requisitions from   Fill rates increased from 72%       4,745,371
     CMAM’s clients for tracer medicines (DLI      to 84%
     6)
     (7) Proportion of Complete Primary            Increased proportion of             6,000,000
     Schools which receive Direct School Grant     Complete Primary Schools
     funds on or before February 28 of each        receiving funds before
     Fiscal Year (DLI 7)                           February 28 to 90%
     (8) Revised district-level budget             - System configured to              6,000,000
     classification by Sub-Sector, configured      classify district education
     and applied (DLI 8)                           expenditures by Sub-Sectors,
                                                   - Following Fiscal Year’s
                                                   budget prepared by Sub-
                                                   Sector classification
                                                   - Current Fiscal Year’s
                                                   budget executed by Sub-
                                                   Sector classification
     (9) Proportion of Complete Primary            - School Supervision Manual         4,000,000
     Schools visited for supervision by SDEJTs     revised and distributed to all
     (DLI 9)                                       SDEJTs
                                                   - Increased School
                                                   Supervision to 50% of
                                                   Complete Primary Schools
                                                   and that 60% of those are
                                                   paid follow-up visits
                                                                                          50,000,000
   *Where no baseline is specified for a Scalable DLR in this column, its value will be deemed to be zero
   for purposes of carrying out the computations illustrated in Part B.2 of this Section.
(c) Program auditing: The auditing arrangements for the program will comprise internal and
    external auditing. The external audit process will place reliance on the work of the internal
    auditors, to the extent allowed by their assessment of the quality of the work undertaken. The
    internal auditors of the program will include the General Inspectorates of Finance, Health and
    Education, as well as the CMAM internal audit unit. They will ensure compliance with
    government rules and regulations, and assess whether the Program operations manual is
    followed. In addition, internal audit institutions will carry-out detailed data verification on
    achievement of DLIs and prepare a report for independent validation by external auditors. The
    Supreme Audit Institution of Mozambique, the Tribunal Administrativo, has the constitutional
    mandate to audit the general government accounts. In addition, the Tribunal Administrativo will
    render a separate audit opinion on the Program financial statements within 12 months after the
    close of each fiscal year. The Tribunal has also agreed to carry-out an independent validation of
    achievement of DLIs as a pre-condition for disbursement of Bank funds for the Program. The
    Program Coordination Team and respective Departments of Administration and Finance will be
    obligated to respond to audit observations within 30 days.




                                                    16
No Fiduciary risk      Performance indicator           Baseline      Recommended standard
 1 Budget            Annual budget allocations    Authorization to   Authorization to spend
   allocation and    for the PFM for Results      spend does not     against approved budget
   authorization to  Program made in              follow any time    allocations following
   spend             accordance with agreed       schedule           country’s budget cycle or
                     work plans and                                  within a month of
                     authorization to spend                          approval
                     given in a timely manner
2   Compliance of    All observations in the      Inconsistent       Response to audit
    Internal Control program internal audit       follow-up of       observation within 30
    Procedures       addressed in an effective    internal audit     days after the receipt of
                     and efficient manner         observations       the draft audit report
3   Procurement      Publication: procurement     Baseline to be     100% by the end of
    planning         planning, plan monitoring    determined at      Program
                     and reporting on Program     program start-up
                     and UFSA websites.
4   Procurement      Publication: Procurement     Baseline to be     100% by the end of
    competition and opportunities and contract    determined at      Program
    equal            awards on Program and        program start-up
    opportunity      UFSA websites.
5   Complaints       All procurement              Baseline to be     100% by the end of
    mechanism        complaints satisfactorily    determined at      Program
                     closed                       program start-up
6   Timely program Program financial              4 months           Interim program financial
    financial        statements are prepared on                      statements prepared
    reporting        time                                            within 2 months after the
                                                                     close of fiscal quarter
7   Timely external   Program external audits     12 months          Program audit reports to
    audits            carried out in a timely                        be available within 12
                      manner                                         months after close of the
                                                                     financial year
8   Audit Follow      Audit observations          Audit              All audit observations are
    up                addressed expeditiously     observations not   monitored and
                                                  resolved in a      satisfactorily resolved to
                                                  timely manner      the extent possible
                                                                     (preferably within 30
                                                                     days of receipt of audit
                                                                     report but not later than 3
                                                                     months)
9   F&C               F&C cases reported on a     Baseline to be     100% by the end of
    transparency      semi-annual basis by the    determined at      Program
                      Anti-Corruption             program start-up
                      Commission (GCCC)




                                             17
