                                                                                                        89291
                                 Mozambique PFM for Results Program

                                      Annex 4: Technical Assessment
Strategic Relevance of the PFM for Results program
1.      The discovery of large natural resource reserves in Mozambique has raised
expectations of increased economic growth, improved public services and poverty reduction.
However, the majority of the population has benefited little from growth in recent years, and
may be skeptical that the potential for increased government revenues will translate into
improved services. The development potential of future natural resource revenues will partially
depend on stronger PFM systems, as well as political commitment to broad based social and
economic development. A gap between political rhetoric and improvements in the everyday lives of
the population may fuel potential for social unrest. Similarly, changing development partner
circumstances (both funding constraints and changing modalities) and perceptions of
Mozambique’s development trajectory may lead to a drop in the levels of assistance, in advance of
actual increases in revenue (it is still some years before natural resources will reach market). The
Government needs to respond to both popular expectations and a changing partner environment.
This creates a window of opportunity to increase government focus on the effective management of
public resources and improved service delivery.
2.      While Mozambique has undertaken a successful program of PFM reforms at the
central level, its implementation in sector ministries, provinces and districts has lagged
behind. Mozambique is among the highest-performing developing countries in Africa in terms of
its aggregate Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) score. 1 Between 2006 and
2010 PEFA scores improved markedly, particularly in upstream functions. While aggregate PEFA
scores are high for legal and policy frameworks, implementation is weaker. In addition, upstream
elements of the PFM cycle (e.g. budget preparation, tax policy) perform better than downstream
functions, including budget execution, procurement, internal controls, accounting, and audit follow-
up. This affects the ability of the Mozambican Government to effectively and equitably deliver
services, and it results in poor value for money in public spending.
3.      In health and education, these lags in PFM reform implementation are affecting
service delivery. Health and education sectors are necessary contributors to Mozambique’s
development pathway, and account for high levels of both domestic and external public
expenditure. Education has typically accounted for 18 – 19 percent of government spending in
recent years. Government health expenditure has varied between 7 and 10 percent (2008 – 2012),
and the sector is also heavily dependent on external financing; approximately 50 percent of total
health expenditure is off-budget external assistance. Important progress has been made against some
Millennium Development Goal targets; primary school enrolment is over 98 percent with gender
parity, and child mortality rates have fallen from 219 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 97 in 2011.
However, progress has been far more limited in other areas. Primary school completion rates for
boys and girls are under 50 percent, and learning outcomes are poor. 2 Maternal mortality rates
remain high at 490 per 100,000 live births. The contraceptive prevalence rate in rural areas is 7
percent. There are 3,300 in-patient malaria deaths each year, and the disease remains the largest
cause of child mortality. Efficient budgeting, allocation, use and accountability for resources in
these sectors are necessary if these challenges are to be addressed. As well as improving the
1
  Andrews, M. (2010) How Far Have Public Financial Management Reforms Come in Africa? Faculty Research Working Paper
Series, Cambridge: Harvard Kennedy School.
2
  Southern and East Africa Consortium for Monitoring Educational Quality (see http://www.sacmeq.org/)
efficiency of government spending, stronger PFM processes may increase the confidence of
development partners to bring more external financing on-budget, and to use government systems.
4.      In the health sector, the reliable availability of appropriate and high-quality medicines
is a necessary component for effective healthcare delivery, and essential to addressing the
primary causes of morbidity and mortality in Mozambique. Specific PFM related weaknesses
have been identified, and the Government has developed proposals to improve performance.
There are many inter-connected system and external challenges to improved healthcare delivery and
health outcomes in Mozambique. These require long-term strategic investment both within the
sector and more broadly across government (e.g. human resource constraints are particularly
challenging, slow moving and linked to broader education, labor force and public sector reform
agendas). The medicines supply chain provides a relatively discrete sub-system within the health
sector, and one in which PFM weaknesses have measurable impact on performance (e.g. poor
medicines procurement practices and diversion are common efficiency problems in developing
countries).3 Medicines are also a very visible indicator to the public of the basic functioning of the
health system, and often constitute the major part of out-of-pocket health expenditures. Recent
analysis of the medicines supply chain 4 identified specific weaknesses in financing, demand
forecasting, procurement, storage and distribution of medicines to health facilities, resulting in
inefficient deployment and use of existing resources. This is clearly an area where improved
management of public resources, including stocks of pharmaceuticals, would contribute to more
efficient public spending and improved service delivery.
5.      In the education sector, Mozambique has been successful increasing enrolment but
retention and learning outcomes remain poor. What happens in schools, and how teaching
resources are translated into learning outcomes are now the primary concerns of the Ministry of
Education and development partners. School based management aims to strengthen the
accountability of schools to their local communities, and to build improved oversight of how
education inputs are used. It is an approach that has been used in a wide variety of country settings
to improve school performance.5 The third Strategic Plan for Education (2012-2016), approved by
the Council of Ministers on June 12, 2012, identifies school based management as an important
mechanism to support better outcomes, and particularly to ensure that resources (such as teachers,
premises, learning materials, funds) are used for their intended purposes. However, school councils
currently lack the capacity to contribute effectively to school management and performance
monitoring. Therefore, improving school based management and accountability is highly relevant to
the education sector agenda in Mozambique.
Technical Soundness
6.       The PFM for Results program is technically sound for the following reasons: (i) it brings
together the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of health, the Ministry of Education and the CMAM
(Central de Medicamentos e Artigos Médico – the Central Medicines Store) to jointly tackle
challenges in the management of public resources in the selected sub-sectors. The program provides
strong incentives for the collaboration of these institutions, which had not hitherto worked together,
on addressing public financial management challenges in sectors; (ii) it combines changed
incentives at the central, provincial and district level through performance linked allocations, with
the technical assistance needed to overcome capacity limitations in sectors to meet objectives; and
(iii) the program gives the authorities the flexibility to address the political economy drivers of
3
  The World Health Report (2010) notes that 3 of the main losses of efficiency in health systems relate to medicines.
4
  Plano Estratégico da Logística Farmacêutica: Rascunho Final (Durão, J. December 2012).
5
  Bruns B, Filmer D, and Patrinos H.A. Making Schools Work: New Evidence on Accountability Reforms. World Bank, 2011.
change that can help or hinder reform. Intervening in PFM processes inevitably involves changes to
formal and informal distributions of power and access to resources. This requires both deep
understanding competing interests within systems, and the ability to adjust implementation as
incentive structures and institutional relationships change.
7.      Financing constraints and inefficiency of spending on medicines in Mozambique
contribute to poor outcomes. External financing for vertical disease programs constitutes
significant proportion of funding for medicines in Mozambique (an estimated US$ 120 – 130
million per annum). This funding is essential to meet the high-burdens of HIV, malaria and TB that
are prevalent in the country. As this funding is restricted, it reduces the ability of the Ministry of
Health to allocate resources across all health needs. The funds available for essential primary health
care medicines are often insufficient. While the volume and flexibility of funding are constraints,
the inefficiency of spending due to system weakness constitutes a serious cause of poor health
outcomes. System weaknesses, leading to unreliable storage, distribution and availability of
medicines, reduce the efficiency of existing and potential future expenditures. Better system
performance would provide an important and durable means to increase the coverage of medicines
within the existing resource envelope, and to maximize the impact of any additional funding in the
future. Improved transparency and PFM in the medicine supply chain would also provide a stronger
basis for costing medicines and supply chain needs, and can contribute to the development of a
sustainable health financing strategy. 6
8.      The Program will primarily focus on improving the transparency and efficiency of the
medicines supply chain. It will strengthen institutional incentives for alignment along the
length of the medicines supply chain, improve the quality and use of information, and reduce
vulnerability to waste or diversion of stock. This focus will complement the large scale funding
for medicines procurement provided by vertical funds (such as PEPFAR and the GFATM).7 The
current reform space in the medicines supply chain to drive improved efficiency requires that the
Program works within the existing organizational structure, while building a foundation for more
profound reforms in the future. The focus on improving accountability, information flow and
alignment of supply chain units can deliver performance improvements in the short term, while
building a performance culture and information base that can support longer term changes. The
multi-layered structure of the supply-chain in Mozambique amplifies inefficiencies in the timeliness
and quality of information communicated between supply chain units; small delays and inaccuracies
at lower levels are aggregated at superior levels, leading to poor communication of demand and
supply information, poor visibility of inventory and lack of clarity regarding pipeline and delivery
scheduling.8 Weak alignment of supply and demand can also lead to gaming behaviors (such as
tactical over-ordering by delivery units in anticipation of incomplete order filling) that further
undermine performance, and increased vulnerability to inventory diversion and wastage. Similarly,
inaccurate and irregular provision of order information undermines scheduled distribution, resulting
in sub-optimal route planning, multiple ad hoc collections and deliveries, more complex inventory
management and monitoring, and poor staff utilization at stocking points.



6
  The Bank and development partners are supporting the Government of Mozambique to develop a road map for a comprehensive
health financing strategy. This will include improved costing and prioritization of health programs in Mozambique, including
prioritized medicines and system investment needs.
7
  The pooled sector fund (Prosaúde) also contributes to medicines procurement, primarily primary health care kits. The Bank has also
supported medicines procurement through the Health Commodities Security Project (P121060) and the Heath Service Delivery
Project (P099930).
8
  Yadev, P and Weimer, B. Political Economy of the Supply-Chain for Medicines in Mozambique, 2013.
9.       Performance allocations and technical assistance to provincial and district warehouses
will incentivize and support more timely and accurate provision of data up and down the
supply chain, and reward increased adherence with standard operating procedures for
inventory and warehouse management. 9 Increased supervision complements these positive
incentives. These improvements, combined with better reporting of medicines availability at health
centers, should increase the quality of information available for procurement and distribution
planning, and reduce vulnerability to diversion of medicines from the public sector for private
sale.10 Institutional incentives, such as improvements in working conditions and access to training,
will help reduce the resistance to such changes, although careful monitoring will be required to
assess if these are sufficient to facilitate shifts in behavior. In addition, the Program allows for some
performance based allocation to be used to support gap-filling purchases for essential primary care
medicines. This will help overcome inefficiencies associated with the restrictions that come with
resources available through vertical funds.11
10.     In the education sector, the Program will change accountability relationships between
communities, school councils, school directors, SDJETs and district government
administrations. The focus of the education DLIs combines an improved financial management
environment (DLIs 7 and 8), with strengthened community accountability (DLI 3) and management
oversight (DLI 9). Better definition of budget classifications will reduce the flexibility currently
available to district government administrations in the reallocating and use of education budgets for
other sub-sectors, and increase predictability of resourcing to schools. Consequently, there may be
resistance to this change at district administration level, and strong commitment from the center to
implement these reforms is required. While discussions with Government counterparts suggest such
commitment exists, DLI8 will also provide central authorities with a financial incentive to ensure
this change takes place. Similarly, strengthening the performance and accountability of school
councils, particularly the participation and oversight of school development plans, will limit the
scope available to school directors for the utilization of school resources for other activities, such as
political campaigning. This shift in power is a primary focus for the education intervention. The
Program design and approach support this shift through complementary mechanisms: guidelines for
the composition of school councils that increase community voice, particularly of mothers;
technical assistance to strengthen the performance of school councils; increased supervision to
reinforce the role of school councils; and performance allocations to compensate for this
rebalancing of roles and strengthened accountability. School based management approaches have
been successful in driving such re-balancing of accountabilities in a number of countries 12 and
experience suggests that such shifts take time to become properly established. The degree to which

9
  All procurement currently takes place at central levels of the system, and vulnerabilities to rent seek behaviors are consequently
concentrated here. While improved information and inventory visibility will underpin better procurement, the results framework does
not specifically focus on procurement processes, although procurement benchmarking will be included in audit terms of reference.
Other development partners are addressing procurement directly. USAID is funding placement of two long-term, and three short-
term, procurement advisors in the CMAM procurement department. They will support identification and implementation of
improvements across core procurement functions, including tendering/contracts, order delivery tracking, spend management, and
supplier management. The team will embed organizational redesign (structure, functions, and roles & responsibilities), procedural
changes (new processes and SOPs) and technological tools (forms, database, trackers) across these functions, and support their
integration with warehouse and finance systems.
10
   While highly likely that some diversion of medicines out of the supply chain for private sale takes place, firm data on such
practices is limited. A 2011 report indicated comparatively limited (when compared to other developing country systems) proportions
of stock unaccounted for (based on a tracer list of medicines followed from the center down to health facilities). Average Estimated
losses varied by level: 0 percent at central level, 1.13% at provincial level, 7.49% at district level and 8.21% at sub-district level.
(USAID. Supply Chain Logistics and Internal Controls Evaluation: Mozambique Country Assessment. February 2012.)
11
   Up to US$ 9.6 million will be available through the Program for the purchase of essential primary health care medicines. Although
inexpensive, these medicines are often neglected due to the restricted nature of vertical funding programs for HIV, TB and malaria.
12
   Bruns B, Filmer D, and Patrinos H.A. Making Schools Work: New Evidence on Accountability Reforms. World Bank, 2011.
central political leadership prioritizes school performance as a popular issue may also be an
important influence on how successful these reforms will be.
Ownership and Sustainability
11.    The Government’s own PFM Vision 2011 – 2025 recognizes the need to connect
reforms in primary, upstream processes, with associated downstream PFM processes inherent
in the efficient planning and delivery of public services (Figure A4.1). In this respect, the PFM
for Results Program is fully consistent with existing PFM reforms, and the Government’s own
commitment to deepen their implementation to have real impact on service delivery outcomes.
12.     The Program ensures sustainable improvement in practices, with high levels of
ownership by the stakeholders. The Program engenders a strong results focused approach to
driving change, both at the level of agreed disbursements linked indicators between the Government
and the Bank, and the use for performance based payments within sectors. It strengthens
information reporting and verification systems as essential corollaries to such results based
approaches. It supports experience of cross-sector working, establishes a mechanism to improve
management capacity, and builds a cadre of more effective public sector managers. These latter will
be better equipped to analyze implementation challenges in their organizations, convene teams to
devise solutions, and dynamically manage implementation with due consideration to the importance
of understanding inter- and intra-organizational incentives. The Program is fully aligned with
strategies and current action plans in both sectors, which set out short and medium term goals and
approaches for performance improvement.13
Figure A4.1: Mozambique PFM Vision 2011 - 2025




13.    PFM support will be demand driven, with PFM institutions working closely with sector
and local agencies as needed. Whiles PFM technical assistance can draw on external consultants
where necessary, PFM institutions will be closely involved with the implementation of the Program.

13
  In the health sector: (a) CMAM Program for Action 2013, and accompanying Results Framework and (b) Pharmaceutical Logistics
Strategic Plan (draft, awaiting approval). In the education sector: The Third Strategic Plan for Education, 2012 – 2016.
This will ensure that capacity development activities are consistent with the directions and
approaches of overarching PFM reform. PFM institutions will also be able to learn from and
incorporate lessons from sectors into national programs and strategies, and to share experiences
across and up and down government.

14.    DNT will coordinate the management capacity development program. The Program
supports the Government to build a cadre of management training staff. International experts will be
appointed to train national staff, build management training expertise within ministries, and to
provide ongoing guidance and quality assurance. Once trained, national staff will be allocated to
support strategically relevant managers and their teams to identify implementation problems, and
then to develop and implement solutions. Regular follow-up will encourage managers to remain
focused on results, and to adapt implementation activities as needed.

15.     Knowledge capture and sharing will be an integral part of the Program. Effective use
of annual and mid-term reviews, and an end of Program evaluation, will ensure that
implementation lessons are learned, disseminated and inform ongoing and future practice.
The Program will generate multiple channels for information capture and practical learning,
including data provided for DLI and performance base allocation assessments, and reports from
management and PFM capacity development activities. The PCT will play an important role in
develop a knowledge platform to share learning across the Program (particularly with PFM
Working Teams) and externally. The PMC will also provide an inter-departmental platform for
knowledge sharing at senior policy maker level. The end of Program evaluation will review
performance against DLIs, sector performance allocation frameworks, and other data sets relevant
to the intended outputs and outcomes of the Program.14 It will also undertake qualitative work to
understand how management, inter-sectoral, and institutional processes and relationships have
changed during the program, and to assess the degree to which results based and problem solving
approaches will have been embedded. Results of the evaluation would feed in the design of follow-
on phase of the Program and help authorities to make key decisions of whether to scale-up the
Program horizontally by including more sectors, or vertically by identifying more
subsystems/themes within same sectors or both. The costs of the evaluation will be met from
Program financing.

16.     The Program approach will be embedded as part of routine government PFM,
information and management systems. Efficiencies achieved in government expenditures
through the implementation of the Program will be sufficient to sustain improved functioning
of these systems over the longer term. Bank financing will support the initial roll out of the
Government‘s program, including initial start-up costs as staff are trained and become familiar with
the Program approach. The Program will support capacity development of public sector managers,
and improvement the functioning of existing government systems. These gains will persist, and
continue to add value beyond the end of the Program. In addition to these internal bases for
sustainability, there is already interest from other bilateral donors to support the expansion of the
Program approach additional sectors.

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements


14
   For example, the Bank (with co-funding from the UK Department for International Development) is supporting Service Delivery
Indicator surveys in the health and education sectors in 2013 and 2015. These include a number of indicators that are highly relevant
to the focus of the Program in the health and education sectors, including availability of medicines in health units and rates of teacher
absenteeism.
17.     The setup and effective operation of the interdepartmental institutional arrangements,
and communication between central ministries provinces, districts and service units, are
critical for the Program success. The Government has drafted an operations manual that defines
roles, responsibilities, procedures and financial flow arrangements to manage and ensure smooth
implementation of the Program. Despite clearly defining the roles and responsibilities of key
stakeholders, setting-up the Program as a multi-sector facility will be challenging. The Program
Coordination Team will need to be established quickly (a program coordinator has already been
identified). The Bank will provide intensive technical and supervisory support, especially during the
first year of the Program.

18.     Program design incorporates practical elements that support implementation. Firstly,
the authorities recognize that managing a sector-wide, results-based program would be very
challenging for any of the sectors. Therefore, the Program has initially identified well defined sub-
systems on which to focus. Secondly, the Program supports existing sector priorities, utilizes
performance targets aligned with these, and has ensured that the Program focus is complementary to
support provided by other development partners (see Annex 1: Table A1.1.2). Thirdly, the Program
would use the country financial management & procurement systems. Increases to capacity in these
areas are incremental to, rather than in competition to government systems. Fourthly, the focus on
developing public sector management capacity, the flexibility of demand-driven technical
assistance, and the flexibility of performance incentives, comprise an inherently adaptive program
approach that can respond to changing circumstances, while maintaining focus on the achieving
high-level goals, as embodied in the DLIs.

Program expenditure framework

1.       The scope of the Government’s PFM for Result’s program 15 is to improve the
transparency and efficiency of spending on public services, with an initial focus on the
medicines supply chain and the school based management of complete primary schools. The
Bank’s PFM for Results Program (‘the Program’) supports the Government program and has
the same scope. The expenditure framework for the Program, totaling US$ 130.6 million, is set out
in Table 1 (page 14 above). It includes Bank (US$ 50 million) and Government (US$ 5 million)
financing to support inter-ministerial coordination, performance based allocations to motivate
institutional change, and capacity development to strengthen PFM and management practices in the
target sub-sectors. Existing Government recurrent expenditures relating directly to the management,
operation and supervision of the medicines supply chain, and school based management of
complete primary schools are also included (and are clearly identified by line items from the budget
chart of accounts). Expenditures relating directly to resources (such as teaching staff and medicines)
that are managed by these systems are not included.

2.     By improving transparency and efficiency, the PFM for Results Program will
contribute to more efficient allocation and use of related government expenditures on
complete primary school education (including teacher salaries, text books etc.), and medicines
procurement. There will also be spillover benefits for the management and use of similar
externally financed expenditures. In the health sector, total government procurement of medicines
amounted to US$ 66 million in 2013. A further US$ 155 million of medicines were procured by
development partners (primarily HIV, TB and malaria medicines).16 All medicines move through

15
     Government of Mozambique. Programa de Gestão de Finanças Públicas Orientado para Resultados (Fase 1: 2014-2018)
16
     CMAM annual medicines quantification projections, January 2013.
the government supply chain. In addition, the US Government and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
TB and Malaria invest about US$ 7 million per year in supply chain strengthening (including
technical assistance for medicines selection and procurement). In the education sector, total
government spending on complete primary schools in 2013 was approximately US$ 172 million. In
addition, the education pooled fund (Fundo de Apoio ao Sector da Educação - FASE) contributed a
further US$ 52.5 million.17

Desired Results, Technical Risks & Mitigations

19.    The Government’s draft program document 18 provides a comprehensive results
framework, from which DLIs are identified. The program development objective (PDO) is to
improve the transparency and efficiency of expenditures for the storage, distribution and availability
of medicines and for the management of complete primary schools. In coordination with
Government, and support from other development partners, improved performance of these systems
will contribute to the better service delivery, further down the causal chain (see Figures A4.2a and
A4.2b below). The Program is designed to be accountable for the first-level results in terms of
improved performance of these systems including: (i) fiduciary integrity and proper monitoring of
medicines storage distribution, and availability; and (ii) transparent and accountable school-based
management.

20.    Each PDO indicator measures the improvement of PFM performance embedded in the
overall performance of the specific sector delivery system. The following three indicators will
capture the fundamental goals reflected in the PDO:
      Availability of essential maternal and reproductive health medicines at health facility level.
      Increased number of provinces achieving the minimum acceptable score of compliance with
       standards for stock management, warehousing, and distribution of medicines as assessed by the
       CMAM internal audit unit; and
      Increased number of schools with more transparent and accountable school councils.
21.     The results framework primarily captures direct benefits associated with the Program,
such as improved PFM accountability and management processes efficiency. If successful,
these benefits will contribute to significant downstream benefits related to service delivery
outcomes (such as increased medicines coverage and more teacher time on task). In addition, once
established, the Program will facilitate, through effective knowledge management and
dissemination activities, a wider adoption of results based and problem solving methodologies to
improve PFM and service delivery performance in other sectors.

22.     The results indicators are designed to be SMART (specific, measurable, achievable,
relevant, and time bound). Indicators are realistic and reflect a coherent theory of change for the
two focus areas based on improvements in both client and intra-system accountability, alignment of
delivery system units and improved timeliness and quality of information and financial resource
flows (see Figures A4.2a and A4.2b). The Program is embedded within and complements a broader
context of Government and development partner support for PFM, education, and medicines supply
chain reform (see Annex 1. Table A1.1.2 and Figures A4.2a and A4.2b below).



17
     Ministry of Education. Program of Activities 2013. Version 2 (Final). December 28, 2012.
18
     Op. Cit.
Figure A4.2a: The results chain and supporting interventions for medicines supply




Figure A4.2b: The results chain and supporting interventions for school based management
Technical Risk Assessment
Table A4.1: Technical risks and mitigation strategies
Issue                          Approach                                        Impact       Probability      Risk
General
Difficulties of inter-          Selection of issues that both MoF and        Moderate        Moderate    Moderate
ministerial coordination, and    line ministries have an incentive to solve
management of performance        as the basis for program design;
based allocations               Reinforcement of collective incentives
(particularly flow of funds to   through the choice of DLIs;
implementing units)             Bank support for timely recruitment of
                                 PCT
                                Ongoing Bank support across sectors to
                                 facilitate dialogue
Challenges in recruiting,       Bank supports DNT to develop ToRs,           Moderate       Moderate     Moderate
training and deploying           identify and recruit high-quality
national staff to provide        international TA for training and ongoing
ongoing public sector            QA of national staff
management capacity             Staff identified within public sector
development and support          institutions centrally and provincially
                                 (deployment issue)
Incentives insufficient or      Annual review of performance                 Substantial     Moderate    Substantial
poorly targeted to offset        allocations, and capacity development
potential shifts required in    Annual discussion of supporting
formal/informal benefits of      interventions in sector dialogue
existing institutional
arrangements
Medicines Supply Chain
Funding constraints for         Two availability indicators focus on         Moderate        Moderate    Moderate
medicines purchase impact        medicines with different financing
on tracer medicines              streams
availability (DLI# 1 and 4)     DLI medicines (HIV and maternal and
                                 reproductive health) are high-priorities
                                 for both GoM and health partners
                                 (particularly, US Government and
                                 GFATM)
                                DLI pricing commensurate with level of
                                 government control
                                Sector level performance based
                                 allocations support gap-filling purchase
                                 of low cost essential primary health care
                                 medicines (which are often neglected by
                                 vertical funding sources). Allocations of
                                 up to US$ 9.6 million are available over
                                 the period of the Program, representing
                                 approximately 20% of costs for
                                 medicines included in primary health
                                 care kits.
                                Improved forecasting, stock position
                                 visibility and reduced losses may
                                 mitigate against short-term funding
                                 variability
Changes in physical or           Indicators relevant to short term              Low         Moderate       Moderate
accountability structure of       Pharmaceutical Logistics Strategic Plan19
the supply chain alter            proposals.
relevance of                     Flexibility of approach can support
approach/indicators               implementation of supply chain reform
                                  proposals
Associated development           Extensive preparation phase dialogue         Moderate     Low             Moderate
partner investments focusing      with primary supply chain partners to
on procurement,                   agree focus of support.
infrastructure, and last-mile    Availability DLIs most at risk, and priced
delivery do not materialize       accordingly.
Quality of medicines             A protocol for sampling, quarantining,       Moderate     Low             Moderate
purchased using Program           testing (in laboratories meeting
funds is poor                     international standards (e.g. ISO 17025)),
                                  releasing or withdrawing consignments
                                  of medicines purchased with Program
                                  funds to be agreed and incorporated in
                                  the Program Operations Manual
                                  (completion of which will be a condition
                                  of effectiveness).
Education sector
Difficulties in engaging,        DLIs focus: on council composition and         High        Moderate      Substantial
training and retaining            activity and; role of SDEJTs in providing
community members                 supportive supervision
sufficient for effective and     Bank support to MinEd and SDEJTs to
representative school             ensure capacity development and
councils                          performance based allocation well
                                  defined, targeted and reviewed on annual
                                  basis for adjustment if required
Lack of cooperation and         Supervision by SDEJTs, and targeting of       Moderate      Moderate       Moderate
support of school director for   performance based allocations
effective school council
management engagement

Implementation challenges        Coalition between MoF, Ministry of           Moderate       Moderate      Moderate
in implementation of              Health, Ministry of Education and Public
program classification at         works to overcome challenges at various
district level                    levels


Economic Assessment

Rationale for Public Sector Delivery - Health and Education Public Sector Service Provision

23.     Education and health services in Mozambique are both overwhelmingly financed and
provided through the public sector, with significant external donor assistance in both sectors.
In both instances, sector administrative structures are mapped to the political structure of
government, with central, provincial, municipal and district entities. An on-going, although
somewhat ambivalent, commitment to and process of decentralization is underway. In the education
sector, the majority of funds are already budgeted and spent at district level, and an established
19
  These are: CMAM autonomy, extended CMAM mandate for delivery to health facilities, and contracting out of distribution.
Longer-term objective for supply chain network redesign is unlikely to be implemented during program implementation.
system of direct grants to school is in operation. For the health sector, decentralization is less well
advanced, with the central Ministry of Health retaining decision making powers on investment
financing, and provinces playing the leading role with respect to budgeting for recurrent spending.
Districts currently play a relatively passive role in planning and budgeting health services. The
medicines supply chain currently has the same concentration of budget holding and responsibility at
central and provincial levels, and is mapped to the center-province-district structure, with stock
holding points at each level. All medicines procured centrally, and all medicines – including those
procured by partners – move through the government supply chain (with some contracting out of
distribution between warehouses in some provinces).

Public Sector Performance

24.     The education sector has achieved almost universal primary school enrolment rates for
girls and boys in Mozambique. However, just under half of the children who enroll complete
their primary school education. In addition, learning outcomes continue to be poor, and have
struggled as pupil numbers have increased rapidly. Thus, while an increase in entry to education has
been achieved, translation into increased learning outcomes has lagged behind.

25.    All medicines used in the National Health Service total value of US$ 221 million in
2013),20 including the significant proportion procured by partners (US$ 155 million), move
through the government supply chain. The supply chain currently faces and number of
constraints and exhibits several inefficiencies typical of developing country settings. 21 Key
challenges include: (i) insufficient resources for procurement and delivery of medicines (and lack of
information on costing of supply chain); (ii) weak alignment and accountability between supply
chain units; (iii) poor information flow (inconsistent, variable timing, incomplete) regarding
consumption, stock-levels and requisitions; (iv) poor inventory management and variable quality of
storage facilities (v) ad-hoc and inconsistent distribution; (v) inefficient distribution network design
(multiple levels of stock-holding points) and; (vi) staff have limited logistics expertise. As a result
of these inefficiencies the availability of medicines in the public sector in Mozambique is often
precarious, and efficiency of spending is an issue (e.g. due to frequent smaller scale or emergency
procurement, sub-optimal delivery planning, wastage and leakage of medicines).

Options for Non-State Delivery of Health and Education Services

26.     The options for non-state delivery of health and primary education services are
currently limited. In general, the markets for health and education services in Mozambique
are immature, and largely focused on the elites in large urban centers. The NGO and mission
sectors are much more limited than in other countries in the region. The private sector, as with the
public sector, faces labor market constraints for medical, teaching and specialist skills (such as
logistics). Government officials have limited experience in contracting modalities and supplier
management, although a number of partners are now supporting capacity development in these
areas, or acting as intermediaries. For example, a partnership between Coca Cola, the Clinton
Health Access Initiative (CHAI) and MISAU is supporting four provinces to contract out the
distribution of medicines to district level. Despite some challenges at the interface between public
and private sector entities, early results have been promising. Timely and scheduled deliveries have

20
   US$ 66 million funded from the state budget, US$ 13 million funded from the health pooled fund and US$142 million procured by
partners.
21
   Plano Estratégico da Logística Farmacêutica: Rascunho Final (Durão, J. December 2012).
been implemented, warehouse staff workloads are more predictable (due to fewer ad hoc stock
requests), and reductions of 15 – 20 percent have been achieved in distribution costs. 22 By
improving the data collection and information flows across the medicines logistics chain, the
program will pave the way for a possible scale-up of this pilot initiative, subject to private sector
interest and capacity (initial discussions have already taken place regarding how the
CHAI/Coke/MISAU project can assist data collection relevant to the PFM for Results Program in
provinces also participating in the CHAI/Coke/MISAU pilot. Provinces receiving performance
based allocations through the Program may also utilize these funds to support the
CHAI/Coke/MISAU project at local level).

27.     A draft Strategic Plan for Pharmaceutical Logistics has been developed and provides a
basis for significant reforms over the mid- to long-term. The strategy proposes four main
reforms: (a) the central medical store (CMAM) becomes a semi-autonomous entity; 23 (b) that its
mandate is expanded to cover delivery to health units (it currently stops at provinces); (c) selective
contracting out of supply chain functions (starting with distribution) and; (d) in the longer term, the
distribution network is redesigned. Once approved, the strategic plan will provide a potential
platform to extend contracting out of services further. However, development of an operational plan
and its implementation is likely to take several years. In the meantime, the program will build
CMAM capacity and improve the system functioning.

28.     The Education Strategy 2012 – 2016 commits to improved quality of primary
education through public sector provision. However, options for non-state provision are in
consideration to help meet the growing demand for secondary education, and for technical
and vocational training. The Government recognizes an urgent need to rapidly improve the skills
base for an existing cohort of young people if Mozambique is to take advantage of economic
growth potential in the coming years, particularly to grow local economies and supply chain around
natural resources hubs and transport corridors. Innovation in these post-primary sectors may provide
a useful learning platform for future consideration of similar approaches in the primary school
sector.

29.     By improving transparency, efficiency and management practices, the Program can
support a stronger public sector management base that would be more able to contract and
interface effectively with non-state providers in the future. Public sector delivery is currently the
most practical delivery channel for primary education and the medicines supply chain due to
prevailing Government policies, weak government capacity to manage contracting processes, and
the relative immaturity of private sector markets in Mozambique in the short term. However, this
operation will help create the building blocks for successful cooperation with the private sector for
service delivery in the future.

Program Development Impact - Program approach and anticipated benefits

30.    The incremental program funding, in addition to existing budget lines that will come
under the scope of the program, will be US$ 55 million (US$ 50 million Bank financing, US$ 5
22
   Performance based allocations to provinces can be used to contract out distribution, including through the CHAI/Coca Cola
partnership. Discussions with CHAI and Coca Cola have identified opportunities for collaboration in provinces currently
participating in the initiative, and funds available through the Program can be used to expand the initiatives to addition provinces.
23
    Until 2008 central medicines purchasing, customs clearance, storage and distribution was contracted out to a semi-autonomous
state enterprise called Medimoc. CMAM was responsible for quantification, planning and oversight. Provinces and districts were
responsible for storage and distribution to lower levels. Medimoc still exists, and is contracted by CMAM to manage customs
clearance.
million GoM), which will be used to improve the transparency and efficiency of expenditures
for the management of the medicines supply chain and complete primary schools . Table A4.2
(below) outlines the potential direct and indirect economic benefits that may result.

Plausibility of Approach - Education

31.      A recent World Bank review 24 of approaches to strengthening management and
accountability in education service notes that reforms must address institutional complexity of
the sector. The authors note that: (a) education systems are managerially, technically and
financially complex and demanding; (b) most incentives that affect learning outcomes are
institutional, and; (c) this complexity makes central planning, management and long-route
accountability impractical and inefficient. Hence, local decision making and fiscal decentralization
can be important to improving system performance and educational outcomes by making service
providers accountable to parents and students (short-route accountability).25

32.     School-based management (SBM) approaches have been developed and implemented
in a number of settings to strengthen local decision making and accountability. In general,
SBM approaches aim to: 26 (a) increase voice and participation by communities in decisions on
education service provision; (b) make information on school budgets and performance widely
available, and; (c) strengthen the rewards to schools for the delivery of effective services to target
communities. These improvements in participation, transparency, accountability and incentives are
intended to drive: (a) higher quality education through more efficient and transparent use of
resources; (b) more welcoming and improved school environment; (c) increased participation by
local stakeholders in decision-making and; (d) improved student performance (lower repetition and
drop-out rates, higher test scores).

33.     The design of the PFM for Results Program is consistent with the findings of this
review. In particular, the Program focuses on improving the implementation of an existing SBM
program. Firstly, it strengthens the PFM environment for SBM, with a focus on the more
transparent and timely flow of funds to schools (DLIs 7 and 8). Secondly, the Program improves the
representativeness and participation of school councils (DLI3) in managing and reporting on the use
of school resources, and increases community voice, particularly for mothers. This focus on
representativeness addresses the issue of elite capture that is identified as a key risk associated with
SBM by the review authors. Thirdly, institutional incentives at central, provincial and local levels
are addressed though performance based allocations that support the achievement of clearly defined
results targets. Lastly, the capacity of school-councils and management at local level is supported
through focused capacity development.




24
   Bruns B, Filmer D, and Patrinos H.A. Making Schools Work: New Evidence on Accountability Reforms. World Bank, 2011.
25
   “Long-route? accountability refers to the accountability of public sector service providers to the population mediated through
national or local political processes. “Short-route? accountability refers to a direct relationship between services providers and
populations that they serve (or should serve). See World Bank. (2004). World Development Report: Making Services Work for the
Poor.
26
   Burns, B et al. Op.Cit.
Table A4.2: Potential Direct and Indirect Benefits by DLI (and other relevant indicators)

DLIs                                                     Economic Benefits
                                                         Direct (PFM service delivery systems)                 Indirect (service delivery)
Health Sector – Medicines Supply Chain
DLI#1: Availability of essential maternal and
                                                          Increased and more consistent availability of        Consistent availability of family planning medicines
reproductive health medicines at health facility level
                                                           inventory (essential reproductive health              avoids costs associated with unintended pregnancies.
                                                           medicines) at service unit level.                    Availability of maternal health medicines reduces
Year 3: At least 9.4 percent increase over baseline if
                                                                                                                 likelihood of birth complications and requirements of
DLIs met.
                                                                                                                 more expensive emergency obstetric care.

DLI#2: Number of provinces achieving minimum                                                                    More accurate stock information leading to improved
acceptable score from internal audit of compliance       Improved control system adherence and inventory
                                                                                                                 requisitioning and improved procurement (based on
                                                          management - including better visibility of stock-
with standards for stock management, warehousing,                                                                more accurate demand).
                                                          in-hand, more accurate recording of receipt and
and distribution of medicines
                                                          dispatch of goods, better management of near
Year 3: At least 8 provinces meeting acceptable           expiry and expired drugs, improved storage
standard                                                  conditions – resulting in reduced wastage and
                                                          lower vulnerability to pilfering and diversion.
DLI#4: Proportion of treatment sites with a stock-
                                                          Increased and more consistent availability of        Consistent availability of ARVs avoids costs related to
outsof key ARVs at the end of each month
                                                           inventory (high-value anti-retroviral medicines) at   potential drug resistance and treatment failure for
                                                           service unit level.                                   people living with HIV (Note: risk of drug resistance
Year 3: At least 6 percent reduction in number of
                                                                                                                 increases dramatically if adherence falls below levels
stock-outs at health facilities if DLI met
                                                                                                                 of 90% - 95%).

DLI#5: Proportion of districts for which CMAM                                                                   Increases visibility of stock down to district level,
receives logistics information through the SIMAM         More accurate and timely information leading to
                                                                                                                 allowing more robust analysis of stock-positioning,
system                                                    more robust requisitioning and better
                                                                                                                 relative needs and performance of districts. Better
Year 3: At least 13.5% increase in number of districts    quantification for procurement.
                                                                                                                 information also reduces vulnerabilities to pilfering
(to 78%)                                                                                                         and diversion.
DLI#6: Fill rate of approved requisitions from CMAM
                                                       Improved alignment of supply with demand,               Costs of associated with non-treatment or inconsistent
clients for tracer medicines                                                                                     treatment avoided.
                                                        resulting in less unmet need and less waste.
Year 3: At least 12% increase in fill rate for tracer
                                                       Better availability of medicines.
essential medicines
DLIs                                                 Economic Benefits
                                                     Direct (PFM service delivery systems)                     Indirect (service delivery)
Education Sector – School Based Management of Complete Primary Schools
DLI #3: Proportion of school-councils that comply
                                                      Increased transparency of the budget.                    De-concentration of competences and actual
with defined standards for transparency and                                                                      decentralization to the service provider units – the
                                                      Possibly increases in the level of execution
accountability (school councils elected according to                                                             schools.
                                                      Better application of internal control mechanisms
revised criteria, approved school development plan,                                                             Better services provided by the schools.
                                                       resulting in reduction in the misuse of funds.
and displayed information on resources allocated,                                                               Effective performance of school councils leading to
planned, and applied)                                                                                            better availability of school resources.
                                                                                                                Monitoring of teachers and student attendance in the
                                                                                                                 classroom.
                                                                                                                Better learning outcomes to be substantiated by
                                                                                                                 examination results.
DLI# 7: Proportion of complete primary schools
                                                         Improved budget execution rate.                       Timely availability of schools materials
receive funds on or before February 28
DLI #8: Revised budget classification by sub-sector,
                                                         Increased transparency of the budget.                 Effective performance of school councils leading to
configured, and applied                                                                                          better availability of school resources.
                                                         Possibly increases in the level of execution.
                                                                                                                Monitoring of teachers and student attendance in the
                                                         Better application of internal control mechanisms
                                                                                                                 classroom.
                                                          resulting in reduction in the misuse of funds.
                                                                                                                Better learning outcomes to be substantiated by
                                                                                                                 examination results.
                                                                                                                Educated and productive human resource entering the
                                                                                                                 labor market of the country.
DLI #9: Proportion of schools visited for supervision
                                                         Better application of internal control mechanisms.
by SDEJTs
                                                         Reduction in the misuse of funds.
Medicines Supply-Chain

34.    Medicines supply chain performance is a common challenge in many developing
countries. Medicines are often the second largest expenditure category in the health sector,
with poor procurement and supply chain performance resulting in wasted resources and
poorer health outcomes. Insufficient financing, poor selection, variable quality, diversion, low
availability and irrational prescribing of medicines are often key factors driving levels of public
sector service utilization and service outcomes. The diagnostic of the medicines supply chain
(paragraph A4.25 above) confirms that such challenges are prevalent in Mozambique

35.     A wide variety of approaches have been utilized to support improved medicines supply
chain performance in developing countries. These include contracting out functions or the whole
supply chain, distribution network re-design, a variety of financing and payment, social franchising
or accreditation of private sector retailers, coordinated or pooled procurement, improved
information systems, and increased transparency in medicines procurement and supply. The
effectiveness of these reforms has varied considerably, with no single reform being guaranteed to
succeed in all settings. The political economy of pharmaceutical sector and medicines supply chain
reform are complex. Medicines are vulnerable to a variety rent seeking behaviors, and medicines
policy may fall across multiple government departments with competing policy aims (e.g.
Ministries of Trade may favor domestic manufacturers).27

36.     The PFM for Results Program works, at least initially, within the existing public sector
supply chain structure. The justifications for this are: (a) a draft pharmaceutical logistics supply
strategy exists, and proposes a semi-autonomous and unified supply chain organization and
functional contracting out (b) private sector logistics and supply chain capacity is limited and; (c)
major external funders are investing significantly in the existing public sector system, and have
agreed to coordinate around the government’s own Supply Chain Plan of Action 2013, and strategic
plan (once approved). The current reform space is therefore already relatively well defined.

37.      Poor alignment of supply chain units, and weak accountability for performance, have
been identified important contributors to poor supply chain functioning in Mozambique. The
PFM for Results Program focuses on improving the coordination and accountability of supply
chain units, strengthening information flows between them, improved control mechanisms
and better adherence to standard operating procedures. These improvements will be driven by
performance based allocations targeting key tasks and steps that support integration (e.g. providing
information on time), and management and PFM capacity building that clarifies roles, improves
abilities to fulfill them, and strengthens supervision.

38.     Experience from a number of countries has demonstrated that public sector supply
chain performance can be significantly improved through variety of structural, management
and accountability interventions. In Zambia, the semi-autonomous Medical Stores Limited (MSL)
is responsible for central receipt of medicines and distribution to district warehouses (there is no
intermediary level). Districts are then responsible for storage and distribution to health units. A
World Bank financed program increased logistics planning capacity at lower levels (district) of the
supply chain, and tested this in combination with two different network structures. In both
instances, performance improved and the availability of tracer medicines at health centers increased
significantly when compared to control districts. Logistics capacity combined with a structure

27
     Roberts, R and Reich, M. “Pharmaceutical Reform: A Guide to Improving Performance and Equity? The World Bank, 2011.

                                                               17
where districts act only as cross-docking stations, rather than stock-holding and order packing units,
saw the availability of pediatric anti-malarials and amoxicillin increased from 51 percent and 63
percent in the controls, to 88 percent and 92 percent respectively.28 The addition of a commodity
planner role at district level improved performance in both intervention arms of the Zambia pilot.
This was in part due to the additional technical capacity these staff provided, but also because
commodity planners helped strengthen the coordination and alignment between central and district
levels, in an environment where the government had ruled out formal integration of districts under
MSL control.29

39.     A recent review30 of medicines supply-chain integration projects in Nicaragua, Ethiopia
and Tanzania by the USAID Deliver Project identifies key components for successful
integration that are consistent with the Program approach. The review identifies the following
components: clarity of roles and responsibilities; visibility of information; clear and streamlined
processes (improved Standard Operating Procedures at each level); trust and collaboration; and
alignment of objectives. In Nicaragua, addressing these issues included: the development of new
SOPs; targets and performance based incentives for different levels of the system and; effective use
of the logistics and management information system. The combined result of these interventions
was a reduction in the number of facilities experiencing stock-outs of contraceptives from 76
percent of facilities to 6 percent.31 Progress in Ethiopia and Tanzania has been more mixed, but the
authors note that reform processes are still in progress.

40.     In both the education and health sectors, the Program sets out a plausible approach to
driving improvements in system functioning and efficiency. In both instances, the Program
works within the existing sector structures, and focuses on improving institutional alignments,
transparency and accountability through clear objectives (represented in the DLIs), performance
based allocations, and capacity development specifically prioritizing management and PFM
practices.

Cost-Effectiveness of the Program
41.     The Program specifically aims to improve the efficiency of the management and
supervision of the medicines supply chain and complete primary school education in
Mozambique. Program financing of US$55 million (including Bank financing of US$ 50 million),
primarily contributes to strengthening fiduciary, logistical, and management functions. The
estimated cost of Program financing and existing expenditures on these functions totals US$ 130.6
million. Experience from similar public sector reforms in other countries suggests that this Program
goal is plausible, particularly when implemented alongside complementary programs that are
investing in commodities, human resources and infrastructure (see Annex 1 Table A1.1.2 and
Figures A4.2.1a and b above).
42.     Program success in strengthening fiduciary, logistical and management functions
would result in efficiency benefits realized across the expenditures and assets managed in the
two target sub-sectors. Relatively small aggregate gains in efficiency savings (4 – 5%) would
result in the Program breaking even in terms of costs. Table A4.2 (above) sets out potential
direct and indirect economic benefits for the Program. Thus, in assessing the potential cost

28
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTZAMBIA/Resources/Brochure-Zambia_201004.pdf
29
   Personal communication with Prof. Prashant Yadev, May 22 2013. Prof Yadev was a member of the design team for the Zambia
project.
30
   USAID Deliver Project. Supply Chain Integration: Case Studies from Nicaragua, Ethiopia and Tanzania. USAID 2011
31
   USAID Deliver Project. Nicaragua: Integrating Logistics Functions at the Ministry of Health. USAID 2008

                                                           18
effectiveness of the Program, it is justified to include benefits that may accrue to the performance of
the two target sub-systems in general. Table A4.3 outlines the broader government and partner
expenditures for complete primary schools and the medicines supply chain, including teacher
salaries and the cost of medicines. Improved PFM accountability and management of the sector
should result in efficiencies across all of these expenditure areas. In table A4.4, potential cost
savings are set out for plausible aggregate improvements in efficiency. Aggregate efficiency will be
dependent on how efficiencies fall across different expenditure areas (e.g. small improvements in
efficiency related to teacher salaries – such as more time on task – will result in relatively large cost
savings due to the high proportion of total education expenditures for which they account).
Table A4.3: Complete Primary Schools and Medicines Supply Chain Costs. US$ Million

       Description                                                     FY14       FY15     FY16       Total*
       1. Cost of medicines – government procured                        57.1      60.2       64.1      181.4
       2. Cost of medicines – partner procured (distributed through
                                                                        142.0     149.1      156.6      447.7
       the government supply chain)
       3. Warehousing and distribution costs for medicines               12.4      13.2       14.2        39.9
       4. Education – government expenditures on complete
                                                                        168.2     176.6      185.4      530.2
       primary schools
       5. Education – development partner expenditures on
                                                                         52.5      55.1       58.9      166.5
       complete primary schools (FASE pooled fund)
                                                                                                       1,365.7

Table A4.4: Estimated Value of Efficiency Savings

       Aggregate Efficiency                              Value of Efficiency Saving
         Saving (3 years)          (based on total medicines and primary education expenditures of US$ 1365.7
                                                                     million)

                1%                                             US$ 13.7 million

                5%                                             US$ 68.3 million

                10%                                           US$ 136.6 million

                15%                                           US$ 204.9 million


Added value of World Bank Intervention

43. The World Bank is well placed to support the Government’s intention to improve the
    efficiency of expenditure and performance of public services, starting with the medicines
    supply chain and complete primary schools. The Bank has a number of comparative
    advantages in this respect:

      Long-standing support for, understanding of and engagement with PFM reforms;
      Established and strong working relationships with the Ministries of Financing, Health and
       Education;



                                                         19
      Established and strong working relationships with development partners in the two target
       sub-sectors: the Bank is currently the Focal Partner of the Education SWAp partners group;
       and the co-chair of the health sector working group on medicines;
      Technical capacity to support the Government to implement the Program, and to facilitate
       lesson learning and knowledge sharing.

44. The Program for Results instrument provides a financing mechanism that is fit for
    purpose for the proposed Program. Its results focus, and implementation flexibility can
    support the Government to introduce more effective inter-departmental working and
    performance based management in the delivery of public services. This will require the ability
    to address institutional incentives, and adapt implementation as these shift during
    implementation.

45. Development partners are exploring performance based financing approaches, but largely
    on a project basis. The Bank Program is able to build on existing strong cross-sector
    engagement with Ministries of Finance, Health and Education to support the Government to
    implement results based approaches at a system level.

46. The Program has been designed to add value to the support of other development partners
    to PFM reform, primary education and medicines supply in the public health sector. The
    specific focus on deepening PFM reform and strengthening management performance at sector,
    provincial, district and service unit level are gaps in existing programs. In the absence of Bank
    engagement, it is unlikely that such interventions would be taken forward, at least in the short
    term.




                                                 20
