                                                                                                                                                           89302
                       Revenue Mobilization Program for Results: VAT Improvement Program

                                                                      Technical Assessment



Contents
Summary Program Description ........................................................................................................................... 2
Program Assessment .............................................................................................................................................. 3
   Strategic Relevance .............................................................................................................................................................. 3
   Technical Soundness.......................................................................................................................................................... 19
   Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ....................................................................................................... 28
Program Expenditure Framework ................................................................................................................... 30
Result Framework and Monitoring and Evaluation ................................................................................... 34
Program Economic Evaluation......................................................................................................................... 43
   Rationale for Public provision ........................................................................................................................................ 43
   Economic Impact of the Program .................................................................................................................................. 43
   World Bank Value Added ................................................................................................................................................ 45
   Results of the Economic Analysis ................................................................................................................................. 45
Program Action Plan ........................................................................................................................................... 50
Risk Analysis and Mitigation ........................................................................................................................... 50
Annex 1: Detailed VAT Implementation Plan (revised) .......................................................................... 52
Annex 2: Review of the national board of revenue website compliance with right to information
rules on proactive disclosure ............................................................................................................................. 63




                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1
Technical Assessment-Revenue Mobilization Program for Results: VAT Improvement Program


 Summary Program Description

 Objectives: The expected results of the Revenue Mobilization Program for Results in Bangladesh: VAT
 Improvement Program (“the Program?) are:

         Expected Results:
          Increased VAT revenues: VAT revenues collected as a percentage of GDP
          Greater transparency: RTI Act Compliance

 1.       This operation will support the VAT Improvement Program to assist the National Board of
 Revenue (NBR) in streamlining and modernizing Value Added Tax (VAT) operations and
 establishing an integrated VAT Management System for the purposes of implementing the new
 regime. The primary focus of the program is to prepare the administration to be able to administer the
 new VAT, which is to be introduced in July 2015. The new VAT Act, 2012 provides for a modern VAT
 scheme based on few exemptions and self-assessment.1 The Act provides the legal basis for the new VAT
 administration, and the impetus for a shift from manual to automated and modernized core tax business
 processing. The program is part of the government’s broader tax reform agenda as articulated in the Tax
 Modernization Plan 2011-16 (endorsed by Parliament in June 2011), which envisages policy and
 institutional reform alongside a program for automating NBR operations to improve services to taxpayers,
 reduce administrative costs for taxpayers, and improve compliance. The VAT improvement program aims
 to widen the tax base by enhancing voluntary compliance, and reducing non-compliance. The ultimate
 goals are to increase VAT revenues and enhance the transparency of the VAT administration in
 Bangladesh in order to achieve its medium-term revenue target of a tax-to GDP-ratio of 12.2 percent by
 FY 2016; and to enhance the VAT compliance. Towards this objective, the program will also address
 those structural weaknesses embedded in the tax system that result in skewed tax bases and provide wide
 opportunities for evasion and corruption. Importantly, the VAT improvement program will support the
 strategic reform agenda, also supported by the IMF’s Extended Credit Facility to enable NBR to fully
 implement the new VAT law.

 2.       To improve VAT revenue collection, the NBR needs to transform into a modern, flexible
 and adequately trained tax administration. The new VAT Law to be introduced in July 2015, if
 properly implemented and effectively administered, could increase the tax yield, broaden the tax base and
 contribute towards establishing a modern and service oriented VAT administration. The Program goes
 beyond the introduction of new software, as it supports the restructuring of the VAT wing along the
 functional lines and the reengineering of key business process. The Program supports the modernization
 of the VAT tax system and it is expected to have spillover effects in other tax areas. The expected results
 are: (a) staying on track with the rapid and ambitious VAT implementation plan, which includes business
 process changes, ICT procurement and deployment, training, change management and communications
 activities; (b) increasing the number of active (registered and filing) VAT tax-payers; and (c) increasing
 the proportion of taxpayers using on-line services to register, file and pay their taxes. The primary focus
 of the automation of the NBR is to improve services to taxpayers, reduce administrative costs for
 taxpayers and improve compliance – through the generation of taxpayer accounts and a system with data
 that can be used for developing an appropriate audit strategy

 3.      In order to achieve the results the Revenue Mobilization Program for Results in
 Bangladesh: VAT Improvement Program supports four main activities: (a) operational
 modernization of the VAT Wing of NBR; (b) the introduction of an Integrated VAT Management
 System; (c) institutional strengthening and capacity building; and (d) program management,
 including program coordination and administration, change management and a comprehensive
 taxpayer communication and education program. The program is proposed for implementation over

 1
  Value Added Tax and Supplementary Duty Act, 2012
                                                                                                     Page 2
Technical Assessment-Revenue Mobilization Program for Results: VAT Improvement Program

 six fiscal years FY14 – FY19. The program expenditure framework amounts to US$70 million for the
 VAT Improvement Program and US$3 million for the verification activities of the Economic Relation
 Divisions over FY 2014-19. IDA resources for the Program under the proposed operation will be $60
 million and government financing of US$13 million is also being provided.

 4.       Substantial technical assistance was provided by the IMF during the legal drafting and
 consultative process: Under the three-year Extended Credit Facility (ECF) arrangements approved by the
 International Monetary Fund (IMF)’s Executive Board in April 2012, substantial technical assistance has
 been provided by the IMF during the legal drafting and consultative process: including drafting of the new
 VAT Law, which was approved in November 2012 (a prior action) after submission of the draft law to
 Parliament in early July (a June 2012, benchmark), and in the drafting of VAT rules and regulations to
 give effect to the new VAT law (with the approval envisaged under the original plan (December 2013,
 prior action) to be rescheduled in order to provide an extended period of review and consultation with
 stakeholders).


 Program Assessment

 Strategic Relevance

 Sector Background

 5.      Low revenue mobilization capacity stands out as one of the main development challenges in
 Bangladesh, making the VAT Implementation Program extremely strategic and relevant. The level
 of tax collection in Bangladesh was 10.4 percent of GDP in 2012, an improvement over the period 2004-
 2009, when it averaged 8.3 percent of GDP. Nonetheless, as shown in Error! Reference source not
 found. Bangladesh is performing below many other countries in South Asia. Furthermore, Bangladesh
 has not been able to sustain improvements in tax collection, particularly in VAT, in the first half of 2013.
 This places Bangladesh at a distinct disadvantage over the medium term in terms of managing fiscal
 policy and having sufficient resources for infrastructure investments; improving service delivery and
 addressing governance concerns that arise as a result of low civil service salaries. At this level, tax
 revenue provides an insufficient base of domestic revenue for Bangladesh to finance the investment in
 human and physical infrastructure required to alleviate poverty levels and propel Bangladesh to middle
 income country status by 2021, as is envisioned in the country’s development strategy.




                                                                                                     Page 3
Technical Assessment-Revenue Mobilization Program for Results: VAT Improvement Program

                                                  Figure 1
                     Tax Revenue (in Percent of GDP) for South Asian Countries, 1994-2012




         Source: World Development Indicators.

 6.      Bangladesh’s relatively low revenue to GDP ratio is primarily due to inherent weaknesses in
 the tax system. The main problems relate to: (a) an inefficient tax administration due to a “type of tax?
 organizational structure, poor management, weak human resources and skilled staff, lack of adequate
 supporting systems, excessive scope for discretionary behavior, and poor physical infrastructure; (b) a
 narrow tax base due to the informal structure of the economy (there are around three million and seven
 hundred registered income taxpayers of which only half file tax returns; and just fifty thousand registered
 businesses that pay VAT); (c) a skewed tax structure, with indirect taxes contributing the most, as set
 forth in Table 1; (d) a complex and non-transparent tax system; and (e) corruption and tax evasion
 enabled in part by the relatively low compensation of tax officials.

         Table 1: Evolution in Tax Revenues (in % of GDP)
                               FY10     FY11          FY12            FY13           FY14     FY15          FY16
                                                  Prog     Est     Budget Prog              Projections
 Total Revenue                 10.9      11.7    12.5     12.4      13.5   13.2        13.6      14.2             14.6
 Tax Revenue                    9.0      10.0    10.5      10.4     11.3   10.9        11.3      11.8             12.2
 NBR Tax Collection             8.6       9.6    10.1      10.0     10.8   10.5        10.9      11.4             11.8
 Of which: VAT and              4.9       5.4     5.5       5.5      5.8     5.5        5.6        6.0             6.4
 supplementary duties
 Customs and excise duties      1.3       1.4    1.4        1.4      1.5       1.5      1.4        1.5             1.5
 Taxes on income and profits    2.3       2.8    3.1        3.1      3.4       3.5      3.7        3.8             3.9
         Source: Bangladesh Authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections.

 7.       Improved domestic revenue mobilization has important implications for better governance.
 Well designed and implemented tax systems encourage good governance and accountability; promote
 inclusiveness and social justice; and can be a tool for improving distribution of income and wealth. A
 governance-focused tax reform agenda and a service-delivery oriented tax system have the potential to
 strengthen the state-society relationship and contribute to development though the following linkages: (a)
 citizens comply with taxes in exchange for the government provision of effective services, rule of law,
                                                                                                         Page 4
Technical Assessment-Revenue Mobilization Program for Results: VAT Improvement Program

 and accountability; (b) taxation can lead to the expansion of responsiveness and accountability through
 proactive participation of citizens, civil society, business associations in the tax reform agenda; and (c)
 improvements in the revenue base can provide the fiscal space for improvements in governance and
 management of the public sector.

 8.       The National Board of Revenues (NBR) faces management, organizational and capacity
 constraints, that by default, “enables? tax fraud and tax avoidance activities to take place . The NBR
 is responsible for the collection of about 81 percent of total revenues and is one of the largest government
 agencies in the country. The NBR is administratively under the Internal Resource Division (IRD), one of
 the four divisions of the Ministry of Finance (MoF)2. Each Division is headed by a Secretary, and the IRD
 Secretary is the ex-officio Chairman of NBR. The NBR is organized along three administrative wings
 “type of tax?: Income Tax, VAT, and Customs, Income Tax, VAT and Customs, which historically have
 operated independently of each other in administrative silos. There are two distinct cadres of officials, one
 for the VAT and customs and the other to the income tax wing, with divergent career and promotion
 prospects. Each of the wings is supported by field offices, which operate with significant autonomy and
 minimal effective oversight of their performance from headquarters. Management procedures and core
 business processes are cumbersome, and they rely heavily on manual procedures and administrative
 assessment as well as intense and frequent contacts with taxpayers, which in turn create excessive scope
 for discretionary behavior from the tax officials.

 9.      The poor performance in revenue mobilization reflects weaknesses embedded in the tax
 policy, as well as the administration. In 2010, the estimated tax effort index3 in Bangladesh was 0.41
 meaning only 41 percent of potential revenues were collected, significantly below the median level of
 0.78 for low-income countries.4 This low tax effort is largely explained by the significant amount of tax
 revenue foregone due to preferential tax treatment given to specific taxpayer groups, to investment
 expenditures or their returns, through targeted tax deductions, credits, tax exclusions or exemptions. An
 assessment by the NBR in 2007 estimated that foregone revenue could be as much as 2.5 percent of
 GDP5. When granted arbitrarily, tax deductions and exemptions etc. restricts the tax base, reduces
 revenues, and impacts equity and causes concern with respect to accountability.

 10.     In response to these challenges, the National Board of Revenue (NBR) put forward a
 comprehensive Tax Modernization Plan (2011-2016). The Tax Modernization Plan (2011-2016) was
 endorsed by Parliament in June 2011, which recognized the critical need to increase tax revenue and
 achieve by FY 2016 the national development plan’s medium-term revenue target of a tax-to-GDP ratio
 of 12.2 percent. To address the tax policy and administration reform needs, the Tax Modernization Plan
 outlines nine strategic areas dealing with: tax policy reform; business process reform; automation of tax
 processes; redefining the status and regulatory power of NBR; restructuring NBR according to function
 and size; strategic communication and outreach; enforcement improvement program; human resource
 program; and infrastructure development program.

 11.     As a centerpiece of the government’s tax policy reform program, a new VAT Law was
 passed by the National Parliament in November 2012, and envisaged to enter into effect on July
 2015. (A new Income Tax code is also being drafted with IFC and IMF technical assistance). The
 Cabinet and the Parliament’s Standing Committee on Finance drafted the VAT Law through extensive
 consultations with stakeholders and careful review in order to ensure consistency with the NBR tax
 modernization plan and medium-term revenue targets. Under the three-year Extended Credit Facility
 (ECF) arrangements approved by the International Monetary Fund’s Executive Board in April 2012,
 substantial technical assistance was provide from the IMF in legal drafting and consultative process.
 2
    The main responsibility of the NBR is to mobilize domestic resources through collection of import duties and taxes, VAT and
 income tax for the government. NBR is also responsible for formulation and continuous re-appraisal of tax-policies and tax-laws
 in Bangladesh.
 3
   Tax effort index is the ratio of actual revenues to potential.
 4
   IMF Paper “Revenue Mobilization in Developing Countries?, March 2011.
 5
   NBR and IMF, 2007.
                                                                                                                       Page 5
Technical Assessment-Revenue Mobilization Program for Results: VAT Improvement Program

 Approval of the VAT Law in November 2012 was a prior action under the ECF and submission of the
 Law to Parliament was a June 2012, benchmark.

 12.      Revised VAT rules and regulations are in draft and are now subject to review and
 consultation with stakeholders. Promulgation of the rules is on track to be in place by the end of the
 year. The secondary legislation is critical in order to provide NBR with the adequate powers and
 autonomy required to enforce the new VAT. The IMF has provided technical assistance in drafting the
 VAT rules and regulations. A first draft of the rules has been released for public consultation, and a series
 of about 20 seminars nationwide is foreseen during March 2014. The approval date for the VAT rules
 and regulations envisaged under the original plan (December 2013, prior action) will be rescheduled in
 order to provide for an extended period of review and consultation with stakeholders.

 13.      Notwithstanding the Tax Modernization Plan’s approval by the Parliament, some aspects of
 the tax administration reform do not yet have strong support and ownership across the senior
 management of NBR. During the past two years of policy dialogue the NBR senior management team
 has expressed strong reservations about several aspects of the Plan; such as: (a) restructuring according to
 function and size and doing-away with the tax by type administration; (b) separating tax policy from
 collection and making this independent of implementation and enforcement, and (c) developing an
 integrated approach to automation, such as implementing a single software solution for the administration
 of income tax and VAT. The extent of change envisaged in the Tax Modernization Plan will require a
 significant institutional reform that will require not only a large investment in change management but a
 much longer timeframe than the 2011-16 Plan allowed for. A more step-wise approach to the
 organizational restructuring and integrated automation is being undertaken in a gradual but nonetheless
 progressive manner.

 14.      While there is an overall and high-level commitment to stay on the path of the Tax Modernization
 Plan, several challenges remain, especially in terms of the administrative integration aspects, bringing the
 two tax cadres to work more closely, and the short time that the Chairman of NBR is typically appointed
 for (a one year appointment plus possible extension). There are also likely to be vested interests in the
 status quo, and managing an institutional reform that involves significant staff in decentralized offices
 adds to the challenge. The more practical reform momentum underway is that each Wing is reorganizing
 and improving business processes and introducing automation first; and will also consider aspects of
 harmonizing across NBR, especially systems harmonization at the same time; but leaving aspects of full
 integration for a future step.

 15.      There are several development partners supporting the NBR through technical assistance
 programs. A tax development partner group (chaired by the IMF resident representative) was convened
 in February 2013 to begin to align this support around the Tax Modernization Plan. The IFC is providing
 technical assistance to the NBR through the Bangladesh Investment Climate Facility (BICF) financed by
 the UK’s DFID and the European Commission; and this has achieved several results: the Tax
 Modernization Plan itself, as well as on-line income tax registration system. The VAT reforms are central
 to the IMF’s Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program; and the Fund is able to use prior actions to keep the
 momentum for the reform on track. In addition, technical support was provided by the Fiscal Affairs
 Department, IMF in the development of the VAT Implementation Plan, and there is an IMF- resident
 adviser in the VAT project implementation team supporting the project director (as well as short term
 advisers on specific aspects such as the rules and regulations). The Asian Development Bank has an
 investment project to support the modernization of the Income Tax Wing; and this project will provide
 new administrative software for income tax; support on-line filing and automation of processing income
 tax returns, and the introduction of a data center, contact center, and processing center for income
 taxpayers. The UK’s DFID has also been supporting NBR through technical assistance to the large
 taxpayer unit in income tax. The harmonization group established by the development partners should
 continue to strengthen coordination and collaboration for current and future endeavors in order to
 harmonize their current efforts with the longer term vision of the Tax Modernization Plan.

                                                                                                      Page 6
Technical Assessment-Revenue Mobilization Program for Results: VAT Improvement Program

 16.      Additionally, automation of NBR operations is being implemented in the absence of a single
 NBR Information Technology Strategy. While a draft strategy exists it is yet to be formally adopted.
 In addition to the stand-alone projects supporting IT initiatives financed by development partners there are
 also several initiatives financed by the government. Thus, there are high risks of automating in silos and
 entrenching NBR fragmentation. In 2010, the IFC provided technical support to draft a single ICT
 strategy, but this was not formally adopted by the NBR nor is it being implemented. Many separate
 automation projects have emerged to automate specific functions. Some of these provide for all tax types,
 such as the application developed for e-payments, while some are for single taxes, such as the income tax
 registration, but could be extended to other tax types. In customs, automation has proceeded much faster
 and ASYCUDA is being used for administration.

 17.     Recently, the NBR has taken several steps towards integration and harmonization across
 the tax types, and the formation of a Technology Working Group has been convened with
 representatives from all Wings. Critical decisions on the IT procurements will also aid harmonization.
 For example, the decision to procure a COTS solution in VAT will require reorganization along
 functional lines in that Wing. International experience would indicate that the change of business process
 in line with a functional approach is much more likely to proceed successfully, with the purchase of a
 Customized Off-the shelf (COTS) system than with a bespoke system. Thus a COTS approach has been
 approved for the VAT automation. The VAT and Income Tax Wings while they have separate processes
 for acquiring administration software have agreed to use the same database platform.

 18.      Even with separate administrative systems in the different wings, integration can proceed
 by identifying operational areas that can be consolidated. The Chairman of NBR agreed in October
 2013 to introduce a unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) to be used as the single identifier for all
 taxpayers (across tax types). Other initiatives such as shared data centers, contact centers, and processing
 centers along with an integrated data warehouse, are all initiatives that are under discussion as both
 income tax and VAT undergoing reforms in tandem. Additionally, the recently established Technology
 Working Group would play a critical role in developing a long term ICT harmonization strategy and
 establishing common approaches to ICT matters across the wings.

 19.      The VAT improvement program seeks to enable the new VAT to become a robust source of
 revenue, it is a critical milestone in the government’s Economic Program supported by a three year
 Extended Credit Facility from the IMF, and has high-level commitment from the Ministry of
 Finance. The primary focus of the program is to prepare the VAT Wing to be able to administer the new
 VAT from July 2015. The government is committed to reforming the VAT administration and its
 committed financial contribution of US$ 13 million is predictable and guaranteed with the government
 approval of the Development Project Proposal (DPP) on “Value Added Tax and Supplementary Duty Act,
 2012 Implementation Project? popularly known as “VAT online?. Furthermore, the government will
 create a budget line for the program, and if they go off track government will use its own funds until they
 are back on track with DLIs achievement. The Bank will continue to support the GoB in achieving the
 long-term goal of modernization and harmonization, which goes beyond the timeframe of VAT
 modernization program completion.

 20.     The program also supports the government’s broader tax reform agenda as articulated in
 the Tax Modernization Plan. The program supports several activities to: move towards a modern VAT
 tax administration based on the assumptions of a full self-assessment system; restructure the VAT Wing
 along functional lines; establish an Integrated VAT Management System centered on highly automated
 business processes; increase the take-up ratio of electronic services; improve communication with
 taxpayers; improve risk identification; and reduce the need for face-to-face contact with taxpayers;
 provide institutional strengthening and capacity building.




                                                                                                      Page 7
Technical Assessment-Revenue Mobilization Program for Results: VAT Improvement Program

 Table 2: The Strategic Areas of the Government Tax Modernization Plan
                      Government Tax Modernization Plan           Government VAT Improvement Program or “the
                                                                  Program? supported by the PfR
                      1.   Tax policy reform
                      2.   Business process reform                Streamlining VAT core business processes.
                      3.   Automation of tax processes            Automation and modernization of VAT core functional
                                                                  areas.

                      4.   Redefining the status and regulatory   N.A
                           powers of the NBR
                      5.   Restructuring NBR according to         Restructuring the VAT Wing according to function.
                           function and size
                      6.   Strategic communication and outreach   Developing and implementing a staff communication
                                                                  and change management plan; comprehensive taxpayer
                                                                  education and communication program.
                      7.   Enforcement improvement program        Strengthening collection enforcement by improving
                                                                  audits and investigations, collection of tax arrears, and
                                                                  appeal system.
                      8.   Human Resource Program                 Developing and implementing a comprehensive training
                                                                  and capacity building program.
                      9.   Infrastructure development program     Establishment of an Integrated VAT Management
                                                                  System (based on Customized Off-the shelf COTS
                                                                  system) to support core VAT administration processes
                                                                  along with Data, Contact, and Processing Centers.
                                                                  Provision of data network, desktop hardware and
                                                                  software, and local and data center servers.
 Geographic                Nation wide                            Nation wide
 scope
 Implementatio             2011-2016                              2013-2018
 n Period
 Cost                      US$ 86 million6                        US$ 73 million




 6
     Based on early estimates from the NBR.
                                                                                                              Page 8
Program Background

21.     The program is supporting the modernization of the VAT system in order to break out of
the low revenue-low capital spending equilibrium that has constrained Bangladeshi growth for
many years, and to enable the new VAT to become a robust source of revenue. As set forth in Table
3, Bangladesh generates substantially less VAT revenues in relation to the GDP than many other
countries, both low and middle income. In terms of VAT productivity, for each point of the standard VAT
rate, Bangladesh generates only 0.22 percent of GDP in revenue compared to 0.34 percent of GDP in
other low income countries. The government economic program seeks to increase tax revenues from 10.4
percent of GDP in FY2012 to 12.2 percent of GDP by FY2016. If Bangladesh could raise its VAT
productivity by 0.12 percent of GDP to the average level of other low income countries, then all else
equal, VAT could increase government revenues by 1.8 percent of GDP. The introduction of a broad-
based and well administered VAT can contribute substantially to achieving this objective.

Table 3: VAT Indicators for Bangladesh and Comparator Country Groups
          Country                 Standard VAT Rate         VAT Revenue (%                 VAT Productivity7
                                                               of GDP)
Bangladesh                              15.0                      3.3                              0.22
Low Income Countries                    16.4                      5.5                              0.34
Lower     Middle      Income            17.4                      6.6                              0.38
Countries
Upper     Middle      Income            17.3                      6.6                              0.38
Countries
High Income Countries                   17.1                      6.7                              0.39
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Notes: Data for Bangladesh is for FY2009, the averages for the country groups are for 2005.

22.      The introduction of the new VAT system will not only increase revenues, but can also have a
positive impact on economic efficiency. Poor revenue performance is due to many shortcomings and
loopholes in the previous law. The first VAT Act was enacted in 1991, and it functions more as an
extended turnover-excise tax system than a true VAT. The law had been amended, appended, and
modified on different occasions resulting in many distortions. By taxing different sectors at different
effective rates, and thereby distorting production and consumption choices, the tax has been harmful to
economic growth. Tax liability under this Act is determined based on highly reduced and arbitrarily
negotiated approved values that are currently embedded in the tariff schedules for manufactured goods
and truncated bases for services and the trading sector. The long list of exempted goods and services that
are provided under the current law, further erode the tax base. There are also many burdensome features
in the existing law, such as the requirement for taxpayers to receive price approvals from tax officers, the
requirement to deposit VAT in the government treasury in advance of purchasing supplies, and the
necessity to attach to the VAT return copies of individual VAT invoices and payment confirmation.

23.      The new VAT Law addresses many shortcomings and loopholes in the previous law. The
new law will enter into effect on July 1st, 2015. It represents the most significant change to Bangladesh’s
tax system in many years, and was guided by four overarching goals: (i) substantially increase the amount
of government revenue that is available to pay for important public sector investments and priority social
expenditures; (ii) significantly facilitate the operations of businesses by making it easier and cheaper to
comply with VAT laws; (iii) considerably enhance the NBR’s capacity to identify and deal with non -
complaint taxpayers; and (iv) provide the basis for a modern, disciplined, and service-oriented VAT
administration. Key changes in the new VAT Law are summarized in Box 1.



7
 VAT productivity is defined as the ratio of VAT revenue to GDP divided by the standard VAT rate. As such it equals the
amount of VAT revenue as a proportion of GDP that is generated by each point in the standard VAT rate.
                                                                                                               Page 9
24.      The new VAT Law if properly implemented and effectively administered would increase tax
revenues by broadening the tax base. The revenue increase will be generated not by raising the VAT
rate, which remains unchanged at 15 percent (the VAT threshold remains unchanged too at BDT 8
million), but instead by broadening the tax base. Under the new Law, all economic sectors will be
brought within the scope of the VAT under which tax will be paid on the basis of actual transaction values
instead of highly reduced and arbitrary negotiated approved values that are currently embedded in the
tariff schedule (for manufacturing goods) and truncated bases (for services and the trading sector) under
the existing law. In addition, the VAT base will be further expanded by substantially reducing the long
list of exempt goods and services that are provided under the current law. An assessment by the NBR
estimated that revenue foregone due to various types of tax expenditure could be as much as 2.5 percent
of GDP in 2005, of which VAT accounts for about 2.07 percent of GDP8. According to IMF forecasts, it
is expected an increase of the VAT yield from 3.7 percent in 2012 to 4.6 percent of GDP by the end of the
program.

Table 4: Comparison of Existing VAT and New VAT Law
   Feature                      Existing VAT                                        New VAT law
Tax Base                 Narrow tax base                          Broad tax base
                         Wide ranging exemptions                  Limit exemptions to a small number of products
                         Limited coverage of services             VAT will apply to all sectors including imports,
                                                                    manufacturing,      services,   and   distribution
                                                                    (Extending the VAT to service sectors-any
                                                                    commodity that can be consumed will be subject
                                                                    to VAT unless exempt)
Rules                    Tax base can be modified by rules       Tax base can only be modified by Parliament
Registration             Separate registration for each          Single registration for each taxpayer
                          place of business                       No VAT on simple movement of goods; single
                         VAT imposed on movements of              registration focuses VAT imposition on
                          goods between two places of              transactions
                          business within the same taxpayer       Consistent with accounting practices-option for
                         Difficult to comply with and             branch registration if separate accounts are
                          requires adoptions to normal             maintain
                          record keeping and accounting
Taxable Value            Complex mixture of rules                Clear and simple rules
                         Notification and pre-approval of        Taxable value is the consideration for the supply
                          prices required                          (price)
                         Set tariff values                       No set tariff values
                         Truncated base for specific             No truncated bases
                          sectors (service and trading            Fair market value for some supplies to associates
                          sectors)
                         No general anti-avoidance rule
                          for associates
Price Approval           Requirement to have prices and          No price approval process
                          input-output coefficient processes
                          approved
Input          tax       Severe restrictions on input tax        All taxed inputs are creditable to the extent that
Credits                   credits both in law and practical        they are or will be used to make taxable supplies
                          operation                               No list narrowing which inputs qualify for credits
                         List defining which inputs qualify      Credit available in the return for tax period of
                          for credits                              purchase
                         Timing of credits matched to            VAT withheld at source and advance VAT paid on
                          timing of output                         imports are creditable
                         No input tax credit allowed for
                          VAT deducted at source, nor for
                          Advance VAT paid on import

8
    NBR and IMF (2007).
                                                                                                             Page 10
Systems               All systems are manual                  The law provides for full conversion to electronic
                                                                and online processes.
Source: Implementing a new Value Added Tax in Bangladesh, IMF, 2011; modified as per the new VAT law approved by the
Parliament.

25.     The new VAT presents an opportunity for addressing shortcomings in tax administration.
Revenue performance is further exacerbated by weakness in the tax administration. The VAT imposes
substantial burden on taxpayers who are required to register and account separately for each of their
manufacturing sites, maintain elaborate records, and physically visit the tax office in order to file their tax
return and comply with their obligations. According to the most recent business survey, revenue
administration performance is perceived as one of the most important constraints to investment and
growth in Bangladesh. Taxpayer compliance cost is high as demonstrated by the Doing Business
indicators. For the typical firm of the Doing Business exercise, total time spent preparing and paying taxes
in Bangladesh was 302 hours in 2012.

26.      The VAT administration is organized geographically and seriously understaffed. The
headquarters office is supported by the field offices, including 254 local circle offices throughout
Bangladesh, which report to 84 divisional offices reporting to 12 regional commission offices
(“commissionerates?). Understaffing and difficulty in filling approved positions-with an average vacancy
ratio of about 71 percent, is a real issue in the NBR VAT Wing. As set forth in Table 5, there are 1,176
tax administration officials out of 4,005 approved positions in the VAT Wing commission offices. The
VAT Wing HQ with only twelve tax administration officials out of 24 approved positions is also
insufficiently staffed and empowered to adequately direct and control the large number of field offices,
which operate with significant autonomy and minimal effective oversight of their performance from
headquarters.

                             Table 5: VAT Staff Positions and Vacancies, 2012
                                        Approved Positions          Filled Positions        Vacancy (in %)
       VAT Wing HQ                               24                          12                     50%
       VAT Wing Commission                      4005                        1176                    70%
       Offices
       Total VAT Wing                             4029                      1188                     71%
      Source: NBR

27.      Currently, both field office and headquarter staff are not organized into units based on tax
administration functions. In the field office, staff is assigned a range of taxpayers for whom they
perform a broad range of functions, which is inherently inefficient and subject to collusion. This form of
organization is one of the biggest weaknesses in Bangladesh’s VAT administration as it does not allow for
specialization among tax officers, nor centralization of routine functions (e.g. processing tax returns and
payments, telephone-based assistance), which are critical for achieving efficiency in administration. The
performance of core business areas is weak as demonstrated by: an inaccurate taxpayer registry, low filing
and payment rates, low audit productivity and coverage, limited almost close to zero take up ratio of
electronic services, etc. For instance, national audit coverage fell from 242 audits completed in FY2007-
2008 to only 148 in FY2008-2009, resulting in an audit coverage of only 0.034 percent9, which is
significantly low compared to international standards for effective audit program coverage of 25-30
percent of taxpayers each year.

28.     The current VAT administrative model is characterized by low level of automation and
outdated processes which is detrimental to tax collection and efficiency of the administration. The
current structure supports a full administrative assessment approach which involves pre-assessment
checking of virtually all tax declarations and significant personal interaction with taxpayers through a
highly distributed network of field offices. NBR has very limited IT capacity. A range of electronic

9
    Source: NBR
                                                                                                           Page 11
services (e-filing, e-payment gateway, e-audit, contact centers) provided to taxpayers is under
development. E-services are still very limited but with their planned expansion, this would enable tax
payers to manage their tax filing and paying responsibilities without face to face interaction with a tax
official.

29.      Introduction of the new VAT law would catalyze improvements in tax administration by
introducing self-assessment and spurring implementation of functionally organized VAT
administration. The introduction of a full self-assessment system would minimize direct intervention in
the assessment process by tax officials and direct far more efforts to targeted risk-based compliance
controls. According to the high-level design of the organizational structure endorsed by the NBR’s
Chairman, the VAT Wing will move towards streamlined and function based organization, which is
anchored by a strong headquarter that sets policy and provides program direction and guidance to the field
offices. To carry out these functions, the HQ functional responsibilities will be organized into a more
logical groupings with dedicated unit established for each major function, e.g. Member VAT Policy,
Member Operations and Information Technology; and Member Audit and Intelligence.

30.      The network of field offices will be strengthened and their responsibilities clarified . Two
different organizational set-ups would be established aiming at focusing the new organizational
arrangements on the most-revenue productive commission Offices-where the changes can be expected to
have the biggest impact and more easily be managed and minimize disruptions to other commission
offices. Since the vast majority of economic activity in Bangladesh is concentrated in the capital Dhaka,
and the corridor between it and the port city of Chittagong, in these locations the Commission Office with
be responsible for all aspects of VAT administration, including VAT registration and taxpayer services,
audit, and collection enforcement. Consequently, the commission offices in these locations will be
reorganized by establishing functional units for registration and taxpayer services, audit, and collection
enforcement, and other services. The Division will also be organized along functions lines, however
together with Circle offices they will be responsible for administering the turnover tax only and will have
no role in the VAT.

31.      In all other locations, VAT administration will be a shared responsibility between the
Commission and the Division Offices, while the turnover tax will be a shared responsibility between the
Divisions and Circle offices. In these locations, the commission office will be responsible for the more
complex VAT administration tasks and will be reorganized along functions lines e.g. registration and
taxpayer services, audit, and collection enforcement. The division offices will be organized into two units-
registration taxpayer services and audit and enforcement. Regarding the VAT administration, the division
offices will perform the routine administrative operations such as provide a walk up counter service to
accept VAT and turnover tax forms and forward them to the processing center; answer taxpayer’s queries
on the turnover tax and when possible the VAT; advisory visits to taxpayers’ premises to exp lain their
obligations under the VAT law and how to comply with these obligations; conduct less complex and less
risky VAT audits, etc. A comprehensive timetable for the organizational arrangements of the VAT Wing
will be developed under the program.

32.      To address understaffing at both the HQ and field offices more than 500 new staff will be
recruited and assigned to the VAT Wing. Staffing needs and assignment will be done using a three step
workload methodology10 to ensure that a sufficient number of staff is assigned to the field offices, and that
staff is allocated in appropriate proportions to each tax administration function. It is expected that the
largest portion of new staff will be allocated to the highly revenue productive Commissions in Dhaka and
Chittagong. A staffing plan will be developed to ensure adequate sequencing of hiring and training of
both transfers and new hires as well as clarify the roles and responsibilities between the existing staff and
new hires.

10
  The three step workload methodology includes: (i) identify quantifiable measures of workload for each major task carried out
by the various units; (ii) calculate the average amount of staff time that is required to complete each task; and (iii) set targets for
amount of work to be completed within certain timeframes.
                                                                                                                              Page 12
33.     Introduction of the new VAT law would be accompanied by the modernization of the core
business processes. Core business processes would be streamlined, automated and brought in line with
good international practices. Taxpayers will be given a substantial higher level of service and assistance to
help them to better understand and comply with their obligations under the new law. At the same time, a
higher degree of scrutiny and enforcement using modern-risk based methods would be applied towards
those taxpayers who fail to comply with their obligations under the new VAT law.

34.      Improved business processes built on effective IT systems, are critical. Automation will play
an essential role in improving VAT administration. As a result, the NBR will establish a new integrated
VAT Management system, based on Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) along with three new
organizational units, including: (i) a Processing Center to process tax returns and other taxpayer
documentation; (ii) a Data Center where the technology system reside and taxpayers’ record will be
stored; and (iii) a Contact Center to respond to taxpayers’ queries (the center will receive queries by
phone, letter or e-mail) about the tax law, the status of their accounts, get taxpayers feedback; gather
taxpayers complaints, set them to responsible officers in the concerned department for addressing
grievances, and disclose them to the public. The Integrated VAT Management System will be a stand-
alone application and capable of integration with other NBR information systems. The system will be run
on a centralized platform to which all tax offices as well as the Contact and Processing Centers will have
access. While the systems and data are run on this central platform, access must be available to staff in
various locations of the VAT Wing. Therefore a data network as well as basic tools (desktop, laptop,
servers, printers, routers, generators, etc.) will be provided to ensure safe and secure connectivity between
this centralized platform in the central Data Center and the VAT HQ, commissions, division and circle
offices. A range of electronic services will be provided to taxpayers (e-registration, e-filing, and e-
payment), support tools to tax officials and reporting capabilities to the managers.

35.     Ideally, the VAT should be implemented in a functional organizational structure where
integration and data sharing could be better managed and the IT system less costly and efficiently
utilized. However, the conditions for pursuing such good practice seem not to be there for quite a
while in Bangladesh for the following reasons: (a) the entrenched cadre system (typical of the South
Asia region) that divides the tax administration into income tax and VAT and customs officials, thus
limiting integration and even harmonization across these two parts of the tax administration; (b) the
urgent time frame required to implement the new VAT law; (c) the on-going, separate administrative
reforms and automation already underway in the income tax wing, supported by the Asian Development
Bank; (d) the lack of a single vision for harmonizing the ICT systems under development. Consequently,
pursuing such first best approach-implementing the VAT in a fully integrated functional organization
structure, is not feasible at this stage as merging income and VAT wings cannot be done overnight and is
expected to be strongly resisted. It is worth mentioning that even in revenue systems where domestic tax
administration-responsible for administering the VAT and customs responsible to collect import VAT, are
integrated and supposed to share information with tax administration in order for the latter to administer
the VAT refund, the coordination is not warranted.

36.     However, the momentum for VAT implementation exists and presents a window of
opportunity for both the Bank and the NBR. The success of the VAT launch could provide impetus
and political support for possible integration at later stage (e.g. the case of Vietnam and to an extent
Ghana). The VAT Improvement Program is a demand driven operation in the context that (i) the
Government has already adopted a new modern VAT law following good practice and will have to
implement it anyway by July 2015; (ii) the VAT implementation is aligned with and directly linked to the
ECF program with continued IMF TA support (even with the FAD resident advisor for VAT
implementation) on furthering the regulation for the VAT administration; and (iii) importantly, the VAT
and income tax wings have reached an agreement on using the same database platform for their respective
administration software systems.

37.    Additionally, the recently established ICT working group will be instrumental in carrying
out a comprehensive assessment of long-term IT management/operations capacity of the VAT
                                                                                         Page 13
Wing, and based on it develop an adequate capacity building program considering the central role
the IT will have in VAT improvement program results.

                                Box 1: Main Features of the new VAT Law

        Registration-The VAT registration thresholds under the existing VAT law is Taka 8 million. The new law
         does not change the threshold, and provides for three taxes: a creditable 15 percent VAT that is chargeable
         by businesses with taxable sales above Taka 8 million; a non-creditable 3 percent turnover tax that applies
         to businesses with taxable sales between Taka 2.4 million and Taka 8 million, and a supplementary duty of
         varying rates that is chargeable on sales of specific goods and services.
        Coverage-The new VAT will apply to all sectors, including import, manufacturing, services, and
         distribution. The revenue increase will be generated not by raising the VAT rate, which remains
         unchanged at 15 percent, but instead by considerably broadening the tax base.
        Taxable value of supply-the VAT is imposed on the actual sales price instead of arbitrary tariff values or
         truncated bases; taxpayers are no longer required to have prices and input-output coefficients approved by
         tax officers and the restrictions on price discount have been eliminated.
        Input tax credits-the new VAT law provides for much broader use of input tax credits by making
         creditable all taxed inputs to the extent they are used to make taxable supplies compared to the old VAT
         which placed severe restrictions on input tax credits.
        Calculation method-the amount of VAT due in each reporting period is based on the invoice-credit
         method where the amount of tax to be paid equals VAT charged on sales (and other positive adjustments)
         minus VAT paid on inputs (and other negative adjustments).
        Timing for remitting VAT to government-the new VAT law allows tax to be remitted to government
         when the tax return is due and eliminates the current requirement for manufacturers and some service
         providers to remit VAT before shipping goods or providing services.
        Refunds-explicit rules are now provided for carrying forward and refunding excess VAT credits.
        Arrears collection-the new law vests the NBR with some additional powers to recover tax arrears,
         including the authority to freeze a tax debtor’s bank accounts, place a lien on the tax debtor’s property, and
         hold company directors liable for paying unpaid taxes. It also allows tax debtors to pay their arrears in
         installment for up to 12 months (only 6 months under the existing law).
        Appeals-under the new VAT law, taxpayers will be able to access an Alternative Dispute Resolution
         system. They will also be required to pay 10 percent of a disputed tax before being entitled to file an
         appeal.
        Exemptions and Supplementary Duty-the number of exempted goods subject to the supplementary duty
         have been substantially reduced under the new VAT law.
        Special arrangements-include advance tax on imports, withholding of VAT by certain categories of
         taxpayers from their suppliers, and special schemes for supplies of residential premises,
         telecommunications, and alcohol and tobacco products (for supplementary duty).
Source: A Draft Plan for Implementing the New Value Added Tax in Bangladesh, IMF, 2013.

38.      The VAT Improvement Program aims to increase revenues by enhancing voluntary
compliance, reducing non-compliance, and enhancing the transparency of VAT administration. It
will achieve its results though addressing shortcomings in the tax administration that have led to
non-compliance, and through automation of the administration in time for the introduction of the
new VAT. NBR faces significant obstacles to control and address non-compliance issues, including non-
registration, non-filing, under-reporting and non-payment, as illustrated in the tax administration results
chain diagram (Figure 2). Achievement of short-term results or outputs, which are a pre-requisite for
medium to longer term results achievement, would require significant reform efforts on the following
fronts:


                                                                                                             Page 14
39.      Closing the Taxpayer Registration Gap: It is made up of individuals or enterprises that
should be registered as taxpayers but are not. The taxpayer register is the bedrock of a tax
administration, and lack of accuracy and reliability of the taxpayer register will in turn produce
deficiencies in both the collection and enforcement process, and subsequently increases administrative
and compliance costs. It is imperative for the tax administration to know its client base, and a unique
Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) be assigned to taxpayers in order to ensure a correct identification
in the taxpayer register (preferably a unique number that is issued for income tax, VAT and other taxes
where appropriate). Implementation of a unique taxpayer identifier across all tax-types as opposed to
multiple TINs is generally considered a good practice.

40.     In Bangladesh, the true size of the VAT taxpayer base is not known. Management notes that
the taxpayer registry contains about 755,000 businesses, with a VAT population of over 430,000
businesses. In reality a large proportion of these businesses are inactive.

41.      The existing taxpayer registration process is manual and suffers from many defects
including representation errors, duplicate numbers, incomplete database, and inconvenience of a
decentralized registration procedure. Consequently, the current VAT, income and turnover tax registers
are out of date and do not provide an accurate estimate of the expected number of taxpayers. Furthermore,
the new VAT law stipulates some changes in the registration rules, including: (i) every business required
to be registered shall have one single registration for all of its operations, including branch operations; (ii)
BIN to be a unique number which no longer contain any identifier or changeable attribution e.g. digits
that link the taxpayer to a particular geographical VAT office will be removed; and (iii) in addition to the
general registration of businesses, NBR will maintain a record of all businesses identified as a
"withholding entity" and will require all VAT consultants to apply for a license.

42.      An accurate estimate of the expected number of VAT registrants is an essential prerequisite
for making key assumptions in a number of development areas and a key indicator of the success of
basic enforcement activities. The estimated number of VAT population is critical in determining the
scale of operations and developing VAT strategies and plans. The estimated number of VAT population
will influence the forecasts of the number of each transaction type, estimates of the number of staff
required in each role, organization design criteria, staffing numbers, accommodations requirements,
training demands, and sizing for the outsourcing of return and payment processing and taxpayer contact
center activities. These estimates then form the basis for the IT technical specifications for data center
size, network design and procurement, hardware and software procurement, and database sizing.

43.       Consequently, a targeted VAT re-registration exercise supported by a comprehensive
taxpayer education and communication program will be undertaken so that the forecast of the
number of VAT population is as accurate as possible. An effort is currently underway to associate
existing BINs with the new TINs in an attempt to establish a "clean" database of existing VAT payers.
The use of the TIN for VAT payers will first be employed by Customs hopefully early in 2014. As a
result, there should be no delay in the use of the TIN for VAT payers in the new system.

44.     The VAT re-registration will benefit from and build on the online income tax TIN
registration initiative. This was launched on July 2013, and supported by the Bangladesh Investment
Climate Fund. Under this new system, tax registration numbers will be issued online after validating
taxpayer information on-real time basis with the National ID database and Registrar of the Joint Stock
Companies (RJSC) database for individuals and businesses respectively. The e-Registration solution
includes a digitally signed registration document issued to the taxpayer and an e-Service authentication
solution to permit secure electronic services. The positive results achieved under the online income tax
TIN registration program are summarized in Box 2.




                                                                                                       Page 15
  As On                     Re-registration                                New Registration
               Individual      Ltd. Company and Firms         Individual       Ltd. Company and Firms
            Male     Female LTd.    Reg. Un Reg. Male              Female LTd.    Reg. Un Reg. Firm
                            Company Firm Firm                             Company Firm
24/10/2013 410,892 78,631          3,813      38    2,467 86,045 16,478          1,820     76             996
                489,523                    6318                102523                      2892
                               495,841                                          105,415
                                                         601,256


Box 2: Positive results achieved under the online income tax TIN registration program

         Reduction in taxpayer compliance cost. Taxpayers can now register with tax authority online in a process
          that takes about 5 minutes. The previous system took more than 9 days and an official fee of US$ 13 per
          registration, which was considered as an advance income tax. This fee was removed as per
          recommendation of BICF. The new system does not require direct interaction with tax officials or the use
          of a tax intermediary for registration purposes, and hence the need to make informal payments (on an
          average US$ 26/registration) has been completely removed.
         Improved governance. The new system will clean up the existing database and enable improvement in tax
          governance and oversight, which in turn will result in better fiscal planning. Currently, there are about 3.7
          million tax registration holders, of which only 1.8 million have accurate data and are filing tax returns on a
          regular basis. As shown above, more than 100,000 new taxpayers, including individuals and companies,
          were brought into the tax net.
         Application of digital signature in a government service, as a key backbone to implement entirely e-
          governance. This is the first time digital signature is being used by any government agency in Bangladesh
          in delivering services to citizens and businesses.
         Better coordination and sharing of information. This is one of the few cases in Bangladesh where 3
          government agencies- the NBR, the RJSC and the Election Commission (owns National ID database), are
          sharing information on real-time basis in delivering a public service.




45.      There is also a need to close the filing gap-the gap between those registered and who should
file tax; and those who actually file taxes. Accurate date is currently not available, but filing
compliance is extraordinary low, with a total of only 62,000 VAT returns filed by the 430,000 VAT
taxpayers. In order to reduce the number of non-filers or stop-filers, modern tax administrations have
established a centralized processing center and provided for e-filing systems; so that the tax forms can be
filed electronically and sent directly to a central processing center. Non filing will be automatically
identified for each tax period at the processing center. The computer system will track which taxpayers
are expected to file returns and by which date. If a return is not received on time, the system will generate
an electronic list of late filers for the period, which will be automatically allocated to the relevant
commission office. Basic risk profiling will be used to prioritize the assignment of cases, e.g. persistent
non-filers will be allocated a higher priority, and consistent follow up actions will be applied.

46.     Making self-reporting and filing easier is important to close the filing gap; as this reduces the
costs for both the taxpayers and the administration. When filing on-line, taxpayers spend less time
preparing their returns, which results in significant reduction in taxpayers’ compliance costs; and removes
the face to face interaction at local offices which is often associated with misreporting for mutual benefit.
Encouraging taxpayers to submit returns electronically under the program, should also significantly
reduce administration costs, since a central processing center will have some economies of scale
compared to processing at a large number of local offices.
                                                                                                              Page 16
47.       The program supports the reduction in the payment gap; which arises when taxpayers who
file returns, or are audited, do not meet their outstanding tax liabilities on time . Accurate date is
missing, but the paying compliance is extremely low, with a total of 50,000 registered businesses paying
VAT. The progress in reducing the magnitude of this gap typically requires coordination across two
different units in a tax administration: payment processing and arrears collection. To facilitate the smooth
payment of tax liabilities, taxpayers will be encouraged through the program to make their tax payment
through electronic means. Additionally, establishment of a data center that stores taxpayer data
(registration, payment and reconciliation between the payment credited to the taxpayers’ accounts and the
tax actually deposited in the treasury) will contribute towards reduction of this gap. Non-payment of taxes
will be addressed with the same automatic identification and follow up of cases as for the non-filer cases.

48.       To reduce the reporting gap requires strengthening of two core business areas, namely audit
and tax appeals. The reporting gap arises when registered taxpayers file their returns, and even though
they make timely payment of the obligations calculated in their returns, but under-report their tax
liabilities. Under the existing system no national audit program targets have been set, and no standard
audit case selection criteria are used. Therefore each office determines its own audit program along with
the number of audits to be conducted and cases to be selected, and usually this is based on the local
knowledge rather than risk-based criteria. The audit coverage of 0.034 percent in FY2008/09 is extremely
low compared to international standards for effective audit program coverage of 25-30 percent of
taxpayers each year. The additional assessment resulting from conducted audits is also low.

49.      The program supports the audit function by establishing a fully risk-based automated
system which will be used to improve the process of identifying audit-cases based on risk criteria.
Audits are a key tool used by tax administrations to increase compliance by: (a) detecting and redressing
individual cases of non-compliance; (b) promoting voluntary compliance by increasing the probability of
detection and penalties for non-compliant taxpayers; and (c) gathering information on both the health of
the tax system and the evasion techniques used by taxpayers. The establishment of independent appeal
mechanisms and the availability of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms to resolve taxpaye rs’
complains are also required for a fair application of the tax system. An Alternative Dispute Resolution
Mechanism was launched to reduce the stock of foregone taxes in dispute, and rolled out to all
jurisdictions in July 2012, with a number of taxpayers already availing this mechanism.

50.      The Customs Wing will play a critical role in the effective introduction of the VAT. The
importers are liable to pay the VAT on taxable imports and supplementary duty on imported dutiable
goods, with the VAT and duty being collected in the same way as customs duties. The VAT will be
calculated on the value of the goods as determined for the collection of customs duty under the Customs
Act, including any amount of customs duty, supplementary duty or other tax payable on the import.
Exports of goods and certain specified services will be zero-rated for VAT purposes. The customs’ trader
register for importers and exporters in ASYCUDA will be updated to link the new TIN that will be issued
to VAT and enlisted turnover taxpayers. Consequently, the VAT and Customs Wings will coordinate to
ensure that the customs register will be kept up-to-date to reflect any change in the VAT register.

51.      Customs data will be a crucial element in the success of the VAT audit program. Hence,
establishment of coordination arrangements between the customs and VAT Wings is paramount.
Much of the VAT collected by customs will subsequently be claimed as input tax credits on VAT returns
filed with the VAT Wing. The VAT staff will rely on customs documentation for the purposes of
verifying the accuracy of reported import and export transactions. For the VAT audit function access to
up-to-date import and export data is a basic requirement. Consequently, the program envisages
establishment of coordination arrangements between the VAT and Customs Wing to ensure exchange of
information on a regular basis.

52.     The results chain for the program is explained in Figure 2.


                                                                                                   Page 17
                             Figure 2: The Tax Program Results Chain




53.     Transforming the organization in this way will be a complex and sensitive undertaking,
consequently, a strong change management program is needed. As with any change, particularly in
the case of tax policy and tax administration reforms, which are technically demanding, politically
contentious, and require careful and sustained implementation over time, it is paramount to design and
implement a change management program throughout the project life and beyond. Hence, the program
will support activities aimed at developing and implementing appropriate strategies for managing
organizational change at all levels of VAT Wing, including a robust behavioral change communication
strategy to explain the rationale and potential impact of proposed changes to all managers and staff.
Additionally, training on change management will be designed and delivered.

54.      A comprehensive taxpayer education and communication program is also needed. The
behavioral change communication strategy and the public education campaign, using multiple
communication channels including new media (social media, mobile) and mass media, should take a two-
pronged approach: (i) behavioral change communication to promote compliance, electronic registration,
etc.; and (ii) advocacy to sustain the policy dialogue. Generating broad-based consensus and a continued
policy dialogue through a creative communication program will help to continue the reform efforts
irrespective of the political situation.

55.     Hence, the program will use and provide a variety of instruments, including: develop and
implement a comprehensive taxpayer education program and communication campaign to raise awareness
and inform the VAT stakeholders and public at large about the VAT reform and potential impact of
                                                                                                Page 18
proposed changes; organize regular consultations, workshops, and presentations to the private sector,
which is unfamiliar with and opposes the overall tax reform process; public information campaign by
using government TV and other media advertisements; advertise requirements to register for VAT,
bookkeeping requirements and invoicing regulation, and issue registration packs (guide and forms) to
expected registrants; provide advisory services to initial registrants; draft explanatory materials;
registration guide to support the registration process, general guidance booklet to explain the VAT in
details; draft a set of technical guidelines to provide assistance to taxpayers in how to apply the new VAT
Law and rules to specific business situations and in relation to specific industries; industry specific
pamphlets, briefings for targeted taxpayers to inform them on the expected impact of the VAT.

56.      An institutional strengthening and capacity building program is included in the design of
the program. A comprehensive and continues institutional strengthening and capacity building program
is needed to enable staff to apply the new VAT law, use the new technology and carry out their work
using the new administrative processes. The training program should be tailored to specific groups of staff
based on what they need to do their job and deliver on their mandate. Enhancing the analytical capacity of
the NBR to carry out tax gap analysis and modeling and revenue forecasting should also be included in
the training program.

57.     Continuous commitment to tax reform will be needed to implement such a complex tax
modernization plan; and the benchmark in the IMF program should reduce the risk that the resolve will
diminish over time or under a different leadership or administration. NBR has already moved ahead on
several activities, including: (a) a high level Program Steering Committee chaired by the Chairman and
comprised of ten members was established to ensure high level drive and manage critical issues that affect
implementation. A Program Implementation Committee, chaired by the Member (VAT: Enforcement and
IT) of NBR and consisting of eight officers not below the rank of Deputy Secretary/Deputy Chief from
key agencies was also established. (b) In March 4th, 2013, a decision was taken by the Minister of
Finance for purchasing a Commercial off the Shelf (COTS) software; (c) Cost estimates for VAT
implementation have been finalized; (d) IMF has appointed a Resident VAT Advisor for facilitating the
implementation of the draft plan; (e) NBR has established a Technology Working Group to develop a
long-term ICT harmonization strategy and identify and establish common approaches to matters across all
wings; (f) GoB approved the Development Project Proposal (DPP) on “Value Added Tax and
Supplementary Duty Act 2012, 2012 Implementation Project? popularly known as “VAT Online?.
Despite these developments, continues commitment to reform is needed to maintain the momentum and
move forward such a complex tax modernization plan.


Technical Soundness

58.      The technical soundness of VAT Improvement Program design, its strategic relevance, the
institutional implementation arrangements, the feasibility of its outputs and their linkage to
program results are all deemed adequate and within the capacity of the implementing
organizations, as suitably strengthened under the capacity building component. The design of the
program has taken into account (i) international good practices and (ii) lessons learned from tax reform
efforts in other countries and implementation of World Bank tax modernization reform projects. They are
summarized in Box 3.

      Box 3: Lessons Learned for Tax Reform Efforts and some Key Features of Modern Tax
                                        Administration
        Successful administrative reform requires sustained political will as much as technical capacity. A sound
         reform strategy, technical understanding and adequate human resources are essential, of course, but so too
         is political commitment—from the highest levels and over substantial periods of time —to overcome
         resistance (not least from the revenue administration itself), ensure effective application of the laws, assure
         funding, and drive through complementary legal and tax policy changes. Where this has been present (in
         Peru, Ecuador, Guatemala, Georgia, and Rwanda, for instance), progress can be substantial; where it is not,

                                                                                                              Page 19
    it will be minimal. This important lesson we have learnt not only from the tax administration reform
    projects, but from all bank operations.
   A medium to long-term strategic vision, owned by the tax agency, is needed to carry out a comprehensive
    reform and build the required capacity. The program is supporting the government’s broader tax reform
    agenda as articulated in the Tax Modernization Plan 2011-2016. This important lesson we have learnt not
    only from the tax administration reform projects, but from all bank operations.
   Tax policy and other legal reforms must be identified and prepared in advance of the project
    implementation if the expected increases in tax administration effectiveness and tax collection are to be
    achieved. In case tax policy reforms are not introduced in a timely and effective way, mitigating measures
    must be in place along with the needed political and institutional commitment to carry them out. Tax
    policy and other legal changes need to be taken in parallel with institutional capacity development to
    achieve full benefits from planned reforms. Indeed, the program is supporting the implementation of the
    new VAT law approved by the Parliament in November 2012 and envisaged to be introduced in July 2015.
    (Pakistan: Tax Administration Reform Project).
   The need for concrete and visible senior management support . The extremely complex process of
    modernizing any tax administration requires strong, committed leadership, convinced fully of the need to
    modernize, enthusiastically championing the reform process. The program design has reflected this
    important lesson, and senior management of the NBR is involved and committed to reform. A Program
    Steering Committee and Program Implementation Committee consisting of senior management of key
    organizations have already been established. (Indonesia and Vietnam tax administration reform projects).
   Computerization is a support tool and should not be the driving force in the reform process. The program
    has been designed acknowledging that the reorganization and modernization of business processes and the
    strengthening of management and planning as well as capacity building of the tax officials are the core
    elements of improving tax administration efficiency. As part of the project monitoring system, it is
    important to ensure that when new IT applications are introduced in the field: (a) they are field tested, (b)
    adequate training in new business processes is provided to users, (c) adopting the new procedures is
    identified in strategic plans, and (d) rewards or recognition of staff for adopting new processes are in place.
    This lesson learnt has impacted the design of many tax administration reform projects with ICT
    component. More specifically, Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Indonesia, Vietnam,
    Pakistan, Croatia, Bulgaria and Romania tax projects.
   A broad and continued policy dialogue on tax reform is needed in parallel to increase the likelihood of
    success for the newly implemented revenue administration reforms. Supervision of projects can quickly
    get bogged down in the minutiae of implementation issues, diverting attention from a broader policy
    dialogue on fundamental tax reform that is critical to ensure that project outcomes are converted into
    sustainable results (Pakistan: Tax Administration Reform Project, Colombia, and the Philippines).
   Substantial enhancement of tax administration effectiveness requires fundamental organizational change.
    Revenue administration reforms entail the implementation of substantial organizational reforms with the
    potential to disrupt operations at field formations and inflame staff’s stiff resistance to change. Extensive
    consultations with stakeholders using a bottom-up participatory process, constructive dialogue and
    adequate risk mitigation measures at the outset are needed. Reorganization action plans need to be phased-
    in carefully over a realistic period, while adequate safeguards and ongoing monitoring need to be actively
    undertaken through an effective communications and outreach program in order to facilitate stakeholders
    buy-in and to address perceived or real inequalities among staff. Indeed the program envisages for a
    change management and a comprehensive taxpayer communication and education program; mitigation
    measures for critical steps which are on the critical path of implementation; monitoring and reporting
    progress twice a year. (Pakistan and Vietnam projects).
   Efforts to control the potential for corrupt behavior by tax officials requires a comprehensive strategy
    aimed at reducing the motive and opportunity for corruption, and providing incentives for integrity to take
    hold. (Vietnam: Tax Administration Modernization Project).
   Stand-alone investment loans may not be the most appropriate instrument for supporting major tax reform.
    Effective support of high-risk/high-return investment such as fundamental tax reform requires an array of
    Bank’s instruments suited to tackle capacity building, tax policy, legislative reforms and political economy
    analysis towards specific and long term maturing development objectives. Flexible and results-oriented
    lending instruments supporting a tax reform strategy with sensible sequencing of actions, greater
    recognition of political economy factors and the governance context, robust TA support, and continued
    policy dialogue, are best suited to bring sustained development objective results compared to the
    traditional, stand-alone investment lending approach. (Pakistan: Tax Administration Reform Project).

                                     Key Features of modern tax administration
                                                                                                        Page 20
     Modern tax administrations are moving towards:
       Function or “hybrid? based organization as opposed to type -of-tax organization. In practice, most tax
         administration‘s organizational structures are a mix of the different features and characteristics of models
         available, which is called ―the “hybrid? model. In this regard, while most tax administration‘s
         organizational structures are based on the functional model, the majority of them have established a Large
         Taxpayer Unit (LTU) and some residues of a type-of-tax oriented tax administration have survived in
         many of them (e.g. excise taxes administered by customs in countries where customs have been merged
         with tax administration‘s operations).
       Improved corporate governance including streamlining the organizational structure and strengthening
         the role of HQ in designing programs and providing strategic guidance. The large office network is
         anchored in the old way of doing business, and is associated with many disadvantages. The function
         based management model means that the role of headquarters cuts across normal, vertical lines of
         authority in the organization. Hence, HQ’s role in designing programs and providing strategic guidance to
         operational levels should be strengthened.
       A client oriented approach which seeks to reach an adequate balance between taxpayer service and
         compliance enforcement. There is a link between taxpayer services and compliance, and it should be
         visible to taxpayers in all dealings with the tax administration. In modern and client oriented tax
         administrations, service approach is integrated into the core tax programs aiming at making all contact
         between the tax administration and taxpayers as simple and efficient as possible. Under this model, for
         example, it is considered a good practice to establish call centers and a move towards larger and more
         centralized service centers to ensure delivery of consistent, high quality service that enables specialization
         (e.g., by taxpayer segment or tax type and procedure).
       Self- assessment as opposed to administrative assessment. This reflects a move towards (i) more
         comprehensive and targeted approach to providing help and assistance to taxpayers; (ii) systematic
         verification of reported tax liabilities through risk-based desk and field audits; and (iii) computerized
         matching of income reports.
       Dedicated processing centers (e.g. for processing of tax returns and payments). Under this approach,
         dedicated process-oriented centers have been established to deal with massive processes that apply to all
         taxpayers segments of taxpayers or type of tax, e.g. tax return processing, primary checks to all tax
         returns, and basic information services.


59.      While the program envisages a strong focus on the introduction of the new customized of-
the-shelf commercial tax administration software; the DLIs encompass the comprehensive tax
administration reform program, so that the ICT purchase cannot be considered an end in itself. The
program envisages a comprehensive reform for the VAT Wing, including moving towards streamlined
and function based organizations, development and implementation of a new integrated VAT
Management System along with institutional strengthening and capacity building, change management,
and taxpayer education and communication outreach activities. When the assistance is provided within a
broader tax administration modernization reform, it is not possible to isolate and assess the impact of ICT
improvements downstream in tax administration outcomes. Additionally, isolated ICT reforms not
complemented with strong institutional strengthening and capacity building components are not likely to
succeed, as ICT is a support tool and should not be the driving force in the reform process. Consequently,
DLIs include one process indicator and key outputs in the results chain- increase in the number of
registered active VAT taxpayers and take up ratio of electronic services, i.e. taxpayers who file and pay
online. These are critical aspects of an efficient tax administration and would contribute towards enhanced
VAT revenue mobilization capacity.

60.     An Implementation Plan for the VAT was drafted with IMF assistance, and approved by
the Minister of Finance on March 4th, 2013. The recently revised plan and endorsed by the
Chairman (March 2013) will be implemented in a step-by-step manner over three carefully
sequenced phases. Each of the phases includes various streams of activities that are intended to create a
new and fundamentally improved VAT administration. The timely delivery of the plan is dependent on
the achievement of the milestones set forth in Figure 3. Annex 1 provides the detailed revised VAT
Implementation Plan.

                                                                                                             Page 21
                         Figure 3: High Level VAT Implementation Plan (revised)


          Phase I                                                                           Phase III
                                                           Phase II
    Planning Completed                                                                 Remaining Programs
                                                  Initial Programs Begin                     Begin


           QIV 2013–QII 2014                     QII 2014–QII 2015                  QII 2015–QIV 2015

 Organizational structure: high level       Secondary legislation:            Filing and Payment Program:
 design                                   published                           commences

 Staffing: high level plan                  Registration Program:             Taxpayer Accounting Program:
                                            commences                         commences
 Administrative programs: high level        Other VAT Programs: initiate      Refund Management Program:
 design                                     development                       commences
 Business processes: high level             Contact Center: operational       Taxpayer Services Program:
 requirements                                                                 commences
 Communication strategy (staff): high       Data Center: operational          Arrears/Non-Filer Program:
 level plan                                                                   commences
 Training: high level plan                  Processing Center: operational    Audit/Investigation Programs:
                                                                              commence
 Office Accommodations: high level plan                                       Appeals Program: commences
                                                                              Customs Program: commences
           Critical Milestones:                 Critical Milestones:                 Critical Milestone:

  February 2014: High level plans     June 2014: Project                    August 2015: First tax returns
   and designs completed                management consultancy                         received
  March 2014: All RFPs completed and   begins
   issued                              August 2014: COTS Team
  May 2014: High level business        begins
   requirements completed              January 2015: Taxpayer
                                        registration begins

Source: Aide-Mémoire “Implementing the New VAT: Current Status and Next Steps? IMF, March 24, 2013.

61.    The program will have four components whose main functions and activities are described
below:

    1. Operational Modernization of the VAT Wing of NBR;
    2. Introduction of an Integrated VAT Management System;
    3. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building;
    4. Program Management, including program coordination and administration and change
       management and a comprehensive taxpayer communication and education program

Component 1: Operational Modernization of the VAT Wing of NBR

62.     This component aims to enable the NBR to ensure a high level of voluntary compliance with the
VAT system. Streamlining and simplification of processes and the establishment of a service system
responding efficiently to taxpayer needs will reduce the compliance burden for taxpayers. Activities under
this component will increase the ability of the tax administration to detect tax evasion and collect the full
amount of taxes due. Introducing new functional business processes in the VAT Wing will also increase
                                                                                                      Page 22
transparency and reduce the discretion of tax officials. This component will contribute to facilitating the
registration process and improving the reliability of information in the tax register. Furthermore, it will
promote new electronic systems for registration, filing and tax payments, which can reduce both
administration and compliance costs. It will also improve the capacity of the tax administration to verify
tax refund requests aiming at reducing one of the major risk areas for tax fraud. This component will also
cover arrears management, which is an important part of a compliance management system. This
component will cover core VAT functional areas: (i) registration, return processing, tax payments,
taxpayer accounting and tax refunds; (ii) tax audit; (iii) collection and enforcement; (iv) tax appeal; and
(v) taxpayer services. The main activities will include but not limited to:

Registration
   (i)      formulate a plan for conducting the initial registration of VAT taxpayers ;
   (ii)     formulate a plan to develop an analysis of taxpayer population and dependent estimates report
            and a third party quality review phase.
   (iii)    carry out the re-registration and harmonize the existing Business Identification Number (BIN)
            with the new TIN to establish a clean database of existing VAT payers;
   (iv)     introduce and strengthen electronic registration;
   (v)      develop new procedures for taxpayer registration and e-registration, including for dealing
            with inactive and non-registered taxpayers;
   (vi)     develop high level business process model and description for registration;
   (vii)    design registration application form, procedures and notification of registration notice; and
   (viii) develop operational manual of registration.

Return Processing and Payment Accounting
    (i)    introduce and strengthen e-filing and e-payment;
    (ii)   develop new procedures for filing and payment (including e-payment and e-registration), and
           account management;
    (iii)  develop high level business process model and description for return and payment processing;
    (iv)   develop operational manual of return processing and payment accounting;
    (v)    design return form; and
    (vi)   issue first VAT return and payment.

Tax Refund
    (vii)  establish a centralized refund management driven by risk-based systems;
    (viii) develop new procedures for refund management; and
    (ix)   develop operational manual of refund management.

Audit and Investigation
   (x)      Improve the audit planning process;
   (xi)     provide an automated system using risk analysis based on all available internal and external
            data;
   (xii)    develop audit manuals including for industry specific audits.
   (xiii) develop new procedures and techniques for desk and field audits including computerized
            audits.
   (xiv) develop operational manual of audit and investigation; and
   (xv)     develop high level business process model and description for audit.

Collection Enforcement
    (i)     develop a comprehensive collection enforcement procedures manual;
    (ii)    improve collection and late/non-filer management;
    (iii)   develop high level business process model and description for collection and late/non-filer
            management;


                                                                                                  Page 23
    (iv)    develop filing and payment procedures and procedures related to prompt control of stop-filers
            and no payers; and
    (v)     improve techniques and procedures for recovery of tax arrears.

Tax Appeals
    (i)    review and improve appeal process mechanisms;
    (ii)   develop a program to deal with tax audits and introduce a centralized appeals case
           information management system;
    (iii)  develop new procedures;
    (iv)   develop high level business process model and description for appeals; and
    (v)    prepare an operational manual of appeals.

Taxpayer Services
   (i)     develop high level business process model and description for taxpayer services; and
   (ii)    develop users and procedure manuals and forms for taxpayer services.


Component 2: Introduction of an Integrated VAT Management System
1.       The NBR decided that each of the three tax types develops separate application software, rather
than an integrated revenue management system for all taxes. In March 4th, 2013, a decision was taken by
the MoF for purchasing a configurable web-based Commercial off the Shelf (COTS) VAT administration
system, instead of developing it in-house. Supporting the long term agenda of harmonization and avoiding
further enhancement of silos, the VAT and Income Tax applications would share a common database
platform “oracle?. The same platform along with the new unique TIN as the single identifier for all
taxpayers would facilitate integration and harmonization between wings at the database level,
subsequently “systems will talk to each other?. The system will be based on a centralized platform to
which all VAT tax offices as well as Contact, Data and Processing Centers will have access. The
Invitation for Tender (IFT), which has been written with strong support of technical advisory inputs
provided by a technical team from the WB, IMF, and IFC, clearly stipulates the requirement from the
potential vendors to use “oracle?. The COTS IT package will be approximately around US$18 million,
close to the US$20 million ceiling for IT procurements under the PforR operational policies. There are
several options that will be considered in the event that the actual value of the tender exceeds the
threshold, such as (a) negotiating with the winning technical bid to remove any non-core requirements for
the system; and (b) requesting an exception to the threshold. The tender is already underway with a view
to signing a contract before end June 2014. The system will need to be implemented in stages
commencing in January 2015 for registration modules and to be fully operational, including audit
modules, by December 2015.

63.    Component 2 provides for procurement and implementation of the Integrated VAT Management
system based on COTS software and associated consulting services to support modernized tax
administration operations in the NBR. The main sub-components and respective activities are:

64.      Sub-component 2.1: Integrated VAT Management System. The integrated VAT Management
System-COST must support VAT, turnover tax (for taxpayers below the VAT thresholds, excise tax (a tax
on bank transactions and airline tickets), and a VAT Withholding tax (VAT remitted directly to the NBR
by an agent rather than being paid to the sellers of VAT goods). It should support all core functional areas
of the VAT administration including: case management; risk management, which would enable the most
effective actions to take to resolve taxpayer compliance issues. The risk management engine should be
used in a number of enforcement and compliance functions and generates risk profiles for taxpayers and
for segments of taxpayer population; registration function; return processing; revenue accounting; revenue
management; taxpayer current accounting; refunds and credit adjustments; enforcement including non-
filing, debt management, audit, dispute to assessments; taxpayer inquiry, document certification and
management. The system should use a browser based interface for all user access to its operational
                                                                                                   Page 24
functions (i.e. tax officials using the system, taxpayers accessing it via the portal). The user interface will
be in Bangla and where feasible English. System interfaces shall be implemented such that each of the
systems can be independently upgraded and/or replaced without changes to the other system or to the core
ICT architecture at NBR. The system should also support a common external face to taxpayers where they
can register, file and pay.

65.      The main activities will include, but not be limited to: develop functional specifications for VAT
tax administration software; prepare and issue IFT for VAT tax administration software; associated
consulting services for tender selection process; vendor configure/customize system; develop data
migration strategy; system test phase registration module; implement registration module; system test
phase returns, payment, and refund processing, taxpayer and revenue account; implement returns,
payment, and refund processing, taxpayer and revenue account modules; implement arrears and non-
filling enforcement modules; system test phase audit module; implement audit module.

66.      Sub-component 2.2: Establishing a Data Center. A Central Data Center is a specialized facility
that stores taxpayer data and house the servers on which various software applications run to allow the
data to be assessed. This unit will be the central repository for all of electronic records of each VAT
taxpayers. Taxpayer data stored at this center include registration, payment, and VAT return information.
The unit will have the responsibility for archiving data, system maintenance activities, and ensuring
business disaster procedures are in place.

67.    The main activities will include, but not be limited to: implement selected Data Center Supplier,
and make the Data Center operational.

68.      Sub-component 2.3: Establishing a Centralized Processing Center. This unit will handle the
increased number of electronic and paper submissions. It will enhance efficiency gains in processing,
provide much greater flexibility in meeting seasonal demands, support upwards scalability as more forms
are filed electronically, and increase the control and security over the receipts and processing of key
administrative documents. The Center will be organized into units based on the following functions,
including: (a) receiving, keying, and processing scanned and faxed tax returns and registration
applications; (b) resolving errors; (c) reconciling and adjusting liability and payment posting on taxpayer
account; and (d) reconciling Treasury tax receipts against payment posting on taxpayer accounts.

69.     The main activities will include, but not be limited to: develop and process center functional
specifications; prepare and issue Processing Center request for tender; tender selection process;
processing center established and begins to process registration forms.

70.     Sub-component 2.4: Establishing a Contact Center: Modern compliance management uses a
combination of taxpayer service and compliance enforcement strategies to promote a high level of
voluntary compliance. This subcomponent aims to establish the service related elements of the
compliance management strategy and will contribute to reducing compliance costs for taxpayers. The
Contact Center will be responsible for responding to taxpayers’ queries (the center will receive queries by
phone, letter or e-mail) on the status of their accounts and the application of the law; get taxpayers
feedback; gather taxpayers complaints, set them to responsible officers in the concerned department for
addressing grievances, and disclose them to the public. With the introduction of the new VAT law, the
center will be an essential vehicle for handling the expected significant increase in taxpayer demand for
advice and assistance on the new VAT legislation.

71.     The main activities will include, but not be limited to: develop contact center functional
specifications; prepare and issue Contact Center request for tender; tender selection process; establish
Contact Center and make it operational.

72.    Sub-component 2.5. Establish a Data Network to enable VAT staff to have access to the IT tax
administration system through the computer terminal. The main activities will include but not limited to:
                                                                                                      Page 25
develop functional specifications for data network; prepare and issue RFP; tender selection process;
install data network, and ensure it is operational.

73.      Sub-component 2.6. Desktop hardware and software and local and data center servers. The main
activities will include but not limited to: develop functional specifications for desktop hardware and
software and local and data center; prepare and issue RFP; tender selection process; install desktop
hardware and software, and ensure it is operational.


Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building

74.     This component consists of VAT wing reorganization along function lines and staff training to
enable staff to utilize the new integrated VAT system and business processes. All NBR VAT Wing staff
will be provided with adequate training and support to enable them to undertake their roles given the
changes to the law and rules to the NBR VAT Wing organizational structure, as a result of the
administrative processes and information technology that will be put in place as part of the Program.

75.      The main activities will include, but not be limited to: review all the current VAT statutory
regulatory orders, standing rules, and general order, and draft accordingly new administrative procedures
to ensure consistency with the new law; calculate number of taxpayers and expected workloads under the
new VAT law; determine broad approach to processing expected workload; design new organizational
structure for the VAT Wing along functional lines-high level design and detailed design of the
organizational structure; estimate staff numbers and requirements by function and level; develop an
accommodation strategy and plan for the ongoing operation of the VAT; develop a staffing plan to ensure
adequate sequencing of hiring and training of both transfers and new hires as well as clarify the roles and
responsibilities between the existing staff and new hires; develop a comprehensive timetable for the
organizational arrangements of the VAT Wing; develop a comprehensive training and capacity building
program (specifying when course materials, training rooms and trainers will be needed and align them to
the training timetable); delivery of a number of specialized technical training programs for all VAT core
business processes, e.g. registration, return processing, tax payments, taxpayer accounting and tax
refunds; tax audit; collection and enforcement; and dispute resolution; induction and managerial training
targeting managers at all levels, aiming to improve their capacities to manage and fulfill the role of
change agent. The training program will go beyond core business processes and deliver training on critical
areas such as good performance, meritocracy, ethical behaviors, customer support culture, communication
and other soft skills. The training program will also target the staff of the processing center, Data, and
Contact centers. The program will also include capacity building activities aiming at enhancing the
analytical capacity of the VAT staff wing on tax gap modeling and analysis. Considering the fact that,
VAT gap analysis and modeling is a complex exercise which requires adequate capacity, the program
team will be supported from external consultancy upon request. As the NBR is integrating the service
approach in its core business processes, a taxpayer satisfaction survey will also be conducted.


Component 4: Program Management

76.     This component consists of two parts. Part One addresses the challenge of properly managing
the implementation of the program and supports expert advice on program management, IT, procurement,
Financial Management and disbursement. Part Two supports a change management and a comprehensive
taxpayer communication and education program to build internal and external support for the reform.

77.      Sub-component 4.1: Program coordination and administration.               Tax administration
modernization reform is a complex undertaking that requires significant expertise both in program
management and in technical content. To ensure effective implementation of components, all activities
will need to be carefully planned and coordinated to ensure optimal effectiveness. Likewise, timely and
efficient overall program management expertise and procurement experience will be required to ensure
                                                                                                Page 26
effective and transparent program implementation. Additionally, establishing monitoring and evaluation
mechanism and reporting on results and achievement of objectives will be critical. This program will
provide advisory services to the VAT Wing staff, as well as for oversight and review of the IT component
and subcomponents, and the necessary office infrastructure to assist the Program Implementation Unit in
implementing all aspects of the program. Additionally, the PIU will be supported by a Program
Management Consultancy Firm, which will mitigate the skills and knowledge gap in business
transformation and the definition of business requirements within the PIU.

78.     The main activities will include, but not be limited to: provide advisors for program
implementation and monitoring and evaluation; short-term consultants in the areas of FM, monitoring and
evaluation, procurement and disbursement and auditing; workstations for the PIU staff; office equipment
and vehicle for conducting the business of the PIU; prepare the ToR for and contract the Program
Management Consultancy Firm.

79.      Sub-Component 4.2: Change management and a comprehensive taxpayer communication and
education program. Bangladesh is characterized by low tax morale, unfamiliarity with the overall tax
reform process, and resistance to change. Establishing an Integrated VAT Management System will
dramatically change the way in which the tax administration of Bangladesh conducts its management and
operations, as well as the way it relates to taxpayers and other stakeholders. Support for the reform
process from staff, external stakeholders, and the public at large is essential for the program to be able to
implement the changes envisaged and achieve the results expected. Consequently, it is critical to develop
and implement a robust behavioral change communication strategy along with a public education
campaign. This communication and public education campaign, using multiple communication channels
including new media (social media, mobile) and mass media, should take a two-pronged approach: (i)
firstly, behavioral change communication to promote compliance, electronic registration, etc.; and (ii)
advocacy to sustain the policy dialogue. Generating broad-based consensus and a continued policy
dialogue through a creative communication program will help to continue the reform efforts irrespective
of the political situation.

80.     The main activities under the change management will include but not limited to: develop and
implement an appropriate staff communication and change management strategy for managing
organizational change at all levels of the tax administration particularly VAT Wing; staff consultation and
engagement activities; design and deliver training on change management;

81.      The main activities under the taxpayer communication and education program will include but
not limited to: develop and implement a comprehensive taxpayer education program and communication
campaign to raise awareness and inform the VAT stakeholders and public at large about the VAT reform
and potential impact of proposed changes; organize regular consultations, workshops, and presentations to
the private sector, which is unfamiliar with and opposes the overall tax reform process; public information
campaign by using government TV and other media advertisements; advertise requirements to register for
VAT, bookkeeping requirements and invoicing regulation, and issue registration packs (guide and forms)
to expected registrants; provide advisory services to initial registrants; draft explanatory materials;
registration guide to support the registration process, general guidance booklet to explain the VAT in
details; draft a set of technical guidelines to provide assistance to taxpayers in how to apply the new VAT
Law and rules to specific business situations and in relation to specific industries; industry specific
pamphlets, briefings for targeted taxpayers to inform them on the expected impact of the VAT.

82.     The component will also include increased transparency. The activities will include a review of
the compliance of the VAT Wing with the proactive disclosure rules of the Right to Information Act,
2009 and the preparation and implementation plan to reach full compliance. The VAT Wing will also
increase the proactive disclosure of performance information including but not limited to (a) regular
disclosure of VAT tax collection; (b) results of tax payer satisfaction surveys; (c) contact center
information on handling calls and dealing with complaints.

                                                                                                    Page 27
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

83.      The Program is to be implemented by the VAT Wing of the National Board of Revenue.
The VIP will be spearheaded by the VAT program implementation team led by the Project Director who
will be the Program focal point and is the NBR Board Member for VAT policy from the VAT Wing. The
Project Director reports to the Program Steering Committee. The 15-member implementation team
includes a program implementation unit (PIU), which includes 4 additional program staff including two
deputy program directors and a government accountant, who are seconded to the program implementation
team from elsewhere in government to bolster the team’s capacity to specifically manage the program and
report on program expenditures. The PIU will be responsible for overseeing program implementation, and
overall program coordination and management. The Project Director will report to the Program Steering
Committee as established for the VAT program, which is chaired by the Chairman.

84.       The ERD will provide overall program coordination with the World Bank, and have
principal responsibility for engaging the independent verification entity. The ERD Office within the
Ministry of Finance is responsible for coordinating development partner financed programs. ERD has
appointed a Program Director (responsible for World Bank projects) and a small unit to oversee the
implementation of the Program. The ERD will provide guidance to the implementing agency as the
Program is implemented, and will provide support to resolve potential issues related to the release of
funds by the Ministry of Finance, as well as overall harmonization as required. During preparation the
Cabinet Division received a small Project Preparation Advance (PPA) to develop the program and
investigate a larger program of support for e-governance and e-services in several ministries. During
initial stages of preparation of the Program, when the potential scope included multiple implementing
agencies, the Cabinet Division played a critical role at this stage. The Advance was used to hire
consultants to help the potential implementing agencies strengthen their programs and develop results
frameworks and monitoring and evaluation systems. Critically the Advance was used to support the NBR
in the finalization of their VAT improvement program documentation that was approved by the Executive
Committee, National Economic Council on October 8, 2013.11

85.     The oversight of the VIP is through a Program Steering Committee headed by the
Chairman, NBR and a Program Implementation Committee. The Program Steering Committee (PSC)
will have the authority to make all decisions that affect the implementation of the new VAT Law. The
PSC consisting of ten members12 will meet at least quarterly to review the reform progress unless there is
a need to convene immediate meetings. For the program, the PSC will assume the following
responsibilities: (i) provide guidance on policy issues to ensure a smooth and timely implementation of
the program; (ii) approve annual work and procurement plans, any major variation to the plans, and
allocate funds accordingly; (iii) provide direction, guidance, and solutions on critical issues related to
program implementation; (iv) offer solutions to inter-ministerial problems related to program
implementation; (v) supervise and monitor the activities of the Program Implementation Unit; (vi) ensure
timely monitoring and evaluation reports needed for the disbursement under the World Bank’s Program
for Result; and (vii) work in close collaboration with the IMF and the Economic Relations Division to
ensure third party independent monitoring for achieved results.


11
   The final program design concentrated on one implementing agency: the VAT Improvement program managed by the National
Board of Revenue, and the rationale for the role of Cabinet Division as a coordinating body was removed. The Advance was also
used to develop the program design and verification protocols and to support other ministries which were considering developing
a results-based e-services and e-governance program which had been considered for inclusion in the Program earlier.
12
   The ten members of the PSC include: Chairman on the NBR/Secretary, Internal Resources Division; Additional Secretary,
World Bank Wing, ERD, MoF; concern Additional Secretary, Finance Division, MoF; Concern Additional Secretary, Finance
Division, MoF; Concern Additional Secretary, Cabinet Division; Representative (not below the rank of Joint Secretary/Joint
Chief) from Ministry of Science and ICT; Representative (not below the rank of Joint Secretary/Joint Chief) from IMED;
Representative from Internal Resources Division (not below the rank of Joint Secretary); Representative from General Economics
Division (not below the rank of Joint Secretary/Joint Chief); Program Director, Member VAT Policy.
                                                                                                                     Page 28
86.      A Program Implementation Committee (PIC), chaired by the Member (VAT: Enforcement
and IT) of NBR and consisting of eight officers not below the rank of Deputy Secretary/Deputy
Chief from key agencies was also established13. The PIC will be responsible for overseeing program
activities, monitoring procurement, and taking action as needed to ensure successful implementation of
the program.

87.     The Program Implementation Unit will be supported by a Program Management
Consultancy Firm (PMCF). The PMCF will consist of a manger, who will work closely with and report
to the PIU’s Director, and 14 experts-7 international consultants and 7 local consultants. The PMCF will
mitigate the skills and knowledge gap in business transformation and the definition of business
requirements within the PIU. According to the VAT implementation plan, the program management
consultancy firm is planned to be on board and start working on June, 2014 (one month after signing the
contract).

88.     The oversight of the VAT Program will be strengthened using the following mechanisms:
(a) a Program Implementation Unit within the team with responsibility for overall management and
coordination and reporting, including financial reporting; (b) bi-annual implementation reviews (program
progress reports will be prepared as per an agreed reporting template) of the VIP; (c) bi-annual
independent, third party verification of DLIs hired by the ERD; and (d) IMF reports produced during IMF
technical and program supervision missions.

89.      The VAT improvement program will be implemented in coordination with other initiatives
funded by development partners in this area, and will use the pre-existing donor harmonization
architecture. The VAT wing is responsible for implementing the new VAT, and there is a group of tax
administration development partners who are coordinated to support with complementary technical
assistance including IFC. The implementation team has access to an IMF resident adviser and a series of
short-term IMF advisory inputs. The IFC Bangladesh Investment Climate Fund is also providing targeted
technical assistance in key areas, including: designing the new VAT administration program regarding
organizational and structural issues; developing a number of key strategies and plans- staffing strategy;
staff communication and change management strategy; overall training and learning support strategy;
taxpayer education and communication plan; detailed business requirements, program, procedures, and
training manual for the registration process, taxpayer services, contact center, and field advisory visit
processes. On a regular basis the IFC will also support conducting the Taxpayer Compliance Cost Survey.

90.      The institutional and implementation arrangements for the program are explained in Figure 3.




13
  The eight members of the PIC include: Chairman, Member (VAT: Enforcement & IT) of NBR; First Secretary (VAT:IT &
Program Management) of NBR; representative from the Finance Division, MoF; representative from SEI Division, Planning
Commission; representative from Programming Division, Planning Commission; representative from Bangladesh Computer
Council; representative from General Economic Division, and concern Deputy Program Director, Member-Secretary.
                                                                                                                Page 29
                           Figure 3: The Institutional and Implementation Arrangements




Program Expenditure Framework

91.     The program expenditure framework amounts to US$70 million for the VAT Improvement
Program and US$3 million for the verification activities of the Economic Relations Division over FY
2014-19. IDA resources for the Program under the proposed operation will be $60 million. In
October 2013, the GoB approved the placement of the VAT modernization program in the Annual
Development Program (ADP) budget, making it eligible to receive funds from both domestic budgetary
and donor sources. This approval shows government’s commitment to reform tax administration and its
financial contribution of US$13 million is predictable and guaranteed. In case the DLI is not achieved,
and hence the disbursement for the WB funds not triggered, the Government of Bangladesh will provide
the funds needed to carry out the activities as outlined in the program.

                                                                                               Page 30
92.     The proposed amount of program financing is adequate to ensure maintenance of financial
sustainability, which is essential for the alignment of the GoB policy objectives, selected priorities
and intended program objectives. Program funding will be included in the NBR annual budget and all
funding (regardless of the source) will flow through distinct budget line items. Program funds will be used
to cover recurrent expenditures and development expenditures (individual and firm consultancies and
goods) related to program activities. The Finance Department of the NBR will track and report the source
of funds in its budget (as required by law and financial management rules).

93.      The Government of Bangladesh’s contribution of US$ 13 million is estimated to be
approximately 13.0 percent of the NBR’s total budget for the period 2014-2017. The budget of the
Internal Resource Division (IRD) for 2012-2013 is Taka 11,830 million or equivalent to US$ 148 million
of which Taka 5,540 million or equivalent to US$ 69.25 million allocated to the NBR. As set forth in
Table 7, which outlines the medium term expenditure framework (2013-2017), the IRD budget will
increase by 44 percent to reach the level of Taka 17,064 million or equivalent to US$ 213.3 million in
2017. NBR budget is expected to increase to Taka 7,970 million or equivalent to US$99.62 million by
2017.




                                                                                                  Page 31
                                   Table 6: Expenditure Framework, Consolidated Program Expenditures, US$ million 2014-2019
Funde      Classificatio   Sub-category       2012      2013/14       2014/15     2015/16     2016/17     2017/1      2018/1   Total
r          n                                  /13                                                         8           9
GoB        Capital         Furniture                                     2.79                                                     2.79
                           IT hardware                                   0.17                                                     0.17
                           Vehicles                          0.18        0.01        0.01        0.01        0.01                 0.24
           Goods and       Goods                             0.00        4.20        0.70        0.26        0.26                 5.43
           Services
                           Office                                        3.09                                                     3.09
                           Refurbishment
           Contingency     Price                             0.01        0.82        0.06        0.02        0.02                 0.94
                           Physical                          0.00        0.21        0.01        0.01        0.01                 0.23
Subtotal                                                     0.21       11.29        0.79        0.30        0.30                12.89
IDA        Capital         Furniture                                     0.00                                                     0.00
                           Generators                                    1.67                                                     1.67
                           IT hardware                                   3.97        2.32        0.75        0.33                 7.38
                           IT software                       2.70       13.31        2.93        0.05                            18.98
           Goods and       Consulting                        0.57        2.29        1.14                                         4.00
           Services
                           Other goods                                   0.91        0.10                                         1.01
                           IT services                       1.50        3.65        2.86        2.86        2.86                13.71
                           Training                          0.50        4.25        0.25                                         5.00
           Contingency     Price                             0.42        2.40        0.77        0.29        0.25                 4.14
                           Physical                          0.11        0.60        0.19        0.07        0.06                 1.04
Subtotal                                                     5.80       33.05       10.56        4.01        3.50                56.93
NBR expenditures                                             6.00       44.34       11.35        4.32        3.81                69.82
total
ERD and ACC                                                              0.95       0.500       0.500        0.50       0.50      2.95
expenditures
Cabinet Division PPA                           0.05                                                                               0.05
Total                                          0.05          6.00       45.29       11.85        4.82        4.31        0.5     72.82



                                                                                                                                         Page 32
                                                       Table 7: Expenditure Framework of the Internal Resource Division
                                                                         (Amount rounded to million)
                                   2012-13 (Est.) in   2012-13 (Est.)   2013-14 in   2013-14 in   2014-15 in                    2015-16 in                    2016-17 in   2016-17 in
                                                                                                               2014-15 in US$                2015-16 in US$
                                        TAKA             in Dollars        Taka         US$          Taka                          Taka                          Taka         US$
Secretariat                             1110               13.875          1230        15.375        1350          16.875          1490         18.625           1640         20.5
National Board of Revenue                5540              69.25          5990        74.875        6590           82.375         7240            90.5          7970        99.625
International Organizations               3.2              0.04            3.4        0.0425         3.8           0.0475          4.2          0.0525           4.6        0.0575
Customs Houses                           670               8.375           720           9           800            10             880            11             960          12
Customs, Excise and VAT
                                         1050             13.125          1130        14.125        1250           15.625         1370          17.125          1510        18.875
Commissionerate
Appellate Commissionerate                 50               0.625           50          0.625         60             0.75           60             0.75           70          0.875
Bond Commissionerate                     110               1.375           120          1.5          130           1.625           150           1.875           160           2
Intelligence and Inspection               90               1.125           90          1.125         100            1.25           110           1.375           120          1.5
T raining                                 20               0.25            20           0.25         20             0.25           30            0.375           30          0.375
Other Customs and VAT Offices             40                0.5            50          0.625         50            0.625           60             0.75           60           0.75
T ax Zones                               1650             20.625          1780         22.25        1960            24.5          2150          26.875          2370        29.625
T ax Appellate Zone                      190               2.375           210         2.625         230           2.875           250           3.125           280          3.5
T ax Intelligence and Inspection         110               1.375           120          1.5          140            1.75           150           1.875           160           2
T raining                                 30               0.375           40           0.5          40             0.5            40             0.5            50          0.625
Directorate of National Savings          1170             14.625          1260         15.75        1380           17.25          1520            19            1680          21
Total – Internal Resources
                                       11833.2            147.915        12813.4     160.1675      14103.8        176.2975       15504.2       193.8025        17064.6     213.3075
Division




                                                                                                               Page 33
Result Framework and Monitoring and Evaluation

94.      The results framework provided below shows the milestones alongside the results chain presented
in Figure The results are attributable to (a) automation of processes, the Integrated VAT Management
System being introduced by the program, and (b) the administration of the new VAT law. The new VAT
Law is presently scheduled to enter into effect on July 1st, 2015 (i.e. FY15/16); consequently, prior to the
introduction of the new law, the expected results will be restricted to actions related only to progress made
towards the VAT implementation plan. The baseline for the result indicators will be established at the end
of FY15/16 through a mid-term review, and target values will be established at the beginning of FY16/17.
The rationale for this decision is twofold: (i) the new VAT law differs so widely from the old VAT law
that the value of using the performance of the old law as the baseline for assessing the new law would be
questionable; (ii) the shortcomings in the NBR’s existing information systems would create significant
challenges for establishing the baseline until the new integrated VAT management system is deployed in
FY15/16.

95.     The PDO indicator for VAT revenues will be measured using the data collected for reporting to
Ministry of Finance and validated by the IMF. The baseline data has been provided by the NBR and is
consistent with the IMF data. Technical support to review the measure and methodology will be
conducted in the first year of implementation. The need to understand the impact on the VAT to GDP
measure from (a) administrative improvements under the VIP (b) the policy changes under the new VAT
law and (c) the external economic environment will be reviewed and the measure of VAT to GDP
changes disaggregated into these components. The indicator of RTI compliance is based on a review of
the information available on the NBR and VAT websites and a comparison with the legal requirements in
the RTI Act. The initial baseline assessment is attached at Annex 2.

96.    A comprehensive results framework is shown in Table 8. The intermediate results of the VAT
program are as follows:

97.     The VAT Implementation Plan remains on track. The VAT Implementation Plan has been
endorsed by the Minister of Finance. This DLI is intended to disburse against specific annual results,
which have been selected to be aligned with the milestones and benchmarks14 that are supported under the
IMF program. The selections of the annual results in this DLI are aligned to the IMF’s ECF program and
timetable. Given the complexity of the program, the weak capacity of the implementing agency and the
lack of a reliable database on outputs, the process indicator is necessary to ensure that the VAT
implementation plan remains on track, and that the new VAT Law comes into effect on Jul 1, 2015. The
milestones are also focused on the key procurements that need to be undertaken quickly–the VAT
administration software and the project management consultancy for the entire program to stay on track.
Targets are broken down into six phases:
98.      Phase 1 plan (FY13/14) includes: (i) contract signed with COTS vendor (selected through agreed
procurement processes); and (ii) contract signed with program management consultancy vendor (selected
through agreed procurement process). Regarding the COTS, the procurement processes should follow
these measures in order for the DLI to be considered met. First, the invitation for Tender (IFT) should be
written with support of technical advisory inputs provided by a technical team from the WB, IMF, and
IFC. Second, the bidding documents should be based on the WB’s own ICT bidding documents. Third,
the tender Evaluation Committee should consist of four independent members: in addition to the
representatives from BUET and BCC, two independent international experts should be nominated, one on
international tax administration system specialist and one on international ICT procurement specialist.

14
  Keeping the VAT implementation plan on track relates to several specific milestones as follows: Year 1 = COTS
and Project Management Consultancy vendors selected; Year 2 = registration commences for new VAT and vendors
for data center, contact center and other IT infrastructure selected Year 3 = process first VAT returns and payments;
Year 4 = audit staff trained and process first VAT refunds.
                                                                                                            Page 34
99.     Phase 2 plan (FY14/15) includes: (i) at least 40,000 taxpayers are registered in the COTS system
by June 2015; and (ii) contracts signed for a) data center, b) contact center, c) processing center, d) other
IT infrastructure (network and hardware) (selected through agreed procurement process)
100.   Phase 3 plan (FY15/16) includes: (i) at least 50,000 VAT returns are processed by the VAT Wing
per month; and (ii) at least 50,000 VAT payments are processed by the VAT Wing per month.
101.     Phase 4 plan (FY16/17) includes: (i) at least 500 audit staff trained on COTS audit modules; (ii)
at least 80 percent of refunds processed within 3 months.
102.   Phase 5 plan (FY17/18) includes: (i) at least 60,000 VAT returns are processed by VAT Wing
per month; (ii) at least 80 percent of refunds processed within 2 months.
103.   Phase 6 plan (FY18/19) includes: (i) at least 60,000 VAT returns are processed by VAT Wing
per month; (ii) at least 80 percent of refunds processed within 2 months.
104.    Each phase consists of more than one target. Achieving one of the targets would trigger
disbursement corresponding to the amount of disbursement assigned to that specific target.
105.     There is an increase in the number of new registered active VAT taxpayers and a reduction
in stop filers. This effectiveness indicator is usually affected by two factors that work in opposite
directions: on one hand, the number of registrants may be reduced in case the new VAT law raises
registration threshold; and on the other hand is supposed to rise as a result of implementing the new
strategy to detect non registration. As the new VAT law stipulates no change in the registration threshold
of Taka 8 million, the indicator will be affected only by the second factor. Introduction of the new VAT
system will be accompanied with a comprehensive taxpayer communication and education program in
order to raise awareness and inform the VAT taxpayers and public at large about the VAT reform and
potential impact of the proposed change. Furthermore, tax officials will conduct registration checks and
visit businesses to increase the number of registered tax filers. Hence, it is expected an increase in the
number of new registered active taxpayers seen against the baseline to be established during the mid-term
review, corresponding to the implementation of the new VAT law. With the new VAT administrative
system, and establishment of the processing center, non-filing will be automatically identified for each tax
period and consistent follow up actions will be applied. Basic risk-profiling will be used to prioritize the
assignment of non-filer cases, i.e. persistent non-filers may be allocated a higher priority to reduce non-
filers. Altogether, they would contribute towards a reduction in stop filers.
106.    Value of new VAT e-payments from the large taxpayer units (LTU) increases and coverage
of e-services widens. Introduction of the integrated VAT management system based on COTS would
play a central role in the modernization of VAT Wing, since it will allow for the standardization of
procedures and provision of electronic services, leading to: less room for discretionary errors; a reduction
in processing time; and improvements in the quality, reliability, and accuracy of information. With the
development of new electronic services, i.e. e-filing and e-payment, an increase in the proportion of VAT
taxpayers who use e-filing is anticipated. Regarding e-payment, it is anticipated an increase in both the
percent of Large Taxpayers who pay online and the amount of e-payment.
107.    There is a decrease in the average time to process and issue tax refunds. VAT refunds will be
managed and monitored centrally by the new processing center in order to capture and identify all VAT
refunds. Refund management would be driven by automated risk-based system, which will apply
appropriate risk parameters for refund processing. With the new automated risk-based system, the time to
process and issue refunds should diminish.
108.    There will be an increase in the “hit rate? of tax audits-percentage of tax audits resulting in
additional tax assessments (in a specific period of time). The new VAT will provide for an effective
audit program to ensure that non-compliance is detected and corrected. The VAT audit program will be
delivered through a national VAT plan which would aim at expanding the coverage, i.e. increase in the
number of taxpayers who are subject to audit; selecting audit cases using a fully risk-based automated
system; improving audit methods by increasing the number of auditors, and enhancing management
system for monitoring audit results. Consequently, an increase in the “hit rate? of tax audits is anticipated.
                                                                                                     Page 35
109.    Reduction in taxpayer cost for complying with the VAT. A technical mission is planned early
in the implementation of the program to agree a methodology for measuring compliance costs and the
compliance gap.
110.    Greater transparency: As part of the drive for improved governance, the DLI will include
process indicators for improved information in the public domain on performance of (a) tax collected (b)
calls handled and dealt with and (c) taxpayer satisfaction.
111.     Overall taxpayer satisfaction with VAT administration. This will be based on the taxpayer
satisfaction surveys, initially to be supported by the IFC-administered trust fund.
112.   Improved fiduciary environment. Selective process results for good financial management and
procurement practices will also be a DLI to improve use of e-procurement, compliance with public
procurement rules and responsiveness to audit reports.




                                                                                                Page 36
                                                                    Table 8: Results Framework

Results                   Unit of   Baseline   Target Values                                                               Freq-    Source    Data
                    DLI

Indicators                measure   2012-13                                                                                uency              Colle
                                               Year 1      Year 2        Year 3     Year 4       Year 5       Year 6                          ction

PDO Indicator.            %         3.7        3.7         3.7           4.1        4.3          4.4          4.7          Annual   MoF       NBR
VAT Tax-GDP
Ratio /1

Compliance with           %         75                     80                       90                        100          Every    NBR       NBR
the availability                                                                                                           two
and usability of                                                                                                           years
information
listed in the RTI
rules and
regulations
Intermediate        √     Process   VAT        1.1.1       1.1.2         1.1.3      1.1.4        1.1.5        1.1.6        Bi-      NBR/      NBR
Results                             Impleme    Contract    At least      At least   At least     At least     At least     annual   IMF
Indicator 1:                        ntation    signed      40,000        50,000     500 audit    60,000       60,000                progre
VAT                                 Plan       with        taxpayers     VAT        staff        VAT          VAT                   ss
Implementation                      approved   COTS        are           returns    trained on   returns      returns               reports
Plan on Track /2                    by         vendor      registered    are        COTS         are          are
                                    Minister   (selected   in the        processe   audit        processed    processed
                                    of         through     COTS          d by       modules      by VAT       by VAT
                                    Finance    agreed      system by     VAT                     Wing per     Wing per
                                               procurem    June 2015     Wing                    month        month
                                               ent                       per
                                               process).                 month
                                               1.2.1       1.2.2         1.2.3      1.2.4        1.2.5        1.2.6        Bi-      NBR/      NBR
                                               Contract    Contracts     At least   At least     At least     At least     annual   IMF
                                               signed      signed for    50,000     80           80           80                    progre
                                               with        (a) data      VAT        percent of   percent of   percent of            ss
                                               Project     center,       payment    refunds      refunds      refunds               reports
                                               Managem     (b)           s are      processed    processed    processed
                                               ent         contact       processe   within 3     within 2     within 2
                                               Consultan   center, (c)   d per      months.      months.      months.
                                               cy vendor   processin     month
                                               (selected   g center      by VAT


                                                                                                                                                      Page 37
                                 through     and (d)      Wing
                                 agreed      other IT
                                 procurem    infrastruc
                                 ent         ture
                                 process).   (network
                                             and
                                             hardware)
Intermediate      √   Number                              Baseline    Baseline     Baseline     Baseline     Bi-      NBR's     NBR
Results                                                   establish   +15,000      + 30,000     +30,000      annual   automa
Indicator 2:                                              ed for                                                      ted
New registered                                            number                                                      registr
active VAT                                                of VAT                                                      ation
taxpayers                                                 active                                                      system
                                                          taxpayer
                                                          s under
                                                          new Law
Intermediate          BDT                                 Baseline     Baseline     Baseline     Baseline    Annual   NBR's     NBR
Results               millions                            establish   + 10         + 15         + 20                  automa
Indicator 3:          (real)                              ed for      percent      percent      percent               ted
VAT e-payment                                             number                                                      payme
                                                          of VAT                                                      nt
                                                          active                                                      system
                                                          taxpayer
                                                          s under
                                                          new Law
Intermediate          Number                              Baseline    Baseline -   Baseline -   Baseline -   Annual   NBR's     NBR
Results                                                   establish   10 percent   15 percent   20 percent            automa
Indicator 4:                                              ed for                                                      ted
VAT stop filers                                           number                                                      data
                                                          of VAT                                                      center
                                                          active
                                                          taxpayer
                                                          s under
                                                          new Law
Intermediate          Number                              Baseline    Baseline +   Baseline +   Baseline +   Bi-      NBR's     NBR
Results                                                   establish   4,000        10,000       10,000       annual   automa
Indicator 5:                                              ed for                                                      ted
Taxpayers who                                             number                                                      filing
file on-line                                              of VAT                                                      system
                                                          active



                                                                                        Page 38
                                    on-line
                                    taxpayer
                                    s under
                                    new Law
Intermediate        √   % of        Baseline    10 percent   20 percent   50 percent   Bi-      NBR's    NBR
Results                 LTU         establish   of LTU       of LTU       of LTU       annual   automa
Indicator 6:            organizat   ed for      taxpayers    taxpayers    taxpayers             ted
VAT Large               ions        number                                                      payme
Taxpayers who                       of LTU                                                      nt
pay on-line                         VAT                                                         system
                                    active
                                    taxpayer
                                    s under
                                    new Law
Intermediate            Days        Baseline    Baseline -   Baseline -   Baseline -   Annual   NBR's    NBR
Results                             establish   5 percent    10 percent   15 percent            automa
Indicator 7:                        ed for                                                      ted
Average time to                     number                                                      refund
process and issue                   of VAT                                                      system
tax refunds                         active
                                    taxpayer
                                    s under
                                    new Law
Intermediate            %           Baseline    Baseline +   Baseline +   Baseline +   Annual   NBR's    NBR
Results                             establish   5 percent    10 percent   15 percent            automa
Indicator 8: “Hit                   ed for                                                      ted
rate? of tax                        number                                                      risk-
audits –                            of VAT                                                      based
percentage of tax                   active                                                      audit
audits resulting                    taxpayer                                                    system
in additional tax                   s under
assessments (in                     new Law
a year)
Intermediate            US$/        Baseline    Baseline -   Baseline -   Baseline -   Annual   NBR's    NBR
Results                 BDT         establish   5 percent    10 percent   15 percent            system
Indicator 9:                        ed.
Taxpayer costs
for complying
with VAT




                                                                  Page 39
Intermediate        √   Process              Tax           Tax           Tax         Tax           Tax           Tax           Annual   NBR      NBR,
results Indicator                            collection    collection    collectio   collection    collection    collection                      ERD
10. Greater                                  disclosed     disclosed     n           disclosed     disclosed     disclosed
transparency                                 Baseline                    disclosed   Taxpayer
                                             taxpayer      Taxpayer                  satisfactio   Processin     Taxpayer
                                             satisfactio   satisfactio   Processin   n             g and         satisfactio
                                             n survey      n survey      g and       disclosed     Contact       n
                                             disclosed     disclosed     Contact                   center        disclosed
                                                                         center      Processin     performan     Processin
                                                                         performa    g and         ce            g and
                                                                         nce         Contact       disclosed     Contact
                                                                         disclosed   center                      center
                                                                                     performan                   performan
                                                                                     ce                          ce
                                                                                     disclosed                   disclosed
Intermediate            %         tbc June                 Contact       50                        69            75            Annual   IFC      IFC
results Indicator                 2014                     center set                                                                   Contac   NBR
11. Overall                                                up                                                                           t
taxpayer                                                                                                                                center
satisfaction with
VAT
administration /3
Intermediate        √   Process              6.1 25        50 percent    75          75 percent    75 percent    75 percent    Annual   NBR,     ERD,
Results                                      percent of    of NCB        percent     of NCB        of NCB        of NCB                 OCAG     NBR
Indicator 12.                                NCB           contracts     of NCB      contracts     contracts     contracts              CPTU
Fiduciary actions                            contracts     are done      contracts   are done      are done      are done
on track                                     are done      through e-    are done    through e-    through e-    through e-
                                             through e-    GP            through     GP            GP            GP
                                             GP            All           e-GP        All           All           All
                                             Submit        significant   All         significant   significant   significant
                                             quarterly     audit         significa   audit         audit         audit
                                             fund          objections    nt audit    objections    objections    objections
                                             utilization   resolved      objection   resolved      resolved      resolved
                                             report to     in 6          s           in 6          in 6          in 6
                                             Finance       months        resolved    months        months        months
                                             Division      Submit        in 6        Submit        Submit        Submit
                                             and           quarterly     months      quarterly     quarterly     quarterly
                                             complete      fund          Submit      fund          fund          fund
                                             fund          utilization   quarterly   utilization   utilization   utilization
                                             release


                                                                                                        Page 40
                                                      processes      report to     fund          report to      report to     report to
                                                      after each     Finance       utilizatio    Finance        Finance       Finance
                                                      quarter.       Division      n report      Division       Division      Division
                                                                     and           to            and            and           and
                                                                     complete      Finance       complete       complete      complete
                                                                     fund          Division      fund           fund          fund
                                                                     release       and           release        release       release
                                                                     processes     complete      processes      processes     processes
                                                                     after each    fund          after each     after each    after each
                                                                     quarter.      release       quarter.       quarter.      quarter.
                                                                                   processes
                                                                                   after
                                                                                   each
                                                                                   quarter.

Notes: 1/ VAT does not include turnover tax. Targets based on IMF projections years 1-3 and NBR projections years 4-6.
2/ All international procurements above US$2 million to be done in accordance with the Program Action Plan.
3/ Year 3 target derived from 2013 taxpayer perception and compliance cost survey results indicator on “Overall Efficiency of NBR staff?
4/ active means registered and filing.




                                                                                                                      Page 41
                                Table 9: Disbursement Linked Indicator Table
                          Result                                                  Indicator


 PDO: To improve revenue mobilization and transparency          VAT Tax-GDP ratio (in %)
                                                               Taxpayers satisfied with level of transparency
                                                               (%)

 Intermediate Result                          Disbursement Linked              Total           As % of total
                                              Indicator                        Financing if    program
                                                                               DLI (US$ M)     financing
                                                                                               amount
 VAT Implementation Plan on track.            DLI11 and 1.2: Progress in                33.0        55%
                                              specific actions
 New registered active VAT taxpayers          DLI 2: Number of new                       7.0         12%
 increase (thousands)                         registered active VAT
                                              taxpayers
 Facilitating Compliance by increasing the    DLI 3: Number of tax payers                6.0         10.%
 coverage of electronic services:             filing online
  Number of taxpayers who file on-line

 Facilitating Compliance by increasing the    DLI 4: Percentage of large tax             6.0         10%
 coverage of electronic services:             payers paying on line
    Percentage of large taxpayers who pay
     on-line
 Greater Transparency                         DLI 5:Performance                          3.0          5%
                                              information disclosed
 Fiduciary actions                            DLI6: Key actions                          5.0          8%
 TOTAL                                                                                  60.0         100%

Monitoring and Evaluation
113.     The Program will require special monitoring arrangements for indicators related to the
milestones in the development of and then the pace of deployment of the new Integrated VAT
Management System. Since the development of management systems is at the heart of this operation,
many of the results indicators will be produced by these new systems once deployed. System-generated
reports from headquarters will be able to identify for example: the number of tax payers; the percentage of
taxpayers using electronic services as well as the volume of taxes collected electronically.
114.     The ERD is responsible for overall reporting to the World Bank on the program results and
performance of the results framework and DLIs. The NBR will be responsible for monitoring the
results and preparing monitoring reports on progress against results twice a year and delivering these
reports to the ERD. ERD is responsible for ensuring the reports are sufficient and are sent to the World
Bank and as necessary for the DLIs, the verification entity. Twice a year is recommended so that there
can be close and timely observation of whether there is a slowing of the pace of the reform, and since the
plan is complex and fast-paced to allow for slippage within a fiscal year, but still achieve the
disbursements. In the first year the World Bank will hire the independent third party verification entity to
ensure timely verification and disbursement; and the terms of reference will be agreed with the
government. The ERD will contract an independent third party auditor for the verification of all DLI
results prior to disbursement for year 2 through to the end of the program. The Terms of Reference and
the procurement process for engaging the independent third party will be agreed with the Bank. The
independent third party auditor reports will be commissioned by the ERD and the reports will be shared
with the ERD; who will send the reports to the World Bank, and the NBR and neither the Bank nor the
                                                                                                       Page 42
Government can modify such reports except for factual errors. For disbursement purposes, the Bank will
then review the reports and retains the right to make the final decision whether DLIs have been achieved
or not.
115.     The ERD will also hire and support the third party in developing and implementing the
verification protocols for the DLIs for years 2-6. The program envisages building capacity of the ERD
for this new function. This in turn will have then the potential to further develop a results-based focus to
performance management in the public sector, as per its mandate.


Program Economic Evaluation

Rationale for Public provision

116.     VAT improvement program focuses on services and processes within the existing tax
administration system, which is wholly within the public domain. Tax collection is widely expected to be
a public function, although in some cases, tax administrations outsource some of their functions to
external providers. However, there is a broad consensus that strategic functions of core business processes
of the tax administration such as taxpayer registration, tax audit or revenue arrears management should
not be outsourced. The same applies to strategic or vital information for administering the tax system. As
a result, outsourcing in the tax administration should be confined to supporting functions such as IT
systems or specific arrangements regarding the provision of services to taxpayers such as data processing
centers, data and contact-centers. Tax collection is therefore firmly belong to the public domain, and the
rationale remains that in order to provide public goods, use fiscal policy to influence the economy and
provide a level-playing field to stimulate the economy; the government sector should have responsibility
for tax administration.


Economic Impact of the Program

117.    The economic analysis of the tax program provides a quantitative evaluation of the effects of the
program on the economy as a whole and for which there are multiple dimensions. Quantifying many of
these dimensions ultimately depends on availability and reliability of data; which prior to automation
remains questionable. The economic analysis focuses on two main dimensions:

       (i)        Reduction in Administrative Costs of Collecting the VAT Tax

118. The modernization of the tax administration should lead to lower costs per amount of revenue
raised. This arises from streamlining and re-organizing the VAT Wing along functional lines, the better
training of tax officials, the greater taxpayer compliance that results from the taxpayer education and
communication campaign, the establishment of a processing data center with higher economies of scale in
processing larger numbers of taxpayer accounts, and the establishment of a contact centers to improve
accuracy of filing, plus streamlining and simplification of core business processes along standard
international lines and the automation of those processes. Additionally, administering the new VAT law
with fewer exemptions, easier procedures and rules to comply with, should also reduce the administrative
costs. Total NBR administration collection costs15 currently average 1.708 percent of total VAT revenues
(without the program), while the VAT administration collections costs average 0.47 percent of total VAT
revenues (without the program).

119. As a result of efficiency gains generated by the program, these percentages would fall gradually.
For the purpose of our analysis we make two assumptions: (i) base case scenario, total VAT
administration collection costs drop by 30 percent, starting from year 5 of the program life; and (ii) low-

15
     Tax administration collection costs include three categories, administrative, salaries, and IT costs.
                                                                                                             Page 43
case scenario, total VAT administration collections costs drop by 10 percent, starting from year 5 of the
program life.



     (ii)     Reduction in Compliance Costs for the Taxpayers.

120. The compliance cost for taxpayers has been subject of many studies showing that these costs tend to
be larger than the cost of administering the tax itself16. These costs include the costs incurred by taxpayers
in meeting the requirements that they need to abide by under the tax law and revenue authorities, over and
above the actual payment of tax. These are costs which would disappear if the tax was abolished 17. More
specifically, in addition to the fiscal burden of tax on business (their actual tax payments), the compliance
burden is the real cost to businesses in terms of staff costs (time spent on tax compliance multiplied by the
relevant wage rate or salary) and other expenses (e.g., buying tax software, hiring a tax specialist on an as-
needed basis, driving to the tax office, and even paying bribes to tax officials.). Estimates of the
compliance costs vary greatly by study, tax considered and by country, however several generalizations
are valid:

      Tax compliance costs can be extremely regressive, a relatively minor burden for large businesses
        but extremely onerous for small firms. The World Bank Group has carried out a number of tax
        compliance cost surveys for businesses in developing countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America
        and the Middle East. While there has long been plenty of evidence of regressivity in tax
        compliance costs in the developed world, the Bank has documented extremely regressive patterns
        in the developing world, with small businesses incurring tax compliance costs of up to 15 percent
        or more of turnover.
      A large share of the compliance cost relates to wage costs for in house and outside advisors
        (working time spent by accountants and other staff on calculating taxes, preparing all reports,
        providing explanations to tax authorities, trips to tax offices, or outsourcing to tax preparers on
        retainer or fee-for-service basis);
      All studies suggest compliance costs are highly significant for the main central government taxes
        such as Personal Income Tax, Corporate Income Tax, and consumption taxes including VAT.
        Compliance costs are typically anywhere between 2 percent and 10 percent of the revenue of
        these taxes, and up to 2.5 percent of GDP. In one instance, (the Ukrainian Taxpayer Compliance
        Costs Survey carried out by the International Finance Cooperation) pointed out that the VAT
        compliance was the driver of high compliance costs. Taxpayers in Ukraine spend on average 650
        hours per year to comply with VAT, compared to 280 hours per year for CIT, and 142 hours per
        year for PIT.
      Compliance costs are typically a multiple of the administrative costs.
      Compliance costs can be reduced by simplifying the tax system and making it more stable and
        predictable, by enhancing the accountability of tax officials, improving taxpayer services and
        increasing the take up ratio of electronic services (e-filing, e-registration, e-payment gateway,
        etc.) and establishing support centers (contact center), streamlining and modernizing the
        organization of the VAT collection, and automating core business processes.

120. For the purpose of our analysis, we make two assumptions: (i) base case scenario, the benefits
derived from the saved compliance costs amount to 2 percent of the VAT revenues starting from year five
of the program; and (ii) low-case scenario, the benefits derived from the saves compliance costs amount
to 1 percent of the VAT revenues starting from year five of the program.


16
   Chris Evans, “Studying the Studies: An Overview of recent research into taxation operating cost?, eJournal of Tax Research,
Atax, The university of New South Wales, Volume 1, Number 1, 2003, pp. 64-92.
17
   This is the official definition of the taxpayer compliance costs. Sandford, C. 1995. Tax compliance costs measurement and
policy. Bath, England: Fiscal Publications.
                                                                                                                    Page 44
     (iii)     Other benefits, which are difficult to be measured, though their economic effects could be
              significant. Consequently, the economic analysis might under estimate the actual benefits.

121. These benefits include: (a) broadening the VAT tax base by facilitating compliance and reducing
non-compliance; (b) increasing taxpayer satisfaction with services provided by the NBR; (c) reducing
distortion of the VAT system due to enforcement of the new VAT law (the number of exempted goods
have been substantially reduced under the new VAT law; the new VAT will apply to all sectors, etc.); (d)
better investment climate as a result of establishing predictable, efficient, and enforceable VAT regime;
(e) enhancing efficiency and performance of the NBR; (f) improving governance of the NBR by
broadening and strengthening the accountability mechanisms to key stakeholders; increasing transparency
of decision making and operations; improving the interaction and cooperation of the NBR with the private
sector; improving compliance with laws and regulations in force; (g) overall good governance as
establishing a “good? revenue administration is a vital contributor to good governance.


World Bank Value Added

122.    The WBG’s comparative advantage in addressing tax administration modernization reforms lies
in four broad areas: First, the Bank has knowledge and expertise gained globally and customized locally.
It has continually expanded and upgraded repository of best practice in development combining global
implementation experience, research and learning, as well as the ability to mobilize and connect global
knowledge and customize it to local conditions. Second, the Bank has convening power to bring together
donors and international organizations. Third, the Bank has global presence and engagement in all
developing regions. It has a global, local, and cross-sectoral presence with the competence to work with
public and private sectors, and with middle-income and low-income countries in partnership with
developed countries. The Bank has the permanent in-country presence required to offer sustained
operational support for countries that need to develop their capacity to address tax administration
modernization reforms.

123.     Four, the Bank has extensive analytical and technical expertise in taxation, as one of the main
providers of assistance for tax administration modernization reforms in developing countries, as
demonstrated by the scope and increasing number of lending and non-lending operations18. The Bank’s
staff at both HQ and country offices have been at the forefront of providing support to developing
countries in establishing effective, efficient, and equitable tax systems, as well as enhancing the capacities
and capabilities of their tax administration. The Bank’s wide experience and close engagement with many
client countries on continuing and long-term projects of comprehensive tax reform give it a unique
experience base and perspective from which to contribute to tax reform agenda. Lessons learned from
previous operations have been analyzed and incorporated in the design of the program. The NBR will
benefit from this experience in the further development and implementation of its reform plan.

124.     The Bank has supported Bangladesh’s tax modernization reform program through the Economic
Management and Technical Assistance Program and the analytical work on Public Expenditure and
Institutional Review, 2010.


Results of the Economic Analysis

125.   The economic analysis is based on the following assumptions, which have been used in other
Bank tax administration modernization projects19.

18
   Currently, there are around 97 WBG tax administration modernization reform projects (including active and pipeline), which
target more than 60 countries and 6 regions.
19
   These assumptions are also aligned with the PREM note “ Estimating Economic Benefits for Revenue Administration Reform
Projects? http://www1.worldbank.org/prem/PREMNotes/premnote112.pdf
                                                                                                                     Page 45
         Tax administration costs tend to fall by 30% over the project period, and most likely to
          materialize at the end of the project;
         Taxpayer compliance costs tend to fall by 2% of tax revenue over project period.

126.     The economic analysis of the program is positive under several scenarios of administrative
cost savings and cost of compliance improvements (Table 10). The VAT Implementation plan has a
high internal rate of return under several scenarios of the quantification of the benefits. The stream of
benefits is quantified based on the reduction in administrative cost of collecting VAT taxes (between 10
and 30 percent) and the reduction in the compliance cost (between 1 and 2 percent of VAT revenues) to
tax payers. The compliance cost savings drive the economic benefits, and based on international
experience a compliance cost savings of around 2 percent of tax revenues can typically arise from
domestic administrative reforms; in addition a 30 percent administrative cost saving adds to the estimated
benefits. The economic Internal Rate of Return (IRR) based on a 30 percent VAT administrative cost
saving and a compliance cost reduction of 2 percent of VAT tax revenues is estimated to be 78 percent,
and the real economic Net Present Value (NPV) at 10 percent discount rate amounts to some US$430
million. Under a low-case scenario with assumptions, of a 10 percent VAT administrative cost saving and
a 1 percent of VAT revenues compliance cost saving, the NPV is still positive at a 10 percent discount
rate (see the Table 10 below). Consequently, the robust results of the economic analysis confirm that the
program generates net wealth to Bangladesh and hence is welfare enhancing.




                                                                                                 Page 46
                                                               Table 10: Results of the Economic Analysis

                                                                                                            Financial
                                                                                                             Returns
                                                                                                         (beyond project
                                                                                                               life)
                                     Baseline    Yr 1       Yr 2       Yr. 3       Yr 4       Yr 5
                                     (2012-      (2013-     (2014-     (2015-      (2016-     (2017-
Assumptions                          2013)       2014)      2015)      2016)       2017)      2018)      Yr 6 (2018-2019)    2020     2021     2022     2023
Real GDP in $ USD (billion)                116        122        130         139        149        159                170     182      194      208      222
Assumed Real GDP growth rate
(in %)                                                5.8        6.4        7.0         6.9        6.9                6.9      6.9      6.9      6.9      6.9
Tax revenue in $ US (bilion)             12.1        12.7       13.6       14.5        15.5       16.6               17.7     19.0     20.3     21.7     23.2
VAT to GDP % program targets              3.7         3.7       3.91        4.1         4.3        4.4                4.7     4.46     4.46     4.46     4.46
VAT revenues with program USD
(million)                                4278       4526       5089        5695       6356       7018               7995     8111     8670     9268     9908
Project Benefits
1. Reduction in administrative
costs
NBR Administrative costs without
the project (in US mill)                 75.0        79.3       89.2       99.9       111.4      123.0             140.2     142.2    152.0    162.5    173.7
NBR Administrative costs with the
project (in US mill)                     75.0        79.3       89.2       99.9       111.4       86.1               98.1     99.5    106.4    113.7    121.6
NBR Admin cost benefits/savings
USD million                                  -          -          -           -          -       36.9               42.1     42.7     45.6     48.7     52.1
VAT admin costs without the
project                                  22.9        24.2       27.2       30.5        34.0       37.6               42.8     43.4     46.4     49.6     53.0
VAT admin costs with the project         22.9        24.2       27.2       30.5        34.0       26.3               30.0     30.4     32.5     34.7     37.1
VAT admin cost
benefits/savings USD million                 -          -          -           -          -       11.3               12.8     13.0     13.9     14.9     15.9
2. Reduction in compliance
costs
Assumed reduction in compliance
costs:                                      0          0          0          0.0        0.0       0.02              0.02      0.02     0.02     0.02     0.02
Compliance costs savings/benefits                                                                140.4             159.9     162.2    173.4    185.4    198.2
Total Savings due to EOGP (in mill
US) with NBR admin savings                   -          -          -           -          -     177.27            201.96    204.87   219.01   234.12   250.27
Total Savings due to Program
(in mill US) with VAT admin
savings                                      -          -          -           -          -     151.62            172.74    175.23   187.32   200.25   214.07




                                                                                                                                                                Page 47
Project costs
Investment (IDA and Government)            0.05       6.00       45.29     11.85     4.82      4.31              0.50                 -        -        -
Operating and maintenance costs               -          -           -         -        -         -              0.30     0.30     0.30     0.30     0.30
Total Costs USD million                    0.05       6.00       45.29     11.85     4.82      4.31              0.80     0.30     0.30     0.30     0.30



Economic Net benefits (NBR
admin)(undiscounted)                     (0.05)      (6.00)     (45.29)   (11.85)   (4.82)   172.96         201.16      204.57   218.71   233.82   249.97
Economic Net Benefits VAT
admin (undiscounted)                     (0.05)      (6.00)     (45.29)   (11.85)   (4.82)   147.31         171.94      174.93   187.02   199.95   213.77
Economic NPV @10 discount
rate NBR admin                           (0.05)      (5.45)     (37.43)    (8.90)   (3.29)   107.39         113.55      104.98   102.03    99.16    96.37
Economic NPV @10 discount rate
VAT admin                                (0.05)      (5.45)     (37.43)    (8.90)   (3.29)    91.47             97.06    89.77    87.25    84.80    82.42
Economic NPV @10 discount
rate                                               $516.68
Economic NPV @10 discount rate                     $434.21
Economic Internal Rate of
Return                                                85%
Economic Internal Rate of Return                      78%
Sensitivity NBR Admin Scenario 2
10 percent saving                         -0.05       -5.45     -37.43     -8.90    -3.29     92.11             97.72    90.38    87.85    85.38    82.98
Sensitivity VAT Admin Scenario 2
10 percent saving                        (0.05)      (5.45)     (37.43)    (8.90)   (3.29)    86.81             92.23    85.31    82.92    80.59    78.33

                                                  With
                                                  project
                                                  Scenari     Scenari
                                       Base       o 1 - 30    o 2 - 10
Ratio Calculations                     Case       percent     percent
Total administrative costs year 1(in
US$ mill)                                 74.99      74.99       74.99
Administrative costs :VAT
revenues)                               0.01753    0.01227     0.01578
Total NBR Admin costs as % of
VAT revenues                               1.75       1.23        1.58
VAT administrative costs (US $
million)                                  22.89      22.89       22.89
VAT admin cost ratio: VAT
revenues                                 0.0054     0.0037      0.0048
%                                          0.54     0.3746        0.48




                                                                                                      Page 48
                                Change assumptions compliance costs savings = 1 percent; Admin costs savings =
Sensitivity Analysis            10 percent

                                                                                                                        43.406    46.401    49.603    53.0263
Admin cost ratio with project   22.89304    24.22083    27.23364    30.48148    34.01875    37.55837        42.79014        87        94        68          3
Admin costs with project US$
million                               23          24          27          30          34      33.803          38.511    39.066    41.762    44.643     47.724
Admin savings                          -           -           -           -           -         3.8             4.3        4.3       4.6       5.0       5.3
Compliance savings                                                                             70.18           79.95     81.11     86.70     92.68      99.08
Total Savings                           -           -           -           -           -       73.9            84.2      85.4      91.3      97.6      104.4

                                (0.05000    (6.00000    (45.2900    (11.8500    (4.82000                                85.146    91.042    97.344    104.082
Cash flow                               )           )          0)          0)           )   69.62375        83.43251        53        34        96         47
Discounted cash flow               (0.05)      (5.45)     (37.43)      (8.90)      (3.29)       43.23           47.10    43.69     42.47     41.28      40.13
NPV                               $76.15
IRR                                 37%




                                                                                                        Page 49
Program Action Plan
127.  The following are some of the activities necessary to achieve readiness for implementation of
VAT Improvement Program, from the technical perspective:

       Carry out baseline measurement for: number of registered active VAT taxpayers; number of on-
        line e-filers; number of Large Taxpayer Unit on-line e-payments; as agreed with the Association
        (June 30th, 2016).
       Carry out independent taxpayer satisfaction survey annually (June 30th, 2015/2017/2019)
       Hire the third party independent verification entity using agreed TOR and procurement process
        with the Bank (June 30th, 2014).
       Complete staffing of VAT Implementation team, ensure minimum of 15 staff working in the
        VAT Implementation Team for the duration of the program (within two months of effectiveness
        and reviewed annually).
       Develop a change management plan for on-going training and sensitization and (ii) undertake
        change management training to sensitize at least 200 VAT tax officers on the introduction of the
        new VAT administration system; and the required behavioral changes when shifting to automated
        system (June 2015).
       Develop capacity building plan; training program, taxpayer outreach and communications plan
        (internal and external) and operational manuals for administrative processes-registration,
        processing, collection, non-filing, enforcement, taxpayer services and audit and grievance
        redressal and appeal procedures; and (ii) develop a proactive disclosure and RTI compliance
        policy document endorsed by the Chairman, and subsequently implement the required changes to
        the website and office disclosures (December 2014).
       Carry out VAT compliance gap analysis and modeling to (a) establish a baseline for the VAT
        compliance gap and (b) support the project team as required (June 30th, 2015);
       Carry out study of disaggregated components of administrative and legal impacts on VAT
        revenue increases over the course of the program; and (ii) Carry out an estimate into the amount
        of revenue foregone due to exemptions and other treatments (June 30th, 2019);
       Technology Harmonization Strategy Integration Plan produced by Technology Working Group,
        and approved by Chairman NBR (December, 2014).


Risk Analysis and Mitigation

128.    The overall technical risk of the VAT Improvement Program is Substantial (S). Implementing a
comprehensive tax administration reform supported by sophisticated IT system is complex technically
and requires changes in the underpinning business process. The capacity of NBR to undertake such a
reform is weak, and despite the proposed mitigation measures (resident tax advisor at NBR, close
supervision from the field-based Bank team, coordination with support provided by other development
partners and DLIs related to key processes from the VAT Implementation Plan), the technical risk
remains Substantial.

129.     Vested interests in the status quo and the volatile political economy add to the risks of trying to
implement comprehensive tax administrative reform in this environment. A change management plan will
be implemented to overcome the resistance of stakeholders to the implementation of the VAT reforms.
Also, the coordination with the agreement with the IMF mitigate against potential changes in government
priorities and political support. Therefore, after the proposed mitigation measures, the stakeholder risk has
been assessed as Moderate.
Implementation Support

130. The task team will provide technical support to the borrower as needed to:
       Support implementing entities to initiate procurement processes and plan for Program activities,
        including PAP activities (first twelve months) and capacity building plans
       Quarterly discussions with implementing partners to review progress and plans for next cycle (12
        to 48 months).
       Independent verification of results, including consultants to be financed by the Bank for results
        1.1.1 and 1.1.2.
       Assessment of progress made, establishment of baseline for key indicators, review targets for
        subsequent years.
Annex 1: Detailed VAT Implementation Plan (revised)

         VAT Implementation Project Timeline
ID       Task                                                                         Start          Finish
                                                                                    MM/DD/YY        MM/DD/YY
        1 1. Legislation
        2 1.1 VAT law                                                                    11/27/12         6/2/14
        3 1.1.1Law passed by Parliament                                                  11/27/12       11/27/12
        4 1.1.2 Consider need for VAT Amendment Act - emerging issues                    11/27/12       11/25/13
        5 1.1.3 Stakeholder consultation - Amendment Act                                   2/1/13         2/1/14
        6 1.1.4 Draft Amendment Act.                                                      2/11/14         6/2/14
        7 1.1.5 Amended law enacted                                                        6/2/14         6/2/14
        8 1.2 Consequential reforms                                                      11/19/13         6/2/14
        9 1.2.1 Consider need for consequential amendments (e.g. To Customs, Tax)        11/19/13        2/10/14
       10 1.2.2 Approve consequential amendments and introduce to Parliament              2/11/14        4/21/14
       11 1.2.3 Consequential amendments passed by Parliament                              5/6/14         6/2/14
       12 1.2.4 Consequential amendments enacted                                           6/2/14         6/2/14
       13 2. Subsidiary Rules and Orders                                                 12/25/12       12/31/14
       14 2.1 Rules                                                                      12/25/12        6/10/14
       15 2.1.1 Draft rules                                                              12/25/12        5/27/13
       16 2.1.2 Consultation                                                              9/12/13        4/30/14
       17 2.1.3 Ministry of Law review                                                    1/28/14        3/24/14
       18 2.1.4.NBR approves                                                              4/30/14        5/20/14
       19 2.1.5 Rules sent for gazettal                                                   5/21/14        6/10/14
       20 2.1.6 Rules gazette                                                             6/10/14        6/10/14
       21 2.1.7 Revise Orders                                                            11/24/13        6/10/14
       22 2.2 Draft revised SROs, GOs and SOs                                            11/24/13        1/31/14
       23 2.2.1 NBR approves revised SROs, GOs, and SOs                                    2/1/14        2/28/14
       24 2.2.2 Publish revised SROs, GOs, and SOs                                        4/16/14        6/10/14
       25 2.2.3 All SROs, GOs and SOs published and applied                               6/10/14        6/10/14
       26 2.3 Technical Guidelines                                                        5/21/14       12/31/14
       27 2.3.1 Identify difficult areas of law requiring clarification                   5/21/14        9/16/14
       28 2.3.2 Draft guidelines clarifying difficult areas of the law                    9/21/14       11/15/14
       29 2.3.3 NBR approves guidelines                                                  11/16/14       11/22/14



                                                                                                                   Page 52
30 2.3.4 Publish guidelines                                                                11/27/14   12/31/14
32 3. Design of new VAT administration programs                                            11/14/13   10/29/14
33 3.1 High level design of the new VAT administration programs                            11/14/13    12/4/13
34 3.1.1 Draft VAT Strategic Statement                                                     11/14/13    12/4/13
35 3.1.2 Chairman approves VAT strategic statement                                          12/4/13    12/4/13
37 3.2 Develop high level business process models and descriptions and business rules       12/5/13   10/29/14
     (HLBR documents are all to be completed for 03/15/14, later date is business rules)
38 3.2.1 Registration                                                                       12/5/13     7/2/14
39 3.2.2 Customer contact and taxpayer services                                             12/5/13     7/2/14
40 3.2.3 Return and payment processing                                                      12/5/13     7/2/14
41 3.2.4 Audit                                                                              12/5/13    8/29/14
42 3.2.5 Collections and late/non filer management                                          12/5/13    9/10/14
43 3.2.6 Investigations                                                                     12/5/13   10/29/14
44 3.2.7 Appeals                                                                            12/5/13    9/17/14
45 3.2.8 Customs                                                                            12/5/13    8/27/14
47 4. Staff Communication and Engagement                                                    12/5/13    1/15/14
48 4.1 Develop staff communication and change management plan                               12/5/13    1/15/14
49 4.2 Commence staff consultation and engagement                                           1/15/14    1/15/14
51 5. Organizational and structural issues                                                 11/30/12   12/30/13
52 5.1 Design new organizational structure for VAT                                         11/30/12   12/20/13
53 5.2 Calculate number of taxpayers and expected workloads under new VAT law              11/30/12   12/20/13
54 5.3 Determine broad approach to processing expected workloads                           11/30/12   12/20/13
55 5.4 Calculate staff numbers and requirements by function and level                      11/30/12   12/20/13
56 NBR approves final staff numbers                                                        12/30/13   12/30/13
58 6. Develop User and Procedure Manuals and Forms                                         11/13/13   11/15/14
59 6.1 Develop User and Procedure Manuals                                                  12/24/13    11/1/14
60 6.1.1 Registration process                                                              12/24/13    7/21/14
61 6.1.2 Return, payments and accounts management                                           4/14/14   10/31/14
62 6.1.3 Refunds Management                                                                 5/20/14   10/14/14
63 6.1.4 Arrears and Non Filing Enforcement                                                 7/18/14   11/11/14
64 6.1.5 Taxpayer Services                                                                  5/20/14    8/14/14
65 6.1.6 Field Advisory Visits                                                              5/20/14   10/14/14
66 6.1.7 Audit phase 1                                                                      7/13/14   11/11/14
67 6.1.8 Audit phase 2                                                                      7/13/14     8/1/15



                                                                                                                 Page 53
 68 6.1.9 Investigations                                                       8/10/14   11/11/14
 69 6.1.10 Appeals                                                             6/24/14   11/11/14
 70 6.1.11 Customs                                                              6/3/14    9/25/14
 71 6.1.12 Other procedures as identified                                      8/26/14   10/20/14
 72 6.2 Forms Design                                                          11/13/13    10/9/14
 73 6.2.1 Registration application form                                        2/24/14     6/4/14
 74 6.2.2 Notification of registration notice                                  2/24/14     6/4/14
 75 6.2.3 Return form                                                           4/4/14    7/28/14
 76 6.2.4 Special application forms                                            5/29/14     8/9/14
 77 6.2.5 Other forms as identified                                           11/13/13    9/10/14
 79 7. Training Course Development                                             12/1/13    4/18/15
 80 7.1 Develop overall training and learning support strategy and approach    12/1/13     2/1/14
 81 7.2 Chairman approves training strategy                                     2/1/14     2/1/14
 82 7.3 General VAT familiarization training package                            7/1/14    8/22/14
 83 7.4 Processing training package - registration                             7/21/14    9/16/14
 84 7.5 Processing training package - returns and payments processing         10/31/14     1/6/15
 85 7.6 Collection and non filing enforcement training package                11/11/14    12/4/14
 86 7.7 Advisory activity training package                                     8/14/14    10/2/14
 87 7.8 Taxpayer Service training package                                      8/14/14    10/8/14
 88 7.9 Contact Centre staff training package                                  8/14/14    11/3/14
 89 7.10 Audit Phase 1 training package                                       11/11/14    1/24/15
 90 7.11 Audit Phase 2 training package                                         8/1/15   10/18/15
 91 7.12 Appeals training package                                             11/11/14     1/5/15
 92 7.13 Investigations training package                                      11/11/14    4/18/15
 93 7.14 Turnover tax staff familiarization training package                  10/31/14    12/6/14
 94 1.15 Customs training package                                              9/25/14   12/15/14
 95 7.16 Other training as identified                                         10/20/14     2/9/15
 97 8. Staffing                                                               12/31/13   12/29/14
 98 8.1 Develop staffing plan                                                 12/31/13    1/15/14
 99 8.2 Chairman approves staffing plan                                        1/24/14    1/24/14
100 8.3 Execute staffing plan                                                  2/25/14   12/29/14
102 9. Staff training                                                          7/23/14    1/24/16
103 9.1 Initial VAT staff familiarization training                             7/23/14   10/14/14
104 9.2 Audit & Enforcement staff - initial advisory activities               10/15/14    12/9/14



                                                                                                    Page 54
105 9.3 Advisory activity staff fully trained                                                          12/9/14    12/9/14
106 9.4 Processing Centre staff - registration job training                                            11/9/14   12/20/14
107 9.5 Taxpayer Contact Centre staff training VAT law and processes                                  12/01/14     1/1/15
108 9.6 Taxpayer Services staff - counter and outreach services training                              11/23/14   12/20/14
109 9.7 Taxpayer Services Staff fully trained                                                         12/20/14   12/20/14
110 9.8 Processing Centre staff - returns and payment processing training                               5/4/15    5/24/15
111 9.9 Enforcement staff - collection and non filling job training                                    6/29/15     8/9/15
112 9.10 Enforcement staff fully trained                                                                8/9/15     8/9/15
113 9.11 Audit staff - phase 1 audit training                                                          5/18/15     8/1/15
115 9.12 Investigations staff - investigations training                                                4/19/15    6/13/15
116 9.13 All turnover tax staff - familiarization training                                            11/12/14     2/3/15
117 9.14 Customs staff - basic familiarization                                                        12/16/14     3/9/15
118 9.15 Audit staff - phase 2 audit training                                                          11/2/15    1/24/16
120 10. IT systems development                                                                        11/27/12   12/26/15
121 10.1 Prepare a comprehensive IT development plan                                                   2/28/13    4/28/13
122 10.2 IT Procurement Support                                                                       11/27/12    3/21/14
123 10.2.1 Obtain IT procurement specialist support                                                   11/27/12    3/21/14
124 10.3 VAT Tax Administration Software                                                              12/23/14   12/26/15
125 10.3.1 Develop VAT tax administration software                                                    12/23/14   12/26/15
126     10.3.1.1 Vendor configures system                                                             12/23/14   12/26/15
127      10.3.1.1.1 Implement registration module                                                     12/23/14   12/23/14
128      10.3.1.1.2 Implement advisory module                                                         12/23/14   12/23/14
129      10.3.1.1.3 Implement Taxpayer Services module                                                12/23/14   12/23/14
         10.3.1.1.4 Implement returns, payment and refund processing, taxpayer and revenue accounts
130 modules                                                                                            5/24/15    5/24/15
131      10.3.1.1.5 Implement arrears and non filling enforcement modules                              7/30/15    7/30/15
132      10.3.1.1.6 Implement audit module                                                             5/30/15    5/30/15
133      10.3.1.1.7 Implement Investigations module                                                   12/26/15   12/26/15
134      10.3.1.1.8 Implement Appeals module                                                            7/5/15     7/5/15
135      10.3.1.1.9 Implement Customs module                                                          12/29/14   12/29/14
136 10.4 Data Center                                                                                  12/10/13    9/15/14
137 10.4.1 Implement Selected Data Center supplier                                                    12/10/13    9/15/14
138 10.4.2 Data Center Operational                                                                     9/15/14    9/15/14
139 10.5 Data Network                                                                                  7/20/14   12/27/14
140 10.5.1 Install data network                                                                        7/20/14   12/27/14


                                                                                                                            Page 55
141 10.5.2 Network complete                                                          12/27/14   12/27/14
142 10.6 Desktop hardware and software, and local and data center servers             7/20/14   12/31/14
143 10.6.1 Install desktop hardware and software                                      7/20/14   12/31/14
144 10.6.1.2 All equipment in place                                                  12/31/14   12/31/14
146 11. Establish Processing Center                                                   7/20/14     1/3/15
147 11.1 Establish Processing Center                                                  7/20/14     1/3/15
148 11.2 Processing Center operational                                                 1/3/15     1/3/15
150 12. Establish Taxpayer Contact Center                                             7/20/14   12/27/14
151 12.1 Establish Taxpayer Contact Center                                            7/20/14   12/27/14
152 12.2 Center begins to receive taxpayer contact                                   12/27/14   12/27/14
154 13. Consultation and Taxpayer Education                                           8/11/13    5/10/16
155 13.1 Public Information Campaign                                                  8/11/13    5/10/16
156 13.1.1 Prepare taxpayer consultation and education plan                           1/31/14    1/31/14
157 13.1.2 Presentations to business and community                                    6/11/14    5/10/16
158 13.1.3 Government TV and other media adverts                                      8/11/13    7/11/15
159 13.2 Explanatory material                                                          8/3/14   12/21/14
160 13.2.1 Draft registration Guide                                                    8/3/14   10/11/14
161 13.2.2 Draft full VAT Guide                                                        9/1/14   12/21/14
162 13.2.3 Draft General consumer explanatory material                               10/12/14    11/8/14
163 13.2.4 Draft industry specific pamphlets                                           8/3/14   10/25/14
164 13.3 Taxpayer education                                                            1/1/14   11/14/15
165 13.3.1 Registration                                                               12/7/14     7/4/15
166     13.3.1.1 Advertise requirement to register for VAT                            12/7/14     7/4/15
167     13.3.1.2 Issue registration packs (Guide and form) to expected registrants   12/21/14    1/31/15
168 13.3.2 Return filing and payment                                                   1/4/15   11/14/15
169     13.3.2.1 Advertise new VAT law filing and payment obligations                  2/9/15     9/6/15
170     13.3.2.2 Provide advisory service to initial registrants                       1/4/15   11/14/15
171     13.3.2.3 Issue full VAT guide to registered taxpayers                          1/4/15     5/9/15
172     13.3.2.4 Consultation with external agencies - develop MOUs if required        1/1/14   12/30/14
174 14. Business Registration                                                          1/4/15    5/30/15
175 14.1 Commence registration, enlistment process for new VAT Act                     1/4/15     1/4/15
176 14.2 Contact all existing VAT and turnover taxpayers and ask to re register        1/4/15    3/28/15
177 14.3 Cancel all old BIN numbers                                                    5/3/15    5/30/15
179 15. Issue and Receive First VAT returns                                          12/23/14    1/25/16



                                                                                                           Page 56
180 15.1 Issue first VAT returns                                                6/15/15    6/15/15
181 15.2 Receive first VAT returns and payments                                  8/9/15     8/9/15
183 15.3 Other VAT Administration programs become operational                  12/23/14    1/25/16
184 15.3.1 Audit commences - full phase 2 functionality                         1/25/16    1/25/16
185 15.3.2 Investigations commence                                             12/26/15   12/26/15
186 15.3.3 Ongoing taxpayer services commence                                  12/23/14   12/23/14
187 15.3.4 Arrears and non filer management commences                            8/9/15     8/9/15
188 15.3.5 Appeals management commence                                           7/5/15     7/5/15
189 15.3.6 Advisory visits                                                     12/23/14   12/23/14
191 16. Implementation Plan                                                    11/27/12     1/1/14
192 16.1 IMF mission prepares draft implementation plan                        11/27/12   12/17/12
193 16.2 Plan presented to NBR chairman                                        12/17/12   12/17/12
194 16.3 Review and finalize implementation plan                               12/18/12    3/11/13
195 16.4 Plan presented to Steering Committee for sign off                      3/11/13    3/11/13
196 16.5 Plan presented to Minister of Finance for approval                     3/31/13    3/31/13
197 16.6 VAT team updates implementation plan                                  11/30/13   11/30/13
198 16.7 Chairman approves updated implementation plan                         12/31/13   12/31/13
199 16.8 VAT steering Committee commences regular monthly oversight meetings     1/1/14     1/1/14
201 17. Government Development Project Proposal (DPP) Approval                  4/23/13   12/31/13
202 17.1 Government Development Project Proposal (DPP) Approval                 4/23/13    4/23/13
203 17.2 Prepare DPP pro forma                                                  4/23/13    5/25/13
204 17.3 NBR Chairman review and approve DPP                                    5/26/13     6/1/13
205 17.4 Finance Minister review and approve DPP                                 6/2/13     6/8/13
206 17.5 Planning Commission review and approve DPP                              6/9/13    7/13/13
207 17.6 Economic Council review and approve DPP                                7/14/13    8/24/13
208 17.7 Decide need for revising DPP                                          12/31/13   12/31/13
210 18. Funding                                                                 12/1/13    6/27/16
211 18.1 World Bank Funding                                                     3/31/14    6/27/16
212 18.1.1 World Bank Board approves project                                    3/31/14    3/31/14
213 18.1.2 NBR requests advance from Planning Commission                         4/1/14    4/28/14
214 18.1.3 Further disbursements requested at 6 monthly intervals                7/1/14    6/27/16
216 18.1.4 GOB Funding                                                          12/1/13    5/28/16
217 18.1.5 Request disbursements at quarterly intervals                         12/1/13    5/28/16
219 19. Tenders                                                                  8/1/13    6/13/15



                                                                                                     Page 57
220 19.1 COTS Tax Administration solution                                        8/1/13    3/21/15
221 19.1.1 Preparation of RFT by NBR                                             8/1/13    11/6/13
222 19.1.2 Review and approval by World Bank                                     8/1/13    11/6/13
223 19.1.3 Chairman (NBR) approves RFT                                           8/1/13    11/6/13
224 19.1.4 Appoint Tender Opening Committee and Tender Evaluation Committee      8/1/13    11/6/13
225 19.1.5 Issue RFT                                                           11/13/13   11/13/13
226 19.1.6 Pre-bid meeting                                                     11/28/13   11/28/13
227 19.1.7 Opening of Tenders                                                  12/24/13   12/25/13
228 19.1.8 Evaluation and selection                                            12/25/13     4/4/14
229 19.1.9 WB approval of evaluation process and selected candidate              4/4/14     5/4/14
230 19.1.10 Processing by IRD and MOF approval                                   5/4/14    5/18/14
231 19.1.11 Processing by Cabinet Division                                      5/18/14    5/25/14
232 19.1.12 Cabinet Committee approval of selected candidate                    5/25/14     6/3/14
233 19.1.13 Issue NOA                                                           6/10/14     6/6/14
234 19.1.14 Contract signed                                                      7/7/14     7/7/14
235 19.1.15 Vendor commences project                                            5/10/14     6/7/14
236 19.1.16 Vendor completes registration component                              6/7/14    9/27/14
237 19.1.17 Vendor completes balance of project                                  6/7/14   12/26/15
238 19.2 Project Consultancy                                                    11/1/13    6/13/15
239 19.2.1 Preparation of EOI and approval by Chairman                          11/1/13   11/14/13
240 19.2.2 Issue EOI                                                           11/15/13   11/15/13
241 19.2.3 Close EOI                                                           11/16/13    12/6/13
242 19.2.4 Select shortlist of EOIs for RFP                                     12/7/13   12/13/13
243 19.2.5 Preparation of RFP by NBR                                           11/15/13    12/5/13
244 19.2.6 Review and approval by World Bank                                    12/6/13   12/12/13
245 19.2.7 Chairman (NBR) approves RFP                                         12/13/13   12/19/13
246 19.2.8 Appoint Tender Opening Committee and Tender Evaluation Committee    11/20/13    12/3/13
247 19.2.9 Issue RFP                                                           12/21/13   12/21/13
248 19.2.10 Pre-bid meeting                                                      1/5/14    1/11/14
249 19.2.11 Opening of Tenders                                                   2/5/14     2/6/14
250 19.2.12 Evaluation and selection                                             2/6/14     3/1/14
251 19.2.13 WB approval of evaluation process and selected candidate             3/1/14    3/12/14
252 19.2.14 Chairman endorsement of evaluation report and selected candidate    3/12/14    3/19/14
253 19.2.15 Processing by IRD and MOF approval                                  3/19/14    3/26/14



                                                                                                     Page 58
254 19.2.16 Processing by Cabinet Division                                        3/26/14     4/2/14
255 19.2.17 Cabinet Committee approval of selected candidate                       4/2/14    4/30/14
256 19.2.18 Issue NOA                                                             4/30/14    5/17/14
257 19.2.20 Contract signed                                                       5/20/14    5/20/14
258 19.2.21 Vendor fulfills project                                               6/14/14    6/20/15
259 19.3 Data Center                                                             11/12/13    9/15/14
260 19.3.1 Determine need for consultant support for sourcing of Data Center     11/12/13   11/12/13
261 19.3.2 Complete sourcing consultancy                                         11/13/13    12/3/13
262 19.3.3 Chairman decides sourcing of Data Center supplier                      12/8/13    12/8/13
263 19.3.4 Determine need for consultant support for preparation of RFP or MOU    12/9/13    12/9/13
264 19.3.5 Implement selected Data Center supplier option                        12/10/13    9/15/14
265 19.4 Data Network                                                              1/1/14   12/31/14
266 19.4.1 Obtain consultancy from IFC for QR of business specs and RFP prep.      1/1/14    1/28/14
267 19.4.2 Preparation of RFP by NBR                                              1/29/14    2/25/14
268 19.4.3 Review and approval by WB (if required)                                2/26/14    3/18/14
269 19.4.4 Chairman (NBR) approves RFP                                            3/19/14    3/25/14
270 19.4.5 Appoint Tender Opening Committee and Tender Evaluation Committee       1/29/14     2/8/14
271 19.4.6 Issue RFP                                                              3/25/14    3/25/14
272 19.4.7 Pre-bid meeting                                                         4/9/14     4/9/14
273 19.4.8 Opening of Tenders                                                     4/15/14    4/15/14
274 19.4.9 Evaluation and selection                                               4/16/14    5/13/14
275 19.4.10 Negotiation with selected candidate                                   5/14/14    5/20/14
276 19.4.11 WB approval of evaluation process and selected candidate              5/21/14    5/27/14
277 19.4.12 Chairman endorsement of evaluation report and selected candidate      5/28/14     6/3/14
278 19.4.13 Processing by IRD and MOF approval (if required)                       6/4/14    6/10/14
279 19.4.14 Processing by Cabinet Division (if required)                          6/11/14    6/17/14
280 19.4.15 Cabinet Committee approval of selected candidate                      6/18/14     7/1/14
281 19.4.16 Issue NOA                                                              7/2/14     7/2/14
282 19.4.17 Contract signed                                                       7/19/14    7/19/14
283 19.4.18 Vendor fulfills project                                               8/17/14   12/31/14
284 19.5 Desktop hardware and software, and local and data center servers          1/1/14   12/31/14
285 19.5.1 Obtain consultancy from IFC for QR of business specs and RFP prep.      1/1/14    1/28/14
286 19.5.2 Preparation of RFP by NBR                                              1/29/14    2/25/14
287 19.5.3 Review and approval by WB (if required)                                2/26/14    3/18/14



                                                                                                       Page 59
288 19.5.4 Chairman (NBR) approves RFP                                          3/19/14    3/25/14
289 19.5.5 Appoint Tender Opening Committee and Tender Evaluation Committee     1/29/14     2/8/14
290 19.5.6 Issue RFP                                                            3/26/14    3/26/14
291 19.5.7 Pre-bid meeting                                                      4/10/14    4/10/14
292 19.5.8 Opening of Tenders                                                   4/16/14    4/16/14
293 19.5.9 Evaluation and selection                                             4/17/14    5/14/14
294 19.5.10 Negotiation with selected candidate                                 5/15/14    5/21/14
295 19.5.11 WB approval of evaluation process and selected candidate            5/22/14    5/28/14
296 19.5.12 Chairman endorsement of evaluation report and selected candidate    5/29/14     6/4/14
297 19.5.13 Processing by IRD and MOF approval (if required)                     6/5/14    6/11/14
298 19.5.14 Processing by Cabinet Division (if required)                        6/12/14    6/18/14
299 19.5.15 Cabinet Committee approval of selected candidate                    6/19/14     7/2/14
300 19.5.16 Issue NOA                                                            7/3/14     7/3/14
301 19.5.17 Contract signed                                                     7/19/14    7/19/14
302 19.5.18 Vendor fulfills project                                             8/17/14   12/31/14
303 19.6 Processing Centers                                                      1/1/14   12/31/14
304 19.6.1 Obtain consultancy from IFC for QR of business specs and RFP prep.    1/1/14    1/28/14
305 19.6.2 Preparation of RFP by NBR                                            1/29/14    2/25/14
306 19.6.3 Review and approval by WB (if required)                              2/26/14    3/18/14
307 19.6.4 Chairman (NBR) approves RFP                                          3/19/14    3/25/14
308 19.6.5 Appoint Tender Opening Committee and Tender Evaluation Committee     1/29/14     2/8/14
309 19.6.6 Issue RFP                                                            3/26/14    3/26/14
310 19.6.7 Pre-bid meeting                                                      4/10/14    4/10/14
311 19.6.8 Opening of Tenders                                                   4/16/14    4/16/14
312 19.6.9 Evaluation and selection                                             4/17/14    5/14/14
313 19.6.10 Negotiation with selected candidate                                 5/15/14    5/21/14
314 19.6.11 WB approval of evaluation process and selected candidate            5/22/14    5/28/14
315 19.6.12 Chairman endorsement of evaluation report and selected candidate    5/29/14     6/4/14
316 19.6.13 Processing by IRD and MOF approval (if required)                     6/5/14    6/11/14
317 19.6.14 Processing by Cabinet Division (if required)                        6/12/14    6/18/14
318 19.6.15 Cabinet Committee approval of selected candidate                    6/19/14     7/2/14
319 19.6.16 Issue NOA                                                            7/3/14     7/3/14
320 19.6.17 Contract signed                                                     7/19/14    7/19/14
321 19.6.18 Vendor fulfills project                                             8/17/14   12/31/14



                                                                                                     Page 60
322 19.7 Contact Centers                                                          1/1/14   12/31/14
323 19.7.1 Obtain consultancy from IFC for QR of business specs and RFP prep.     1/1/14    1/28/14
324 19.7.2 Preparation of RFP by NBR                                             1/29/14    2/25/14
325 19.7.3 Review and approval by WB (if required)                               2/26/14    3/18/14
326 19.7.4 Chairman (NBR) approves RFP                                           3/19/14    3/25/14
327 19.7.5 Appoint Tender Opening Committee and Tender Evaluation Committee      1/29/14     2/8/14
328 19.7.6 Issue RFP                                                             3/26/14    3/26/14
329 19.7.7 Pre-bid meeting                                                       4/10/14    4/10/14
330 19.7.8 Opening of Tenders                                                    4/16/14    4/16/14
331 19.7.9 Evaluation and selection                                              4/17/14    5/14/14
332 19.7.10 Negotiation with selected candidate                                  5/15/14    5/21/14
333 19.7.11 WB approval of evaluation process and selected candidate             5/22/14    5/28/14
334 19.7.12 Chairman endorsement of evaluation report and selected candidate     5/29/14     6/4/14
335 19.7.13 Processing by IRD and MOF approval (if required)                      6/5/14    6/11/14
336 19.7.14 Processing by Cabinet Division (if required)                         6/12/14    6/18/14
337 19.7.15 Cabinet Committee approval of selected candidate                     6/19/14     7/2/14
338 19.7.16 Issue NOA                                                             7/3/14     7/3/14
339 19.7.17 Contract signed                                                      7/19/14    7/19/14
340 19.7.18 Vendor fulfills project                                              8/17/14   12/31/14
342 19.8 Hardware Services Support - Mission to consider                         1/31/14    1/31/14
343 19.8.1 Take decision on whether separate RFP required                        1/31/14    1/31/14
345 19.9 Accommodation for VAT Implementation Team                               12/1/13     7/1/14
346 19.9.1 Engage local accommodation consultant (IFC funded) to define RFP      12/1/13   12/28/13
347 19.9.2 Preparation of RFP by NBR                                            12/29/13    1/18/14
348 19.9.3 Review and approval by WB (if required)                               1/19/14     2/1/14
349 19.9.4 Chairman (NBR) approves RFP                                            2/2/14     2/8/14
350 19.9.5 Appoint Tender Opening Committee and Tender Evaluation Committee       2/2/14     2/8/14
351 19.9.6 Issue RFP                                                              2/9/14     2/9/14
352 19.9.7 Opening of Tenders                                                    3/12/14    3/12/14
353 19.9.8 Evaluation and selection                                              3/13/14     4/7/14
354 19.9.9 WB approval of evaluation process and selected candidate               4/7/14    4/14/14
355 19.9.10 Chairman endorsement of evaluation report and selected candidate     4/14/14    4/21/14
356 19.9.11 Issue NOA                                                            4/21/14    4/22/14
357 19.9.12 Contract signed                                                       5/6/14     5/6/14



                                                                                                      Page 61
       358 19.9.13 Temporary accommodation secured                                                       5/6/14    5/27/14
       359 19.9.14 Final accommodation secured and occupied                                              5/6/14     7/1/14
       360 19.10 Office accommodation - Headquarters and Field                                         12/31/13    12/3/14
       361 19.10.1 Prepare high level accommodation plan                                               12/31/13   12/31/13
       362 19.10.2 Preparation of RFP by NBR                                                             2/1/14    2/21/14
       363 19.10.3 Review and approval by WB (if required)                                              2/22/14    3/14/14
       364 19.10.4 Chairman (NBR) approves RFP                                                          3/15/14    3/21/14
       365 19.10.5 Appoint Tender Opening Committee and Tender Evaluation Committee                     3/22/14    3/28/14
       366 19.10.6 Issue RFP                                                                            3/22/14    3/22/14
       367 19.10.7 Opening of Tenders                                                                   4/17/14    4/17/14
       368 19.10.8 Evaluation and selection                                                             4/18/14    5/13/14
       369 19.10.9 Negotiation with selected candidate                                                  5/13/14    5/20/14
       370 19.10.10 WB approval of evaluation process and selected candidate                            5/20/14    5/27/14
       371 19.10.11 Chairman endorsement of evaluation report and selected candidate                    5/27/14     6/3/14
       372 19.10.12 Issue NOA                                                                            6/3/14     6/4/14
       373 19.10.13 Contract signed                                                                     6/18/14    6/18/14
       374 19.10.14 Vendor fulfills contract                                                            6/18/14    12/3/14
Source: Aide- mémoire “Implementing the New VAT: Current Status and Next Steps? IMF, March 24, 2013.




                                                                                                                             Page 62
Annex 2: REVIEW OF THE NATIONAL BOARD OF REVENUE WEBSITE
COMPLIANCE WITH RIGHT TO INFORMATION RULES ON PROACTIVE
DISCLOSURE


Background

This report was undertaken for the National Board of Revenue (NBR) as part of on-going
technical assistance to the NBR in the modernization agenda. The report aims to provide an
assessment of the NBR’s website and its ease of use and usefulness to the public. An assessment
was undertaken to determine the extent to which the website: (a) meets the expectations of the
proactive disclosure rules of the Right to Information Act, 2009; and (b) meets the expectations of
the user with the current content and layout.20 This assessment was undertaken as part of the UK
government’s DFID-financed technical assistance program managed by the World Bank to
support the implementation of the Right to Information Act, 2009.

This report assesses the NBR website: www.nbr.gov.bd and not www.nbr-bd.org. Although both
websites are currently accessible as NBR websites it is not clear which is the most up to date
version. Whichever is to be used should become the single site and the other de-activated in
order to avoid confusing the citizen. If it would be useful to also review the www.nbr-bd.org site
this could also be done. An additional assessment of the information available for the VAT
administration only was also done, and using both websites, concludes that the information
available for the VAT Wing is similar in both websites, and similar to that available for the NBR
as a whole.

Findings

The report finds that:

     a) The website fulfills over half of the proactive disclosure requirements under the RTI
        Act, 2009 rules and regulations. This assessment is on par with the scores received by
        the Ministry of Finance’s website and is considered an overall high score. However, no
        information is provided on two categories under the rules “subsidies? and “permits?,
        although it is likely that neither are granted or issued by the NBR. Significantly, the
        website does not provide the contact details of a designated RTI officer. The assessment
        is provided in Table 3.

     b) There are a number of “quick fixes? that should be applied to the current website.
        Mostly this is a result of unavailable information when clicking on a link. More details
        are provided in Table 1.

     c) Although the website is user-friendly, it can be refined more to cater to the needs of
        the taxpayer. Overall, the website offers a strong hierarchy of information and adheres
        to a structure/template that is easy for navigation. However it can be refined further
        through site re-design and paying more attention to a content strategy and the user’s
        journey through the site. More details are provided in Table 2.


20
  The report was undertaken by a World Bank team comprising Tracey Lane (Senior Economist, SASGP),
and Munyema Hasan and Tashmina Rahman (Governance Consultants, SASGP). Comments were received
from Sajid Chowdhury (Communications Consultant) and Julia Dhimitri (Taxation Consultant).
                             Table 1: “Quick Fixes? for the NBR Website

Source of Information in
                           Content Description       Place on Website         Issue to be Resolved
the Website

                            VAT Wing; Customs
                             Wing; Income Tax        Homepage, bottom; also   Clicking on links leads
NBR Offices – NBR           Wing; Customs and           top Menu Bar             to no information
                               VAT Admin


                            Customs, Excise and
                            VAT Commisionerate
                                                                                Some info is missing
                              (Dhaka-North);
                                                                                from the links. More
                              Rajshahi; Large
                                                     Homepage, bottom; also        links on various
  NBR Offices – VAT         Taxpayers Unit VAT
                                                        top Menu Bar           divisions can be found
                           Dhaka; Customs, Excise
                                                                                by clicking on “Read
                                  and VAT
                                                                                        More?
                              Commisionerate
                               (Dhaka-East)


                           Custom House (Dhaka,
                                                     Homepage, bottom; also   Clicking on links leads
       Customs              Mongla, Chittagong,
                                                        top Menu Bar             to no information
                                Benapole)


                            Tax Zone 1-3, Large      Homepage, bottom; also   Clicking on links leads
      Income Tax
                            Taxpayers Zone Unit         top Menu Bar             to no information

                              Income Tax SRO;
                                                      Homepage, top Menu       Income Tax Order has
      Income Tax             Income Tax Order;
                                                            Bar                   no information
                                  Paripatra

                             VAT, Income Tax,         Homepage, top Menu
        Projects                                                                  No information
                              Customs, Excise               Bar

                           Online Manifest; Online                                The links 1-4 are
      e-Customs             Bill of Entry; Online          Homepage            irrelevant and possibly
                           Duty Payment; links 1-4                             mistakenly put content

                                                      Homepage, top Menu
        Forms              VAT; Customs, Excise                               Excise link has no info
                                                            Bar

                                                                              VAT Rules, Income Tax
                                                                                 Rules, Income Tax
                                                                               Order; Customs Rules;
                           Budget Speech; Finance
                                                      Homepage, top Menu      Customs Order; Excise
        Budget             Bill; VAT; Income Tax,
                                                            Bar               Rules, Excise SRO and
                               Customs; Excise
                                                                               Excise Order – no info
                                                                                on link. However this
                                                                               info is available under
                                                                               the separate tabs in the
                                                                               menu bar in the
                                                                                Homepage.



                     Table 2: Recommendations for the NBR Website

             Issue                   Recommendation                            Timeframe

User Statistics          Include statistics related to number of       Next 3 months
                         users of the website and other analytical
                         tools on website usage. To be followed
                         as targets.


Site (Re) Design         The central module that mentions updates      Next 3 months
                         for tenders and expressions of interest can
                         be replaced by content that is directed at
                         the primary users of the site. The
                         ‘Tender/Notice’ module in the right
                         sidebar is in fact a repetition of this
                         central module, and it too can be moved
                         away from the site’s prime real estate.

                         The links in the navigation bar should be
                         re-ordered and re-named to be of greater      Next 3 months
                         value to users. Currently, there are too
                         many links in the top navigation bar.
                         Some of them do not work, and some of
                         them link to the wrong pages. A list of
                         possible revisions is shown below:

                                About Us
                                  o Chairman message,
                                       Chairman profile, and
                                       Organogram can probably
                                       be removed
                                Act
                                 o Needs better explanation
                                Rules, Budget, Customs, VAT,
                                 Excise, Income tax
                                 o Needs additional content
                                     that can help users
                                     understand what these links
                                     are meant to do
                                Field office
                                      o Incomplete
                                FAQ
                                 o This page has great
                                     potential, but there is not
                                     enough content
                                Project, Events, Publication
                                 o Again, these pages need
                                     more content that can
                                     explain why these pages
                                 exist for the user
                              Webmail
                               o This should not be included
                                 in the top navigation bar.
                                 For a nationally public site,
                                 this link should probably not
                                 be visible at all to users

                      Pieces of legislation are scattered            Next 3 months
                      throughout the website. It would be good
                      to have them under one section/link
                      "Bangladesh Tax System", with two sub-
                      links, the first one including technical
                      guides/regulations/notes, etc, which are
                      needed for the tax administration officials
                      to interpret the legislation and enforce it
                      adequately. The second link should
                      include explanatory notes/guidance for
                      taxpayers to comply with taxes. The latter
                      should aim at answering questions you as
                      taxpayer would raise.

                      Simulated Case Studies to imagine a            Next 6 months
                      probable user and his/her journey through
                      the site. This can include three segments
                      of taxpayers (large, medium, small). This
                      exercise can be undertaken to understand
                      how this journey can be assisted and
                      made easier.


Content Maintenance   Links to VAT Calculator, VAT                   Next 3 months
                      Registration very helpful. These should
                      be maintained well. The homepage would
                      improve significantly if the other non-
                      taxpayer-related services were removed,
                      and only these taxpayer-related links
                      remained.

                      The Chairman’s message on the home
                      page can be significantly reduced in size.
                                                                     Next 3 months
                      The link to the ‘Profile of Chairman’ can
                      be removed.

                      The links in the area directly beneath the
                      top navigation bar need to be much more
                      clearly delineated. The e-Payment button,
                      for instance, sits directly on top of a link
                      to a page called ‘Irregularities of
                      Grameen Bank’, so there is a risk that
                      users may think that these two subjects
                      are somehow related.
Additional Content            A Site-map can be helpful                    Next 3 months

                              A primary user should be able to open the    Next 3 months
                              homepage and understand what this site is
                              about within two seconds. The homepage
                              needs a tagline or some kind of opening
                              message that lets users know what the
                              website can do for them.
                                                                           Next 6 months
                              Add the following questions in the
                              Homepage to assist the primary user:

                              1.   ‘What is income tax, and how do I
                                   pay it?’
                              2.   Is there any way to pay taxes online?
                              3.   How can I learn more about the tax
                                   systems for the company that I just
                                   registered?
                              4.   Can I download tax forms?

                                                                           Next 6 months
                              The section on NBR's structure and its
                              staff should be more user friendly and
                              helpful for the taxpayers to understand
                              "who is responsible for what", and all
                              available means of communication to
                              contact the officials.                       Next 6 months
                              It may be helpful to have a link on the
                              main donor funded projects assisting the
                              NBR- a short summary of each project's
                              goal, scope and the main activities.



Best Practices to Consider

User-focused content on a revenue department homepage:

A good example of user-focused content on a homepage can be found here:
Washington State Department of Revenue

At the top of the homepage of the Washington State Department of Revenue website is a helpful
list of links that point the user in the right direction. The exact wording is shown below. Each
bullet point on the site is a link to a separate page:

“I need to. . .

        File my taxes online (E-file)
        Find a sales or use tax rate
        Look up a business or verify a Reseller Permit
        Find my pre-assigned access code
        Search for unclaimed property
       Get statistics and reports
       Report tax fraud
       Get business licensing and renewal information (BLS)?


Re-order and re-name the links in the top navigation bar:

On the Wisconsin Department of Revenue page, for instance, the links are:

       Homes
       Businesses
       Individuals
       Tax professionals
       Governments
       Unclaimed property

On the Kansas Department of Revenue page, for instance, the links are:

       Home
       Personal tax
       Business tax
       Vehicles
       E-services
       Forms
       Contact us
       Divisions
       Media
       Miscellaneous

Similarly, the NBR Bangladesh site’s navigation bar links could possibly be re-ordered and re-
named to something like:

       Home
       For individuals
       For businesses
       Forms
       Understanding taxes
       About us
       Contact
                       Table 3: Assessing the NBR website against the RTI Proactive Disclosure Framework (Using the EOGP Framework, see Annex 1)

 Public       Feature               1                    2                  3                  4          5             6            7           8            9              10       Score   Total
 Body                         Institutional        Organizational       Operational         Services    Budget       Subsidies    Permits   Procurement    Decisions         RTI              Score
National   Availability:            Y                   Y                   Y                  Y          Y             N            N           Y            Y               N        7      14/20
Board      main website
of         Other website
Revenue    Usability**              Y                    Y                   Y                 Y          Y             N           N            Y               Y           N         7

           The NBR website is considered to have received a high score in complying with the RTI Proactive Disclosure Framework. The scores are similar to the
           Ministry of Finance’s score. The website is user-friendly and easy to navigate, with the exception of the improvements mentioned above that can be taken into
           consideration.

           The reason why the NBR website scores are not higher is due to the absence of data on subsidies and permits. However it is possible that these are neither
           granted nor issued by the NBR. However, the absence of a designated RTI officer and his/her contact details should be included in the website in compliance
           with the RTI Proactive Disclosure Requirements.


                               Table 4: VAT Wing on NBR Website Assessment using the RTI Proactive Disclosure Framework (www.nbr.gov.bd)


                                                                                                                                                   9
 Public                          1                  2              3                4            5                         7           8                   10                 Total
             Feature                                                                                        6                                   Decision             Score
 Body                      Institutional      Organizational   Operational       Services      Budget                   Permits   Procurement              RTI                Score
                                                                                                         Subsidies                                 s


            Availabili
             ty: main           Y                   Y               Y               Y              Y          N             N           Y          Y       N          7
National     website
Board of      Other                                                                                                                                                           14/20
                                                                                                              N             N                              N
Revenue      website
            Usability*
                                Y                   Y               Y               Y              Y          N             N           Y          Y       N          7
                 *




                                                                                                                                                                                   Page 69
                           Table 5: VAT Wing on NBR Website Assessment using the RTI Proactive Disclosure Framework (www.nbr-bd.org)


                                                                                                                                 9
 Public                       1               2              3            4         5         6          7           8                   10            Total
            Feature                                                                                                           Decision         Score
 Body                   Institutional   Organizational   Operational   Services   Budget   Subsidie   Permits   Procurement              RTI           Score
                                                                                                                                 s
                                                                                              s




           Availabili
            ty: main         Y                Y              Y            Y         Y         N         N           Y            Y       N
National    website
Board of                                                                                                                                               13/20
Revenue
             Other
                                                                                              N         N                                N
            website
           Usability*
                             Y                N              Y            Y         Y         N         N           Y            Y       N
               *




                                                                                                                                                          Page 70
   Annex 1: Enabling Open Government Program (EOGP) Proactive Disclosure Assessment
                                     Framework


ENABLING OPEN GOVERNMENT PROGRAM (EOGP):
Proactive Disclosure Component


Background

The Bangladesh RTI Act 2009 (and RTI Regulations) has extensive proactive disclosure provisions,
whereby public bodies must place defined types of information in the public domain. This saves
citizens having to submit RTI requests and reduces the administrative burden on public bodies of
having to respond to multiple requests. However, simple release (availability) of information is not
sufficient. In order to be effective, proactive disclosure should follow certain key principles:
information should be accessible (easy to find), easy to understand, relevant and updated.

Through a trust fund with DFID, the World Bank is providing technical support to selected public
bodies to support proactively disseminating information, consistent with the requirements of the
Bangladesh RTI Act and international best practice. The public bodies targeted under the program
are:

       Ministry of Primary and Mass Education
       Directorate of Primary Education
       Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
       Directorate General of Health Services
       National Board of Revenue
       Ministry of Finance
       Accountant General
       Anti-Corruption Commission

The initial focus of the program will be on supporting proactive disclosure through websites. All
these bodies have their own websites, but the quantity and quality of information on these varies
considerably. Some have a lot of information, others very little. Even when available, further
common issues are that the information is not always easy to find or understand, there is inconsistent
use of Bangla and English, and some documents (notably PDF files) are unreadable because of
technical issues.
Given this wide variation across the target bodies, it is important to establish a baseline of current
levels of proactive disclosure. This will help identify gaps and specific areas where support is needed
in each public body.


Types of Information

The baseline assessment is focused on compliance with proactive disclosure requirements under the
RTI Act 2009. Some of these are detailed in the Act, but most are elaborated in the RTI Regulations.
For ease of analysis the types of information have been classified as follows:

    #           Type                    Details                   RTI Act Regulations

    1    Institutional         Laws, rules, regulations,    1. Rules of business and
                               functions, powers            responsibilities of authorities
                                                      2. Powers and responsibilities of
                                                      concerned authorities and their
                                                      officials
                                                      5. Acts, rules-regulations,
                                                      instructions, manuals (documents
                                                      and records preserved and used
                                                      by authorities for delivering
                                                      business)

2   Organizational      Organizational structure,     4. Directory of officers and
                        details of facilities and     employees
                        employees, officers
                        names and contact
                        information, pay
                        structure

3   Operational         Policies, strategies,         1. Description of activities,
                        plans, progress reports
                                                      5. Documents and records
                        (including annual
                                                      preserved and used by authorities
                        reports), evaluations
                                                      for delivering business

4   Services            Public services provided,     1. Description of activities
                        how to access these, fees,
                        documents required,
                        forms...

5   Budget              Current budget, previous      8. Budget of authority and its
                        budget and actual             subordinate offices/reports on
                        expenditure, audit            identification of types of
                        reports                       planning, proposed expenditure
                                                      and actual expenditure

6   Subsidies           Stipends, grants,             9. Implementation procedure of
                        scholarships                  social safety net, poverty
                                                      alleviation, health service
                                                      programs and description of
                                                      beneficiaries, allocation of fund
                                                      and amount of resources subject
                                                      to provisions of Section 7 of RTI

7   Permits, Licenses   Concessions, grants,          10. Description of
                        permits....objectives,        allotted/guaranteed concession,
                        beneficiaries, amount         permit/license, allotment or
                                                      recipients provided by concerned
                                                      authorities (including description
                                                      of necessary conditions)

8   Procurement         Procurement process,          5. (a) All contracts conducted by
                        criteria, tender notices,     the Government/authority related
                        decisions, awarded            to development/public
                        contracts, progress reports   works/projects (b) short
                                                      description of every contract
                                                               estimated cost/time-frame of
                                                               contract

     9     Decisions and         Important decisions, esp.     3. Process of decision making
           Decision-making       those directly affecting      and means of ensuring
           Processes             the public;                   accountability and supervision
                                 Decision-making               6. Description of any types of
                                 procedures, and               counsel/representation for
                                 mechanisms for the            planning and implementation of
                                 public to have say            decisions which are adopted by
                                                               authorities
                                                               7. Meetings and decision of any
                                                               Board, Council or Body
                                                               constituted to advise and suggest
                                                               any authority

     10    RTI                   RTI explanation,              1. Name, designation and other
                                 application procedure,        information of Designated
                                 details of Designated         Officer of information providing
                                 Officers, contact details     unit
                                                               2. Detailed description of name,
                                                               designation and address of
                                                               Appellate Authority
                                                               3. Detailed description of names,
                                                               designation and address of
                                                               Information Commission and
                                                               Commissioners
                                                               4. Copy of all applications
                                                               accepted by authorities that
                                                               contains following information:
                                                               (a) name of authority which has
                                                               accepted the request; (b)
                                                               document requested for (c) date
                                                               of request




Baseline Assessment Methodology

The methodology entails a review of the websites of each of the above listed public bodies to answer
the following questions:
          1) Availability - Are the types of information listed in the RTI regulations available on the
          public body’s website? – if not, is the information available on some other website?
          2) Usability - Is the form in which the information is presented consistent with best practice
          principles, i.e. easy to find, easy to understand and updated21?

21
  ‘Relevant’ has not been included here because all the types of information listed in the RTI
Regulations will be relevant. While some websites could contain (additional) material that is not
relevant, that is not being scored (negatively) because the baseline assessment is focused on
compliance with proactive disclosure requirements.
With regard to scoring for question one:

       The score will be a simple ‘yes’ if information is available on the public body’s own website,
        and ‘no’ if it is not.
       A ‘yes’ requires at least half of the information listed in each category (see table above) to be
        given on the website.
       If not available on the main website, the second column will similarly be ticked ‘yes’/’no’
        depending on whether the information is available on some other website.
       If the information is available on another website, it will be counted ‘yes’ in the final scoring
        (see below).

With regard to scoring for the second question:

       If the information is consistent with at least two of the key proactive disclosure principles –
        easy to find, easy to understand and updated – the answer will be ‘yes’;
       If only one or none of the principles is being followed, the answer will be ‘no’;
       If the information is only available on another site, or technical issues prevent readability
        (e.g. PDF files with ‘gobbledigook’) it will be considered as not being ‘easy to find’.

The scores – number of ‘yes’ marks – for each category, availability and usability, will be added up to
give two marks for each public body: one on availability of information (marks out of 10), and one on
usability (marks out of 10). The final score for each public body will be the total of these, i.e. marks
out of 20.

[Note: by definition, the assessment is somewhat subjective, particularly the availability question on
how much of each type of information is given on the website.]
_______
The scoring framework for the eight websites is given below, with a sample scoring of Ministry x.

Use of the Baseline Assessment

Listed below are the issues the assessment is designed to identify, and potential measures that could
be taken as a result:

                       Issue                                 Recommendation
         Information not available anywhere       Information needs to be made
                                                  available on public body website
         Information not available on main        Same information should be posted on
         website but on another website           main website
         Information is available but hard to     Website needs to be reorganized so
         find/understand or is not updated        information is easy to find
                                                  Specific information should be
                                                  presented in a format/language that is
                                                  easy for readers to understand
                                                  Information should be updated
   Scoring Framework – An Example

Pub    Featur        1        2          3        4     5       6      7       8          9     10   Sc    To
 lic     e       Institu   Organiz    Opera     Serv   Bu     Subs    Per    Procur     Deci    R    or    tal
Bod               tional   ational    tional    ices   dge    idies   mits   ement      sions   T     e    Sc
  y                                                     t                                        I         or
                                                                                                            e
       Availa      Y          Y          Y       Y      N       N      N        N         Y     N
Sam    bility:                                                                                       7/1
ple:   main                                                                                          0*    9/2
Mini   websit                                                                                               0
stry   e
x      Other       --         --         --      --     N       N      N        Y         --    Y
       websit
       e
       Usabil      N          N          N       Y      N       --      --      N         Y     N    2/1
       ity**                                                                                          0

   *Score for availability is based on total number of ‘yes’ marks, i.e. availability on main website AND on
   another website.
   ** Where information is not available on the main website, but is available on another website, it will be
   marked ‘No’ for ‘easy to find’ – since users have to go to another website to access it.
   Where technical issues make it hard to access/read a document it will be marked as ‘No’ for ‘easy to
   find’.
