                                   89301
June 2014


Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
Directions for Policy
Acknowledgements

The team is grateful to officials and staff in the Ministry of Education
and Culture, the Directorate General of Higher Education (DGHE), and
National Development and Planning Agency (Bappenas) the Directorate of
Education, for discussions that initiated this report; and for various inputs
throughout the production of the report. We are particularly grateful to
Prof. Patdono Suwignjo, Secretary for DGHE and Mr. Subandi, Director of
Education of Bappenas, who provided inputs and support for the task team
to complete this report.

We thank colleagues at DFAT - Rivandra Royono, Steven Ellis, and Hannah
Birdsey - for their support throughout the production of the report.

The report is managed by a team comprising of Siwage Negara (Task
Team Leader, Operations Officer, EASHE); Michael Crawford (Lead
Education Specialist, EASHE), Shang Gao (Consultant, EASHE), Adam M.
Gann (Consultant, EASHD), Andrew Ragatz (Education Specialist, EASHE)
and Gedsiri Suhartono (Consultant, EASHE). Dyah Kelasworo Nugraheni,
provided the most efficient team support. The preparation of the report
was under the overall guidance and support of Luis Benveniste (Sector
Manager, EASHE).

The production of this report was made possible through the generous
financial support of DFAT Indonesia.
June 2014


Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
Directions for Policy
    Abbreviations & Acronyms


      AHELO                Assessment of Higher Education Learning Outcomes.

      ASEAN                Association of Southeast Asian Nations

      AusAid               Australian Aid

      BAN-PT               Badan Akreditasi Nasional Perguruan Tinggi (National Accreditation Board)

      BBM                  Bantuan Belajar Mahasiswa (Student Learning Assistance)

      BHMN/PTN-            Badan Hukum Milik Negara/Perguruan Tinggi Negara Badan Hukum (State Owned
      BH                   Legal Entity Universities)

      BPS                  Badan Pusat Statistik (Central Bureau of Statistics)

      BSNP                 Badan Standarisasi Nasional Pendidikan (National Education Standard Agency)

      DIKTI/DGHE           Directorate General of Higher Education

      DUOC                 Community College Franchise in Chile

      GOI                  Government of Indonesia

      HR                   Human Resources

      HS                   High School

      IDR                  Indonesian Rupiah (Currency)

      INACAP               Instituto Nacional de Capacitacion Professional, the largest TE institute in Chile

      LIPI                 Lembaga Ilmu Pengetahuan Indonesia (Indonesia Institute of Science)

      LF                   Labor Force

      MOEC                 Ministry of Education and Culture

      MORA                 Ministry of Religious Affairs

      NTEI                 Non-University TE Institutions (polytechnics, community colleges, etc.)




2   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
    Directions for Policy
OECD       Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development

PPA        Peningkatan Prestasi Akademik (Improving Academic Achievement)

PIACC      Program for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies

PISA       Program for International Student Assessment

PTN-BLU    Perguruan Tinggi Negeri – Badan Layanan Umum (State Universities – General Services
           Agency)

Q1         Lowest quintile by consumption

Q5         Highest quintile by consumption

R&D        Research and Development

SES        Socio-economic Status

SAKERNAS   National Labor Force Survey

SBMPTN     Seleksi Bersama Masuk Perguruan Tinggi Negeri (second chance for students to enter
           public TEI system. The selection process is held by clusters of public TEIs).

SNMPTN     Seleksi Nasional Masuk Perguruan Tinggi Negeri (first chance for students to enter
           public TEI system. This selection process is held by respective public TEIs, based on
           invitation, with negotiable, generally higher, tuition fees.)

SPMB       Seleksi Penerimaan Mahasiswa Baru, Selection Admission

SUSENAS    National Socio-Economic Survey

STI        Science and Technology Innovation

TE         Tertiary Education

TEI        Tertiary Education Institutions

UI         Universitas Indonesia (University of Indonesia)

USD        United States Dollar (Currency)




                                                                             Abbreviations & Acronyms
                                                                                                        3
    Table of Contents



                                       Abbreviations & Acronyms                                            2

                                       Table of Contents                                                   4

                                       Executive Summary                                                   6

                                       The Analytical Framework for this Report                           11

                                       Introduction                                                       12

                                               Tertiary Education in Indonesia is a Good Investment for
                                                                                                          15
                                               Individuals and for the Economy

                                               Demand for Tertiary Education Will Continue to Grow as
                                                                                                          19
                                               High School Graduation Rates Increase

                                               Making Tertiary Education More Equitable                   25

                                               Broadening the Definition of Quality and Relevance while
                                                                                                          33
                                               Raising these across the System

                                               Institutional Autonomy is Needed for Tertiary Education
                                                                                                          41
                                               Institutions to Be Responsive to Student Demands

                                               Data and Information                                       49

                                       Annex                                                              54

                                       References                                                         56




4   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
    Directions for Policy
List of Exhibit
Exhibit 1.    Labor force composition (headcount and percentage): workers below and above               16
              age and total, by education level, 2012
Exhibit 2.    Returns to education by education level, all labor force, 2001-2010                       18
Exhibit 3.    Returns to education by education level, 35 years old or younger, 2001-2010               18
Exhibit 4.    High School Graduates and TE Enrollment, 1999-2012                                        20
Exhibit 5.    Compound Annual Growth Rates for Various Indicators, 1999-2012                            21
Exhibit 6.    Size of the 19-23 year-old age cohort with historical and projected enrollment data       21
Exhibit 7.    Gross Tertiary Enrollment by Quintile, 2012                                               26
Exhibit 8.    Gross Enrollment of Q4-Q5 versus Q1-Q3, 2012                                              26
Exhibit 9.    TE Enrollment by Consumption Quintile, 2012                                               27
Exhibit 10.   Number of enrolled students by consumption quintile and degree type                       27
Exhibit 11.   Highest Degree of the TE Institution teaching force, 2004-2010                            35
Exhibit 12.   Domestic PhD Production in the US Rose Ten fold in One Generation                         36
Exhibit 13.   The accreditation results (programs) from BAN-PT and DGHE as of year 2012                 37
Exhibit 14.   Education Expenditures in Indonesia                                                       44
Exhibit 15.   Education Expenditure as a Percentage of Total Budget and GDP                             45
Exhibit 16.   Public Spending by Level of Education, 2008-2009                                          46
Exhibit 17.   Conceptual Framework of Disconnects in TE                                                 50
Exhibit 18.   Summarizing four main information subsystems on tertiary education in Colombia            52


List of Boxes
Box 1.        The case of Canada: high percentage of post-secondary graduates indicates                 23
              an over-education of its youth?
Box 2.        Chile’s move toward a comprehensive TE student financial aid system                       30
Box 3.        Defining Quality and Relevance as “Value”: The US’s Proposed Aid-linked College           39
              Ranking System
Box 4.        Goals for increasing autonomy with accountability                                         47
Box 5.        Areas of improvements on data and information in Indonesia                                51




                                                                                            Table of Contents
                                                                                                                5
    Executive Summary

    Indonesia has made notable progress in raising attainment levels in primary and secondary school. More
    than 1 million additional students graduated high school in 2012 when compared with 1999, and graduation
    rates are expected to increase further. Major efforts are being made throughout the system to improve
    learning outcomes and ensure graduates have more knowledge and better skills.

    This progress at primary and secondary school creates more demand for tertiary education (TE). Most
    students (88 percent in a recent survey1) profess a desire to continue studying after high school. Indonesia’s
    TE system, however, is not well prepared to help create relevant, high-quality opportunities for this growing
    pool of high school graduates.

    Wages for those with TE are high and have remained so even as more and more workers enter the labor
    market with at least some TE. TE is a good investment in Indonesia, even when one attends a TE institution
    (TEI) of perceived low quality. Empirical analyses of labor markets do not support the anecdotes about large
    numbers of unemployed and underpaid workers with TE. This fact is a main general conclusion that should
    shape the direction of TE policy in Indonesia.

    However, the current existence of positive returns to TE to date is no guarantee of future positive returns.
    In fact, trends for increasing skill demands in labor markets will put pressure on TEIs and graduates to offer
    more and better skills to employers. The government should seek to formulate and implement policies that
    can raise skill levels and relevance before labor markets get saturated with workers with current skill levels
    and before returns decline.

    The paper’s general conclusion is that TE is a good investment—for individuals and for the economy as a
    whole. This is true even at the current levels of quality and relevance of TEIs. The paper suggests that five
    important Policy Directions should follow from this conclusion..

    Indonesia has actively debated and implemented TE reform since at least the mid-1990s. It has experimented
    with numerous new or adapted policies to increase the quality, responsiveness, and accountability of its
    universities. Greater institutional autonomy and increased use of competitive funding mechanisms for
    resource allocation have been the cornerstones of the reform efforts. A “New Paradigm” was promoted
    under which the strongest and most academically advanced institutions were granted increasing authority
    to manage their own affairs and in return were to be held accountable for producing superior results. As the
    flagship institutions progress, autonomy would be widened and conceded to additional institutions. Bold
    pilot initiatives were implemented and a great deal of experimentation took place.

    Lessons from pilots and experimentation paved the way for a new legal framework. Law 9/2009 created a
    new legal framework that provided the basis for a vast expansion of institutional autonomy. Regrettably for
    the advancement of the reforms, the constitutionality of this law was successfully challenged in court and it
    was repealed in 2010. However, new legislation from 2012 re-established most of the new legal framework.
    Resistance to Law 12/2012 has been less intense than it was to Law 2009 and calls for repeal have been
    fewer and less vociferous. The Ministry of Education and Culture is preparing the regulations under which
    the law will be implemented. The benefits of the new framework are largely still to come and depend on
    successful implementation of the law. Four leading universities whose autonomy was nullified by Law
    2009’s repeal have had it restored. Other universities await this privilege, and the TE community as a whole
    expects that expanded powers and more liberal rules about the use of funds will make all TEIs more effective
    and efficient.



    1   Myriad. (2013). Improving Access and Equity to Indonesian Higher Education for Candidates from Economically Disadvantaged
        Backgrouds.




6   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
    Directions for Policy
This important debate has centered on improving the quality and efficiency of TEIs, especially universities.
An important, realistic assumption is that increased freedom for TEIs will translate into higher quality and
more relevant education for TE students and to more efficient use of resources by TEIs. Although there are
legitimate implementation concerns related to inefficient funding mechanisms, complicated and opaque
budgeting processes, insufficient quality assurance systems, civil service requirements for teachers, etc.,
increased autonomy can and should remain a key part of overall policy.

But this debate leaves several important issues in TE policy unaddressed. It looks primarily at the experiences
of those who are in the TE system; it does not focus on aspirants who seek to attend but cannot. In effect, the
debate tends to center on the needs and actions of TEIs, not on the needs of students and aspiring students.

This policy note seeks to change the perspective of the policy debate toward the needs of aspiring and actual
TE students. It intends to use a new lens to view the adequacy of TE policy. It starts from the assumption that
TE policy should seek to create relevant, affordable opportunities for all high school graduates. It endeavors
to pay as much attention to the people being left out of TE unfairly as to the experiences of those who
already attend TEIs.

In addition, the paper seeks to use the best available data to support its conclusions. Data on TE in Indonesia
is scarce and sometimes of poor quality. Nevertheless, policies can only be effective if they address the real
issues and constraints of the sector (as revealed by data and accurate analysis). The general findings and the
five policy directions are therefore underpinned by what the authors believe is the best available evidence.

With respect to the value of TE as an investment, the evidence shows a doubling of the number of workers
with TE in the labor forces between 2001 and 2010. Despite this vast increase in supply, wages for public-
sector workers with TE have remained stable, and wages for private-sector workers with TE have increased.
This inelasticity of demand for workers with TE strongly suggests that employers value their skills, even
when those skills are gained at TEIs of mediocre or low quality. Various other indicators from labor force
surveys, such as the labor force participation rate and the skills-demands of growing employment sectors,
further support the value of TE.

The fact that current TE graduates can earn well does not lessen the need for improvements to the quality
and relevance of TE. The more skills and knowledge can be gained through TE, the more and the longer it
will support high wages and good jobs for those who have it.

Each of the main policy directions in this note is associated with a key finding and supporting evidence.

                                    High school graduation rates have increased more than TE enrollment
  Finding One                       rates between 1999 and 2012. What looks like a large expansion is
                                    actually a smaller share of a larger group of high school graduates
  Increased high school             continuing on to TE. More than eight out of ten high school students
  graduation rates are              express a desire to continue to TE, but only about three in ten are able to
                                    enroll (Myriad, 2013).
  driving increased
  demand for TE. This trend         Further increases in the annual cohorts for high school graduates are
  will continue for years to        expected, and these will further raise the demand for TE. The fact that 12
  come and define the type          years of schooling is now mandatory is likely to increase demand for TE
  of TE most needed.                significantly, mostly among “new” high school graduates from the lower
                                    three income quintiles. The TE system will likely need to double in size
                                    again—to about 10 million students—before enrollment stabilizes.
Most marginal entrants will be “first generation” students: that is, the first from their families to attend TE.
These aspirants will generally lack the preparation to succeed in traditional university studies and many will
seek skills that lead more quickly and directly to better jobs.




                                                                                               Executive Summary
                                                                                                                   7
    Policy Direction One:

        Government policy should facilitate further expansion of the TE sector while improving quality and
        relevance at every level. Policies should not just expand enrollment, but should create conditions
        that promote a greater range of high quality providers, degree options, and affordability levels.



                                       75 percent of TE students are from families in the upper two income
      Finding Two                      quintiles. Many high school graduates from families in the lowest three
                                       income quintiles can neither earn a spot at a public university nor afford
      Students from families in        one at a private institution. Government scholarships are scarce—they
      the bottom 40 percent of         cover only five percent of enrollment—and are given only to the most
                                       academically gifted needy students. No financial assistance is available
      the income distribution
                                       for the vast majority of TE aspirants. Thus, although Law 12/2012 includes
      represent only 10 percent        a provision that mandates that 20 percent of TEI enrollees be students
      of TE enrollment.                from disadvantaged backgrounds, the government’s Bidik Misi
                                       scholarship program is not, in its current form, able to help large numbers
                                       of poor students attend and complete TE degrees.

    Commitment to raising enrollment levels among poorer students will require policies that more
    comprehensively assess the financial needs of aspiring students and provide a range of tools and options
    to help them attend TEIs. This begins with the prioritization of financial need over academic merit and the
    acknowledgement that helping the most academically capable among the poor is not a sufficient ambition
    for policy.

    Policy Direction Two:

        The government should adopt a comprehensive financial aid policy that supports its goals for
        equity (i.e., increasing the enrollment and graduation rates of students from disadvantaged
        backgrounds). The new system should offer assistance to all financially needy TE students and
        provide the basis for increasing enrollment among students from the bottom two income quintiles.



      Finding Three                    Quality and relevance are perennial concern in TE. Students, parents,
                                       employers, policymakers, and TE professors, instructors, and
                                       administrators want the education provided to be high quality. They also
      Quality and relevance            want it to be relevant and to provide knowledge and skills that will allow
      need to increase                 students to succeed as graduates, especially in their work lives.
      throughout the system,
      and the definition and           Concern for quality needs to be operationalized with an awareness that
      understanding of these           no valid and reliable objective measures of quality currently exist. Quality
                                       must be gauged by proxies. This is a challenge, but it is one that many TE
      terms must change and            systems have met successfully.
      broaden as this happens.
                                        The main policy question with respect quality and relevance is: what is
                                        meant by these terms? Increasingly, the answer is based on the value
    that the education can add to any given student’s skills, knowledge, and capabilities. Schools add value by
    carefully defining their target student population and then meticulously satisfying its needs. Schools that




8   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
    Directions for Policy
do this well are said to be fit for their purpose, and “fitness-for-purpose” is the preferred definition of quality
and relevance for modern TE systems.

The concept of “value” in tertiary education is emerging as a concept closely linked to “fitness-for-purpose.”
Value is usually defined in terms of institutional performance on key indicators comparable across
institutions. The main indicators of value are dropout and completion rates, time-to-degree, labor market
success of graduates (time-to-first-job and salary), and total degree cost. Regardless of the discipline or
program area, TEI performance can be compared using these criteria.

Defining quality as the highest levels of academic rigor is now obsolete as a policy tool. Rigor is important
throughout the system, but academic rigor is usually strongly associated with selectivity of students.
Selectivity is appropriate for elite and flagship institutions, but is not a feature of TE systems that should
be generalized. Among its many drawbacks, defining quality as academic rigor tends to favor the upper
echelons of the socio-economic strata, especially those in which people can afford high quality basic
education.

Most high school graduates and TE aspirants will not benefit from institutional selectivity. Nonetheless,
families and future students still often define success as acceptance to and graduation from a traditional
university. High-quality university education is an important part of the Indonesian TE system, but it does
not provide the best opportunities for the average high school graduate. Non-university programs with
study and degree options that are more closely linked to better employment should be considered “high-
quality” if they increase an individual’s job and career prospects. Excellence and “fitness-for-purpose” at all
levels—from universities to community college—should underpin a new understanding of quality and
relevance.

Policy Direction Three:

   “Fitness-for-purpose”—a TEI’s ability to respond to the needs of its students—should strongly
   complement or replace academic rigor as the main definition of quality in TE. Quality and
   relevance should be promoted in a wider range of disciplines and subjects aimed at the ability
   levels and aspirations of the typical high school graduate, not the most academically gifted one.
   Community colleges, short degree programs, and studies related to graduates’ near-term success
   in job markets should get preference for government financing and other policies that facilitate
   their creation.



                                  Public TEIs are treated like government agencies rather than educational
  Finding Four                    institutions. Faculty and staff are civil servants whose career advancement
                                  is based on their length of service rather than on their effectiveness as
  Greater autonomy should         teachers and researchers. Budgets are inflexibly set at micro-levels with
  be provided throughout          essentially no regard for the purposes to be achieved and no flexibility to
  the financing and               respond to changing circumstances. Private TEIs have somewhat greater
  regulatory framework.           freedom but also face autonomy constraints as a result of the public
                                  financing that they receive. Lack of autonomy for use of resources,
                                  academic policy, and staff management prevents TEIs from offering
high-quality learning opportunities for students. Resource savings generated by improved frameworks can
and should be used to promote equity through student financial assistance.




                                                                                                 Executive Summary
                                                                                                                      9
     Policy Direction Four:

         TEIs can only respond to student demand and need if they have the abilities and incentives to
         make key decisions for themselves. The most important among these decisions regards the
         autonomous but accountable use of resources. Providing greater autonomy for institutions is a
         necessary step to promoting the needed responsiveness within the TE system.



                                        TE students fare well in job markets, but many are swayed by anecdotes
       Finding Five                     of graduate unemployment or the perceived security of a public-sector
                                        job. To make better decisions about whether and what to study, they
       Students and                     require more high-quality information. Information on financial aid
       policymakers lack                availability and options, labor market returns to skills, and returns to
       information about the TE         education for holders of different types of degrees will help to promote
                                        good decision-making.
       system.
                                         Knowing the likely future labor market value of the degree is only one
                                         area in which an aspiring student requires knowledge. To make wise
     decisions, an aspiring student will also seek to learn about a given institution’s quality, through such
     measures as dropout and completion rates, time-to-degree, labor market success of graduates (time-to-
     first-job and salary), and total degree cost. Aspiring students will also want to know whether prospective
     programs are accredited as well as the outcomes of any quality assurance processes.

     In addition, policymakers need more information to understand the characteristics of the system and
     the impact and effectiveness of policies. Currently, the quality of information on enrollment, student
     characteristics, progression and time to degree, how students pay for school, and employment outcomes
     is suboptimal. Empirical studies of the impact of policies would be desirable but are impossible to conduct
     using existing data.

     Policy Direction Five:

         Improve vastly the quality of information and data on the TE system and disseminate it (especially
         to aspiring students) to promote informed decision-making


     A range of policy responses exist for each of these themes. Most would not require significant new
     investments of public money if the vast potential efficiency savings of current spending could be optimized.
     The goal of this paper is to expound on these five themes and indicate the types of further analysis that
     could lead to the development of sound policy options for each. Taken together, these policy directions
     could form the basis of a new, sound, and comprehensive approach to TE policy in Indonesia.

     It is critical to emphasize that time horizons for systemic change in tertiary education are long—usually
     measured in decades. Simultaneous progress is needed on multiple fronts, and often it takes time for all
     required inputs to be in place. For instance, the Government may wish to make progress in the non-university
     sector, and should rightfully put time and effort into doing so. However, it must develop the sector at a rate
     that is compatible with the development of a critical mass of human resources for instruction. Failure to
     recognize or plan for this element may imperil any progress. The scale and pace of reforms should be such
     that progress on all five policy directions proceeds in relative harmony.




10   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
The Analytical Framework for this Report

The World Bank, through the Core Higher Education Group (COREHEG), uses a ten point analytical framework
for TE system analysis. The ten points are stated as policy “to dos,” and each point is meant to highlight one of
ten key policy actions that lead to strong and effective TE systems. Effective systems are those that promote
economic growth and prosperity, are equitable and offer something for everyone, and provide high-quality
and relevant education at all TEIs (not just at the flagship institutions).

Although the points are succinct statements, their formulation is the product of long accumulation of
experience by Bank staff in promoting TE system reform. The advice embodied in the ten points is directly
relevant to Indonesia’s TE system; it aids both the diagnosis of problems and the selection of the best policy
directions to be considered and pursued.

The World Bank’s East Asia Human Development flagship report, “Putting Higher Education to Work: Skills
and Research for Growth in East Asia” looks at the specific challenges for higher education in the region.
The report identifies fiver main “disconnects” that keep TE in the region from reaching its potential. These
disconnects can be thought of as the major deficiencies that TE policy should seek to attenuate or eliminate.

                       COREHEG                                      “Putting Higher Education to Work”
                     Policy “To Dos”                                           Disconnects
1. Make TE and training more equitable and affordable.
2. Diversify options while levelling the playing field.         Disconnect 1: Between TEIs and employers

3.    Improve Secondary Education                               Disconnect 2: Between TE and earlier
4.    Embrace competition (at national and global level)        education
5.    Assure that institutions maintain high quality
                                                                Disconnect 3: Between TEIs and companies
6.    Target public resources toward programs with high         (as research users)
      social returns
7.    Expand institutional autonomy in exchange for
      accountability                                            Disconnect 4: Between TEIs and other TEIs
8.    Increase the efficiency of institutions and the system    and training providers
      as a whole
9.    Use innovative approaches to bolster retention and
      graduation rates                                          Disconnect 5: Between TEIs and research
10.   Give students the information they need to make           institutions
      good decisions

This report will draw on the analytical frameworks from both of these important sources to present the
proposed policy directions for Indonesia. While the diagnosis and policy directions may be grouped into
some broad categories, their effects are felt in many parts of the system.

The full underlying analysis which is the basis for this report’s recommendations can be found in COREHEG’s
analytical materials (available at www.worldbank.org/education/tertiaryeducation) and in the Flagship
Report (citation). Readers who wish to delve more deeply into these issues are encouraged to consult these
works.

The scope of this policy note does not include extensive presentation of detailed diagnosis for each issue.
Rather, it seeks to focus on key empirical findings as they relate the most pressing policy changes to be
made. The Paper seeks to connect its basic findings about TE to the future policy agenda.




                                                                               The Analytical Framework for this Report   11
     Introduction

     Each year, more than four million children are born in Indonesia. Given the right opportunities, practically
     all of them would be capable of finishing high school and going on to complete some type of TE degree.
     If these degrees were from relevant, high-quality programs, these graduates would likely begin their forty-
     plus years in the labor market well equipped to find and excel at interesting and challenging work. A range
     of benefits would accrue to them as individuals. They could expect higher incomes, less unemployment,
     and advantages for taking care of the health and education of their children throughout their lifetimes.

     Indonesia as a whole would benefit as well. Its skilled workforce would help sustain high levels of productivity,
     which would, in turn, contribute to economic growth that could propel it toward high-income status. As
     the ranks of the highly-educated grew, there would be fewer people without TE degrees to compete for
     the dwindling number of unskilled and low-skilled employment opportunities. As a result, wages for these
     positions would be higher than they might be if overall aggregate education levels remained low.

     Greater TE attainment and relevance could produce benefits beyond those related to income and wages. For
     example, Indonesia could see better qualified teachers at every level, which would improve the quality of
     K-12 education. In addition, stronger teaching might increase the number of domestically-trained PhDs and
     advanced researchers, making it easier to access and use the world’s rapidly growing stock of knowledge
     (especially that of the scientific and/or technological variety). The more capable workforce would improve
     the investment climate by maintaining higher levels of productivity and derive greater benefits from the
     technologies and knowledge that accompany investment. These benefits could be substantial and would
     be likely to outweigh associated costs.

     Is this a utopian vision or an achievable future for Indonesia? The experience of other countries suggests
     that it is the latter. Japan, Korea, and Finland all built world-class education systems in a single generation.
     Singapore and China (particularly Shanghai) have accomplished the same feat more recently. In these
     countries, attendance and degree attainment at some types of TEIs changed quickly from a rarity to the
     norm. The path to this future is a viable option for Indonesia, and great progress is possible with sustained
     implementation of sound policies.

     Priorities for policies that could bring about such a future would include:

         (i) a view that TE is a good option for most (if not all) high school graduates, and the provision of
               relevant, affordable opportunities for all;
         (ii) financial aid policies that provide meaningful financial assistance to TE students and aspirants from
               less wealthy families;
         (iii) a conception of TE quality and relevance broad enough to encompass excellence on a variety
               of levels (from the nation’s leading universities to its most humble academies and community
               colleges);
         (iv) financial and regulatory frameworks that give TEIs greater autonomy (while maintaining the levels
               of accountability necessary to ensure excellent educational results) and encourage them to them to
               improve dramatically through the creativity and dynamism that characterize all strong educational
               institutions; and
         (v) comprehensive and reliable information on the TE system for current students, aspirants, employers,
               and policymakers.

     Getting to an optimal system will not be easy. In recent years, Indonesia’s experience with TE reform has
     vacillated from cutting-edge innovation and experimentation to significant policy reversals effected by the
     repeal of key legislation. The notion that only publicly-provided TE can be affordable has persisted even




12   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
in the context of regressive public spending that leaves most Indonesian students unable to enroll in TEIs.
Rules about resource use make it difficult for institutions, professors, and students to raise performance to
internationally competitive levels.

However, none of these obstacles is insurmountable. Change begins with an understanding of how and
why policy should evolve.

It is critical to emphasize that time horizons for systemic change in tertiary education are long—usually
measured in decades. Simultaneous progress is needed on multiple fronts, and often it takes time for all
required inputs to be in place. The scale and pace of reforms should be such that progress on all five policy
directions proceeds in relative harmony.

Chapter 1 of this report looks at the value of TE as an investment for individuals and for the Indonesian
economy as a whole.

Chapter 2 looks at who aspires to attend TEIs and who enrolls, arguing that further expansion of high-
quality TE options will be required to meet rising demand.

Chapter 3 shows that the TE system over-enrolls students from rich families and under-enrolls students from
poor families and suggests policies to improve this situation.

Chapter 4 examines how focusing on academic ability defines too narrowly what it means to provide “high-
quality” TE.

Chapter 5 argues that making the system more responsive to student needs will require the government
to transfer the power to make decisions (along with increased accountability for decisions made) to TEIs.

Chapter 6 looks at the pressing need for improved information about the system, both for aspiring students
and for policymakers.




                                                                                                   Introduction   13
14   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
                     Policy should seek to create opportunities for high school graduates to invest in their skills through some form of Tertiary Education.




Chapter 1
Tertiary Education in Indonesia is a Good
Investment for Individuals and for the
Economy

The link between education, skills, and economic growth is well established in the economics literature and
supported by vast amounts of empirical data. These general linkages hold true for TE in Indonesia as well.

The theoretical framework through which education forms skills and promotes growth has been articulated
in various ways. Porter (1990) identifies four stages of economic transformation: (i) factor-driven; (ii)
investment-driven; (iii) efficiency-driven; and (iv) innovation-driven. Factor-driven economies are less
dependent on skills as the value of the factors of production does not require significant value-addition.
As investment increases, however, the economy increasingly requires more advanced human capital to
complement physical investments, identify and implement efficiency gains, and finally transfer, devise, and
adapt new technologies for innovation. The increasing demand for highly skilled workers in the private
sector suggests that Indonesia is dynamic in the investment and efficiency stages. Failure to obtain sufficient
human capital has real potential to stall progress toward economic transformation.

Evidence from developing countries shows both the value of TE and the value of the skills acquired through
it. Kane and Rouse (1993) summarize the results of a natural experiment (based in part on proximity to a
suitable TEI) demonstrating that each additional year of TE is associated with a nine percent increase in
annual average earnings. Card (1993) uses a similar methodology to find a 7.3 percent increase in annual
average earnings per additional year of TE. Both of these results are fully consistent with the overall empirical
finding from comprehensive US data sets that each additional year of TE is associated with an increase in
annual average earnings of approximately 10 percent.




                                                                                                                                             15
     Evidence from the OECD’s Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC)
     strongly suggests that the skills acquired in education, not merely the attainment, are the source of
     increased earnings. Hanushek et al. (2013) identify an 18 percent increase in annual average earnings per
     standard deviation increase in numeracy.

     Finally, a recent and comprehensive study of the economic impact of TE in low- and middle-income
     countries reviewed five dimensions of benefits from TE: (i) on individual earnings; (ii) on economic growth;
     (iii) on productivity; (iv) on technological transfer; (v) on capabilities; and (vi) on institutions. Evidence from
     99 rigorous empirical studies of developing countries shows consistent, strong evidence for TE’s impact on
     individual earnings and further consistent evidence for its impact on growth, institutions, and capabilities.

     The evidence from Indonesia is aligned with these general findings. In particular, a review of labor market
     trends shows that, despite large increases in the supply of TE graduates in the workforce, demand for
     graduates remains robust. In fact, demand by private employers for TE graduates has grown faster than
     supply in the past decade, despite a near doubling of the annual number of graduates. Wages have not
     remained quite as steady in the public sector (especially for teachers), but, overall, the returns to a TE degree
     are positive and higher than those associated with any other level of educational attainment. This suggests
     that returns outweigh costs, and expansion should continue until this is no longer the case.

     Exhibit 1. Labor force composition (headcount and percentage): workers below and above age and
     total, by education level, 2012


                 4,812,886 (9.8%)                 4,750,269 (8.1%)              9,563,155 (8.9%)
                                                    54 853 (0
                                                    54,853    1%)
                                                           (0.1%)                916 122 (0
                                                                                 916,122    8%)
                                                                                         (0.8%)
                          ()
                  861,269 (1.7%)

                                                  10,345,466 (17.7%)
                                                                               25,294,955 (23.5%)

                14,949,489 (30.3%)                  13 770 (0
                                                    13,770    0%)
                                                           (0.0%)
                                                                                                       Completed tertiary
                                                  7,716,527 (13.2%)              877,306 (0.8%)
                                                                                 877 306 (0 8%)        Working while enrolled in
                                                                                                       tertiary
                                                    38,125 (0.1%)
                                                    38 125 (0 1%)
                  863,536 (1.8%)
                          ()                                                   18,855,269 (17.5%)      Completed senior secondary
                                                                                                       Working while enrolled in
                                                                                 297,377
                                                                                 297 377 (0
                                                                                         (0.3%)
                                                                                            3%)        senior secondary
                11,138,742 (22.6%)                19,118,266 (32.7%)                                   Completed junior secondary
                                                                                                       Working while enrolled in
                                                                                                       junior secondary
                  259,252
                  259 252 (0
                          (0.5%)
                             5%)                                               31,238,722 (29.0%)
                                                                                                       Completed primary

                                                                                                       Some primary

                12,120,456 (24.6%)                                                                     Never attended
                                                  11,992,287 (20.5%)

                                                                               15,552,126 (14.4%)

                  3,559,839 (7.2%)                 4,464,554 (7.6%)
                                                                                5,196,959 (4.8%)
                  732 405 (1.5%)
                  732,405 (1 5%)
             Workers 35 years old or        Workers above 35 including new    Total LF (107,791,991)
             younger, including new         entrants (subtotal: 58,494,117)
          entrants (subtotal: 49,297,874)

     Source: SAKERNAS, Indonesia




16   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Exhibit 1 shows a picture of the younger segment of the labor force (workers of and under age 35) having
much more TE but close to the same salaries and returns. To the extent that graduates obtain high-quality
relevant skills in TE that raise their productivity, their wages should further rise, allowing for greater
enrollment before a leveling equilibrium of costs and returns. So analysis of supply and coverage of TE
should be the first policy issue, but quality and relevance should be of equal concern to policymakers.

In fact, a recent World Bank report commissioned by AusAid (“Indonesia’s Higher Education System: How
Responsive Is It to the Labor Market”, August 2013) had several major findings regarding labor market
outcomes for TE graduates: 2

    Facts and Numbers:            The number of workers with at least some TE has doubled in the past ten
                                    years;
                                  In 2000 about 5 million workers had at least some TE; by 2010 more than 10
                                    million did;
    Labor force                   Tertiary graduates have higher labor force participation compared to all
    participation:                  other levels of educational attainment;
    Skills match:                 TE grads are generally finding jobs compatible with their skills and have the
                                    better working conditions than workers with lower levels of education;
    Supply and demand:            Growth of jobs for workers with tertiary education is 21 percent compared to
                                    overall job growth of eight percent;
    Returns to TE:                Returns to TE is twice as high as that of senior secondary graduates; and
                                    several times higher than that of basic education degree holders2;
                                  Returns to higher-level skills continue to be in high demand by private firms.
                                    Managers, leaders, and key technical personnel remain in demand and
                                    command premia on salaries and working conditions;
                                  Teacher policies initially created some rent-seeking, but subsequent policy
                                    changes have led to fewer high-paying teaching jobs and more low-paying
                                    contract job in teaching, with corresponding lower salaries and returns;
    Labor force                   The segment of the LF under age 35 has accounted for most of the increase in
    composition:                    supply of graduates; returns to this segment are trending downward slightly
                                    but still remain significantly above return to all other levels of education;
    Public vs. private            Returns to private sector employment for TE graduates continue to increase
    sector jobs:                    despite increases in supply of graduates seeking these jobs;
                                  Erstwhile policies setting high salaries for teachers have attracted many TE
                                    grads to seek public sector employment (please see BOX 6).

These findings suggest that aspiring students correctly perceive the future value of TE in the labor market.
The aggregate nature of the data does not support the supposition of threshold effect for the quality
of education. That is, we do not find evidence that poor quality of higher education is leading to higher
unemployment, lower wages, or other negative outcomes for those who attend tertiary.

It is important to emphasize that this finding does not imply that anything called TE will create a benefit. It
is quite likely that, currently, demand for increased skills is running ahead of supply. Even when students are
gaining only marginal improvements to their skills sets in mediocre or poor TEIs, these improved skills sets
appear to have value to employers.

2     The returns to education are presented as the additional wage relative to what a primary education graduate (or less) makes:
      in 2010, a tertiary graduate made slightly more than 100% more than a basic education grad, return to gradates is roughly 1.1.
      A senior secondary graduate made 60% more, therefore return to senior secondary graduates is roughly 0.6. Junior secondary
      increases your wage by about 20 percent, thus 0.2. The general regression controls for age and gender.




                                                                                                                               Chapter 1   17
                                               Tertiary Education in Indonesia is a Good Investment for Individuals and for the Economy
     Exhibit 2. Returns to education by education level, all labor force, 2001-2010

                             1,4

                             1,2

                               1
                                                                                       Tertiary

                             0,8
                                                                                       Senior

                             0,6                                                       Secondary

                                                                                       Basic
                             0,4

                             0,2

                               0



     Source: Cerdan-Infantes, 2013. Data from SAKERNAS, Indonesia


     Exhibit 3. Returns to education by education level, 35 years old or younger, 2001-2010

                             1,4

                             1,2

                               1                                                       Tertiary

                             0,8
                                                                                       Senior

                             0,6                                                       Secondary
                                                                                       Basic
                             0,4

                             0,2

                               0



     Source: Cerdan-Infantes, 2013. Data from SAKERNAS, Indonesia

     But this does not mean they will continue to be valuable. As supply of workers with TE increases, pressure
     for more and better skills will increase if wages are to keep from dropping. This means that TE policy must
     address cannot rest on a “quantity” approach to increasing TE coverage.

     This means that TE policy must seek now to implement the full set of policies that raise coverage, equity,
     quality, relevance, and efficiency. Policy must seek to do this as reasonably rapidly as possible so that
     benefits may appear before the labor market becomes saturated with the supply of workers at today’s skill
     levels and today’s degree of relevance.

     Policies that improve quality and relevance take time to develop and implement. Results can take years to
     appear. The government is well served to move quickly to improve quality and relevance to avoid a future
     drop in returns and a stalling of the efficiency and productivity gains associated with greater skills.

     To achieve this, policy should seek to create opportunities for most high school graduates to invest in their
     skills via some form of TE. The remainder of this paper discusses the five key policy directions that are most
     likely to promote this outcome.



18   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Indonesia achieved near universal coverage in primary school in 2009 and continues to increase the number of students finishing basic education. Both high school
                                                                                          graduation rates and tertiary enrollment rates are likely continue to rise.




      Chapter 2
     Demand for Tertiary Education Will
     Continue to Grow as High School
     Graduation Rates Increase

     This chapter and the next one examine who is likely to seek to enter TE, and what policy should do to
     promote help achieve appropriate coverage and equity goals. In doing this, the chapters draw on several
     principles from the COREHEG and World Bank East Asia policy frameworks for TE:

              Make TE and training more equitable and affordable.
              Diversify options while levelling the playing field.
              Improve Secondary Education.
              Embrace competition (at national and global level).
              Disconnect 1: Between TE graduates and employers.
              Disconnect 2: Between earlier education and TE.

     These issues frame the analysis and discussion that follows.

     Looked at in absolute terms, the increase of enrollment levels by an additional two million students
     constitutes a major expansion of TE. Looking only at these numbers, one could conclude that the sector has
     expanded enough and should not expand any further. The purpose of this chapter is to argue an opposing
     point of view: that the sector can and should continue to expand, but under better policies that promote
     greater quality and relevance. The nature of the marginal student entering TE has major implications for
     policy.


                                                                                                                                                       19
     As enrollment has gone from roughly 3 million students in 1999 to roughly 5 million students in 2012, most
     of the growth has been in the “demand absorbing” private institutions—those that receive the least amount
     of public subsidy. Questions about the quality of the education offered by these institutions are common;
     some policy observers are rightly concerned about the ability of the system to maintain quality in the face of
     such large increases in enrollment. They rightly cite the expansion as a reason why the government should
     more urgently promote policies that can improve quality.

     The source of increased demand seems clear: increased numbers of high school graduates. Birth cohorts
     have remained stable over the past two decades, so TE demand is not the result of demographic factors. It is
     the result of more students staying in school to receive their high school diplomas. The number of diploma
     holders has grown slightly faster than the enrollment rate of TE. We impute that of the 2.5 million high
     school graduates in 2012, roughly 1 million entered TE.

     Of course, the government can only assess the adequacy of coverage if it has a clear and meaningful target.
     What share of high school graduates should continue to tertiary? No objective answer to this question
     exists, but good international practice is based on two main suppositions:

           The TE system should offer a relevant, cost-effective option to all high school graduates who seek
             to continue to TE;
           In practice, at least half of high school graduates should continue to TE and at least half of these
             should complete their degrees.

     For many countries, such coverage and graduation rates are the cornerstones of their TE policies. The
     importance is not the number, but rather the commitment to helping all those who want further invest in
     their skills to do so well and cost-effectively. Those who stop formal learning at the conclusion of high school
     generally face a more difficult future than those who continue schooling. A good cornerstone of policy is a
     reasonable target for coverage which makes the pool of formal learners large and the pool of those who will
     not go beyond high school smaller.

     The data make clear that what may appear at first glance to be a massive expansion is in fact slower growth
     of tertiary education when compared to increases in high school graduation rates. A smaller share of high
     school graduates are continuing on to tertiary education in 2012 than did in 1999.

     Exhibit 4. High School Graduates and TE Enrollment, 1999-2012




     Source: Statistik Pendidikan, MOEC, with authors’ calculations




20   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Indonesia achieved near universal coverage in primary school several years ago and continues to increase
the numbers of students who finish the basic education cycle. Current data show more than 2.5 million
students receiving high school diplomas each year. In academic year 2000 to 2001, 1.6 million students
graduated from high school.

Exhibit 5. Compound Annual Growth Rates for Various Indicators, 1999-2012
                                                                              Compound Annual Growth Rate
 TE Age Group (19-23-year olds)                                                                 .07%
 TE Enrollment                                                                                 3.92%
 Cohort of High School Graduates                                                               4.82%
Source: Statistik Pendidikan, MOEC, with authors’ calculations

Both high school graduations rates and tertiary enrollment rates are likely to continue to rise because of
(i) the policy to make schooling mandatory through 12th grade; and (ii) the correct perception among high
graduates that tertiary studies will improve their earning power. However, point (ii), while currently true,
may change as tertiary graduates continue to flood the labor market. The best way to keep returns high is to
be sure affordable, relevant options for study exist for the largest range of high school graduates.

Exhibit 6. Size of the 19-23 year-old age cohort with historical and projected enrollment data

                                       Projected enrollment with recommended TE expansion rate
                    40                 Projected enrollment with current trend
         Millions




                                       Gross Enrollment
                    35                 Net Enrollment
                                       Population of age cohort 19-23
                    30

                    25
                                                                                     Max: 21.91
                                            Min: 19.82
                    20

                    15
                                                                        With recommended
                                                                            expansion                  50%
                    10

                     5                        nt
                                Gross Enrollment                                                      Flat line 25%
                         15%
                         1                                 25%                 With current trend
                                       Net
                                       NetE nrollment
                                           Enrollment
                     -
                         2000   2005             2010            2015             2020            2025

Sources: Population Data from BPS (Central Bureau of Statistics), Enrollment data from Statistik Pendidikan, MOEC3
Population trend 2012 – 2028 is forecasted by birth and mortality rate

A simple calculation serves to make the dimensions of the challenge clear. With roughly four million students
born per year, one expects high school graduation rates to continue to increase until roughly 80 percent
of children finish high school. Of these 3.6 million high school graduates, one hopes that 1.8 million would
enroll in some form of TE, and at least 900,000 would complete degrees. Currently, enrollment is estimated
to be five times larger than the number students who “exit” TE annual (whether through graduation or
drop out—these figures are imputed from education levels of new labor market entrants). This means the
Government can expect and should seek a future in which tertiary enrollment plateaus at roughly 9 million
students. Exhibit 4 shows that this might take place within 10-12 years according to reasonable trends.

3   The SUSENAS (Household Survey) is not fully consistent with data obtained from Statistik Pendidikan MOEC in two aspects: 1.
    There is smaller Gross Enrollment Rate reflected from SUSENAS Data; 2. The Ratio of Gross Enrollment and Net Enrollment is larger
    than that of MOEC data. The proportion of students of age cohort 19-23 enrolled in TEIs is larger in SUSENAS data.




                                                                                                                           Chapter 2    21
                                         Demand for Tertiary Education Will Continue to Grow as High School Graduation Rates Increase
     The largest implication of this trend is the need broaden and change the types of TE currently offered.
     Universities will seek to continue to enroll the brightest and most capable learners, but the marginal student
     will have quite different needs. Indonesia PISA scores show that 80 percent of 15-year-olds score at PISA
     level 2 or below. PISA average scores, in fact, are close to 1.5 standard deviations below the OECD average.
     This means the average high school graduate in Indonesia has knowledge and skills that are two- to three
     grade levels below the average OECD high school graduate.

     A high quality, relevant TEI for such a graduate would be characterized by two features: (i) it would provide
     the student with knowledge and skills that were not acquired in high school; and (ii) it would provide
     knowledge and skills that concretely increase the employment prospects after studying.

     Creating such programs is not easy or even straightforward. It cannot be done by primarily by legislation or
     by fiat, although appropriate legal frameworks are necessary. It is accomplished by creating incentives for
     providers to do the micro-level work of assessing students’ need and responding to these with affordable
     programs. Currently, the incentives in the Indonesia TE system—with the possible exception of some areas
     of the private university sector—do not promote these goals. Establishing enrollment targets for the TE
     age cohort with sub-targets for university and non-university enrollment is worthwhile, but it will not be
     enough to expand under “business-as-usual” policies. Higher enrollment without better, more relevant
     degrees may strain graduates’ abilities to get a positive return on their investment. Thus, the government
     would also do well to conduct a geographic analysis of non-university options in order to guide the creation
     of new community colleges and a labor market analysis of employment trends for new market entrants in
     order to promote programs related to common occupations for TE graduates. These measures will help to
     make study options for poorer students more affordable (because high-cost programs are likely to have
     negative returns) and more relevant.

     A key future direction of policy, then, will be to promote a greater range of relevant, high-quality programs,
     so that, inter alia, labor productivity increases and returns to TE remain robust. It is recognized that Indonesia
     labor markets are short of workers with qualified generic skills such as communication, computer science,
     and even writing. However, employees with good technical, leadership and management skills are more
     difficult to find. Indonesian TE policy should promote this virtuous circle wherein high-quality, relevant
     programs boost productivity, and therefore wages, and in so doing also continue to attract more students
     to tertiary studies.

     Policy Direction One:


         Government policy should facilitate further expansion of the TE sector while improving quality and
         relevance at every level. Policies should not just expand enrollment, but should create conditions
         that promote a greater range of high quality providers, degree options, and affordability levels.



     Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
         Establish a target share of the age cohort enrolled with sub-targets for universities and non-
            universities according to capacity.
         Conduct a geographic analysis of non-university options to guide the creation of new community
            colleges.
         Conduct a labor market analysis of trends toward increased formal employment among new labor
            market entrants; promote programs related to these occupations.




22   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
  Box 1. The case of Canada: high percentage of post-secondary graduates indicates
         an over-education of its youth?

  Among OECD countries, Canada has the highest percentage of postsecondary degree holders in both
  age ranges of 25-64 and 25-34, 48 percent and 56 percent postsecondary graduates respectively. Some
  question whether the country is over-educating its youth or helping them make a wise investment in
  their futures. Evidence from Canada suggests that expanding TE and providing broader access to it for
  high school graduates not only stimulates the economy in a long run, but also brings higher rates of
  return to education in the short run.

  Employment rates and salaries of graduates provide the key positive evidence. Canadian tertiary
  graduates suffer less unemployment and earn significantly more than high school graduates. Both
  advantages have remained robust even as Canada has amassed the world’s best educated workforce.
  No evidence can be found to suggest workers are over-educated.

  In Canada, public policy and investment from provincial and federal government strongly support
  high school graduates to pursue postsecondary study in either university programs or non-university
  programs, namely community colleges, trade certificate training and so on. University programs take
  students longer to complete than community colleges and other short programs. Shorter, technical and
  vocational degrees are considered relevant and of high quality; aspirants are encourage towards these
  as much or more than university studies. Canada’s share of non-university tertiary graduates is among
  the highest in the OECD.

  A report from the C.D. Howe Institute, “The Payoff : Returns to University, College, and Trades Education
  in Canada, 1980-2005,” clearly shows that earning premia for postsecondary graduates are much larger
  than high school graduates. In 2005, earing premia for Trade certificate holders are 12percent higher
  than high school diploma holders; community college graduates earning premia 17percent higher and
  bachelor degree holder 45percent higher than high school graduates. There is also a remarkable trend
  of increase in earning premia for postsecondary graduates compared to high school graduates from
  year 1980 to 2005, for instance, bachelor graduates’ earning premia raise from 32percent to 45percent
  for male, and 49percent to 60percent for female. Likewise, the increase of earning premia showed clear
  results that having postsecondary degrees, from university and non-university programs, bring higher
  returns to education.

  The evidences shows growth in supply of Canadian postsecondary graduates has been consisted with,
  but not outpaced, growth in labor market demand for their skills.


Percentage earnings permia (compared to high school graduates):
                             1980              1985             1990             1995             2000            2005
                                                       Male (%)
 Trade                         2                  3               7                9               10               12
 Community College            10                 12               16               17              19               17
 Bachelor’s                   32                 36               40               43              49               45
                                                      Female (%)
 Trade                         2                 -1               2                1                2                -2
 Community College            16                 15               19               19              19               19
 Bachelor’s                   49                 52               56               58              59               60




                                                                                                                     Chapter 2    23
                                   Demand for Tertiary Education Will Continue to Grow as High School Graduation Rates Increase
24   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
                     Those who stop learning at the conclusion of high school generally face a more difficult future than those who continue schooling .




Chapter 3
Making Tertiary Education More Equitable

Law 12/2012 states that 20percent of TE students should come from “frontier, outer and disadvantaged
areas.” This is a laudable policy goal and an achievable one if sufficient policy attention and effort are
dedicated to it. In light of the analysis in Chapter 2, one sees that this will require not only doubling the
current number of poor students in the TE system, but maintaining these ratios as the system inevitably
expands further.

Many have interpreted Law 12/2012 to mean that one-fifth of enrollees should be students from poor
families. While exact definitions are needed, under any definition it represents a preferential option for the
aspiring student with both fewer financial resources and lower abilities to succeed in traditional (university-
style) academic programs.

Approaching these issues requires first and understanding of the current levels of equity in TE and secondly
directions for significantly raising enrollment and retention rates among poor students.

How Equitable is Tertiary Education Coverage Currently?

Information about the socio-economic status of tertiary students comes from the SUSENAS household
survey. The data indicate grossly disproportional representation of students from families in the highest two
consumption quintiles. In 2012 over 75.7percent of students were from Q4&Q5 households. Only 10percent
of total enrollment is students from the bottom 40percent of consumption level.




                                                                                                                                         25
     Exhibit 7. Gross Tertiary Enrollment by Quintile, 2012
         Quintile        % of age cohort enrolled4               Share of enrollment5                2012 enrollment head count
           Q1                      4.23%                                 3.3%                                  172,040
           Q2                      8.80%                                 6.9%                                  358,402
           Q3                     18.07%                                14.1%                                  735,779
           Q4                     31.42%                                24.5%                                 1,279,257
           Q5                     65.68%                                51.2%                                 2,673,956
          Total                                                         100.0%                                5,219,434
     Source: MOEC, Indonesia


     Exhibit 8. Gross Enrollment of Q4-Q5 versus Q1-Q3, 2012
     Year                                       Q4&Q5                                Q1-Q3                                Total
     2000                                      2,676,378                             467,456                            3,143,834
     2012                                      3,953,214                            1,266,220                           5,219,434
     Share (2000)                                85.1%                                14.9%                               100%
     Share (2012)                                75.7%                                24.3%                               100%
     Source: MOEC, Indonesia

     A comparison of data from 2000 and 2012 shows an encouraging trend in which the Q1-Q3 share has
     increased almost 10 percentage points from its initially low baseline. This pattern of inequitable enrollment
     is unfortunately quite typical of lower-income countries with maturing and expanding TE systems. Prior
     to expansion, TE is traditionally the exclusive domain of those from wealthy families. Poorer students are
     less likely to get or complete decent basic education, more likely to leave school to work, and less likely to
     have resources to pay for TE. When private higher education begins to absorb pent up demand for TE, new
     enrollees usually come from families with the means to pay: those in Q4 & Q5.4

     Barriers to equity are significant. So long as university remains the dominant mode of tertiary attendance
     (compared to non-university), poorer students will face a double obstacle to attendance. First, they will
     be less likely to score highly on academically-focused entrance exams, due to the generally poorer quality
     secondary schools they attend, along with other disadvantages of lower SES. Second, they will be less able
     to enroll and pay for school even if they can gain admission. Finally, they are at high risk for drop out.5

     Students from Q1-Q3 also face non-monetary obstacles to enrolling or finishing TE. In addition to the
     reasons listed above, these students are more likely to live in rural areas, belong to a linguistic or ethnic
     minority groups. A recent survey found that while the vast majority of high school students (88percent)
     aspire to attend tertiary, only those in the highest consumption quintiles feel reasonably financially capable
     to do so. Those in poorest two quintiles almost universally claim financial difficulty.

     Specific policies are needed to attenuate these disadvantages. A comprehensive and well-constructed
     financial aid system—which may include, inter alia, generous student loans, systems to identify students
     with academic potential in secondary schools, and systems to identify disadvantaged students in
     universities—can effectively reduce these equity gaps. Indeed, many economically dynamic lower and
     middle income countries have attacked the problem of inequity with significant investments in student
     financial aid. In Latin American alone Chile, Brazil, and Colombia have invested the equivalent of billions
     of dollars to promote equity, often with impressive results. Indonesia would be well-served to follow these
     examples. Box 2 describes the main models used by comparator countries to balance institutional finances
     and student financial assistance.

     4   The numbers in this column represent student enrollment coming from certain quintile as percentage of a particular population, in
         this case, age cohort of 19-23. For instance, 1.57% in Quintile 1 by definition: 1.57 % of all population of age cohort 19-23 is enrolled
         in TEIs.
     5   The numbers in this column represent student enrollment coming from certain quintile as percentage of total TE students enrolled.
         For instance, 1.99% in Quintile 1 by definition: 1.99% of all students enrolled in TEIs are coming from Quintile 1.




26   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Exhibit 9. TE Enrollment by Consumption Quintile, 2012

                   2,200,000                                                                                       50%
                                         Public TEI Enrolled Total
                   2,000,000             Private TEI Enrolled Total                                                45%
                   1,800,000                                                                                       40%
                   1,600,000
                                                                                                                   35%
                   1,400,000
                                                                                                                   30%
                   1,200,000
                                                                                                                   25%
                   1,000,000
                                                                                                                   20%
                     800,000
                     600,000                                                                                       15%
                                                                                                                   10%
                     400,000
                     200,000                                                                                       5%
                            0                                                                                      0%
                                  Poorest            Q-2              Q-3              Q-4            Richest

Source: SUSENAS, Indonesia


What Types of Financial Assistance Are Available?
As typical of many TE systems, Indonesia over the years has acquired a host of very small scholarship
programs from various origins and with various purposes. These micro-size programs generally emphasize
a combination of academic merit and financial need, and may have other special criteria as well. In 2010,
MOEC initiated the Bidik Misi6 scholarship program in order to reach more needy students. While this new
effort is laudable, by 2013 Bidik Misi only provided 140,000 students with full scholarships.

Taken together the various source of programs, financial aid cover about six percent of enrollment. If we
consider the Bidik Misi scholarships with respect to the enrollment of Q1-Q3 students, we find they are
a more respectable 15percent enrolled students. We can safely assume that most students in the Q1-Q3
will have difficulty paying for school, so this amount on financial aid leaves 5 out of six poor students
without assistance. By contrast, financial aid programs in other countries—increasing including developing
countries—often serve more than 50 percent of all enrolled students. It is increasingly common to find 30
to 40 percent (or more) of the public TE budget spent on student financial assistance.

Exhibit 10. Number of enrolled students by consumption quintile and degree type
                                       Q1               Q2                Q3                 Q4               Q5              Total
 Population of 19-23               4,332,826        4,097,356         3,903,905         3,646,149         4,140,082       20,120,318
 D4, S1 and above                   118,784          234,059           408,434           808,086          1,971,952        3,541,315
 D3                                 16,347            31,857            62,612           117,274           250,342          478,432
 D1 and D2                           4,194            20,582            31,686            23,374            49,722          129,558
 Total enrollment
                                    139,325          286,498           502,732           948,734          2,272,016        4,149,305
 headcount
Source: Core SUSENAS, March Round 2013


6    Please refer to Annex for specific selection criteria and the amount of scholarships available per student in each public TEI.




                                                                                                                                Chapter 3    27
                                                                                                  Making Tertiary Education More Equitable
     The Bidik Misi program covers the full costs of tuition and a stipend. Like other government scholarship
     programs, it mainly targets students at public universities. In 2012, the DGHE added a very small portion
     (2,000 new entrants in 2012, and additional 8,000 new entrants in 2013) of scholarships for students who
     enter private TEIs. By each university’s size and prestige, the number of scholarship recipients varies.

     Each year, the DGHE allocates the amount of Bidik Misi Scholarships to each university who had applied
     and qualifies for this program. Bidik Misi scholarships have the same standard for every university, despite
     the fact that each university has different tuition changes. Therefore, if Bidik Misi cannot fully subsidize all
     tuition for students in certain TEIs, the institution will have to pay to meet the gap to make sure students
     benefit from full tuition deduction.

     In addition, the effectiveness of the Bidik Misi program is likely hampered by the reported problems with
     poor targeting of recipients and frequent late payment of the scholarships themselves. Financial Aid is in
     place for the purpose to increase graduation rates, shorten duration to complete a certain tertiary degree,
     and eventually lead to better employment outcomes. These are the empirical positive impacts of Financial
     Aid. However, impacts on Bidik Misi’s should be undertaken at the first available opportunity to testify its
     positivity and effectiveness.

     As mentioned earlier, numerous partial scholarships are thought to be provided through other scholarship
     programs, such as the Bantuan Belajar Mahasiswa (BBM) program and the Peningkatan Prestasi Akademik
     (PPA) program. No reliable information is available on the quality of targeting of these scholarships, the
     extent to which poor students may receive more than one, or their effectiveness in promoting attendance
     and graduation by recipients.

     Four main issues emerge with the scholarships: (i) criteria that accurately group students into appropriate
     types of scholarships; (ii) the clarity and feasibility of the criteria themselves; (iii) panel/team who determines
     the selection process; (iv) the public awareness of the existence and options of scholarships addressing
     students’financial needs. The scholarship programs seems to be designed to help the bright and academically
     talented among the poor who, despite all obstacles, score well on the university admissions test and gain a
     place in public universities. The program seems to have neither the resources nor the ambition to either (i)
     assist those financially-needy students who are in TE to pay for studies and graduate; or (ii) make it possible
     for the poor student on the margin to enroll.

     The 2012 Law on Higher Education includes a provision which mandates that 20percent of enrollment
     in higher education institutions be students from poor economic backgrounds. This ought to provide an
     impetus to replace or complement the scholarship-based system with a more comprehensive financial
     aid system. However, the Law 12/2012 does not define exactly what is meant by the term “poor economic
     background,” leaving this to be defined when the law is implemented.

     Moving to a comprehensive financial aid system would require several key changes from the one-size-fits
     all policy of scholarships. The move toward a comprehensive financial aid policy would be characterized by
     six elements:

        1. The removal of academic merit as key selection criteria for aid allocation. The mixing of merit and
           need criteria in financial aid tends to favor students from the higher ranges of whatever socio-
           economic stratum is eligible for aid. It also undercuts a main tenet of TE policy: that any accredited
           TE program has value for some learners. Merit-based aid tends to emphasize that the most rigorous
           academic programs have the most value. Need-based systems tend to reinforce the idea that all TE
           should add value for students regardless of their academic capabilities at enrollment.
        2. Financial need must be accurately and reliably measured. Many countries find it challenging to
           gauge the level of student need, but it is impossible to optimize aid allocations and their effects
           on enrollment and graduation rates without doing so. Improved targeting of existing scholarships
           begins with finding accurate and reliable ways to measure need.
        3. Multiple financial aid instruments are usually most effective. Grants and loans are the two best
           known instruments, but tuition discounts, income-contingent loans (graduate taxes) and even




28   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
      human capital equity investments are in the modern financial aid toolbox. Regardless, it is imperative
      that the government disseminate information about all available scholarships to secondary school
      students.
   4. Engagement of TEIs in the aid process can leverage resources and prevent “tuition inflation.”
      Furthermore, the government should strive to provide adequate scholarship management support
      for TEIs.
   5. The goal of aid policy should be to maximize equitable enrollment and graduation within a given
      budget constraint. This budget constraint can be expanded by reallocating some resources, like those
      that finance professors at private TEIs, to the creation of portable financial assistance for students.
      Moreover, the financial aid budget should be set as a fixed share of total TE spending rather than as a
      fixed number.
   6. Students must receive their scholarship benefits on time if scholarship funding is to have a meaningful
      impact on their ability to afford TE.

Additional features of a comprehensive financial aid system include:

   1. Reliable ways of gauging student family income and student need
   2. The amounts of financial assistance needed to promote enrollment, retention, and graduation
      among poor students
   3. Whether to cover students in private as well as public institutions
   4. Whether to provide equal assistance for short tertiary degree and university degrees
   5. Whether to be solely need-based or whether to reward need/merit combinations (as the current
      scholarship programs do)
   6. Whether to seek to maximize the number of students assisted under a given budget/slash resource
      envelope or whether to create a “right” to scholarships and loans among all enrolled tertiary students
   7. Whether to mandate TE institutions to accept students as a condition of operating or to pay
      institutions on a per capita basis for enrolling poor students
   8. How to keep increases in aid financing from translating into higher tuition costs

The path toward a comprehensive financial aid policy begins with intensive collection of data on student
financial need and the effectiveness of existing instruments. Empirical research should investigate how
effective the Bidik Misi is in providing access to and completion of TE among recipients, and how well it is
targeted to the neediest students. It would be advantageous for the Government to seek to understand the
impact of the Bidik Misi scholarship in detail. Such an understanding would be an important initial step to a
more comprehensive student financial assistance strategy.

Policy Direction Two:


   The government should adopt a comprehensive financial aid policy that supports its goals for
   equity (i.e., increasing the enrollment and graduation rates of students from disadvantaged
   backgrounds). The new system should offer assistance to all financially needy TE students and
   provide the basis for increasing enrollment among students from the bottom two income quintiles.


Some research entities had taken the initiatives to study and understand the effectiveness of public
scholarships – Bidik Misi. For instance, the Department of Economics at Padjadjaran University had released
a report in January 2013 on a case study of the effectiveness of Bidik Misi in West Java, Indonesia. The report
used two sets of data from Indonesia Family Life Survey and the National Socioeconomic Survey (SUSENAS)
to conduct the analysis and draw conclusions. Both sets of data revealed weaknesses of Bidik Misi. Despite




                                                                                                           Chapter 3    29
                                                                             Making Tertiary Education More Equitable
     the good intention and incentives Bidik Misi provides for students who are in financial needs, the main issue
     with this public scholarship is the lack of coverage on students with severe socioeconomic difficulty to seek
     for TE. With a quota of 30,000 seats for Bidik Misi Scholarship in 2012, 2,400 are available for poor students
     in West Java Province. Back in 2010, the coverage of poor students are even less, with 23percent of students
     who benefit from Bidik Misi are from non-poor families. One of the main reasons for this lack of access to
     scholarship is due to the inability for low socioeconomic students to pass the national entrance exam or
     fulfill the minimum academic requirement to attend public universities. The report therefore provoked two
     policy stimulation programs to complement the Bidik Misi: Private Tutoring Voucher and Conditional Cash
     Transfer (Fahmi et al., 2013).

     Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
         Create a system to assess financial need and examine options for reliably establishing family
            income.
         Move from fixed budget for scholarships to fixed share of TE funding for student assistance.
         Replace the financing of professors at private TEIs with portable financial assistance to students.


       Box 2. Chile’s move toward a comprehensive TE student financial aid system

       As in Indonesia, civil society in Chile considers TE-especially university education-to be an essential
       service. Aspiring students and families expect the government to ensure access and affordability.
       Until recently, Chile’s TE finance system resembled Indonesia’s in many respects: (i) wealthier and
       academically-gifted students preferentially received aid, with little regard to their absolute need; (ii)
       poor students were less able to gain access to public universities, forcing those least able to pay to
       enroll in private universities; (iii) financial aid was a historical collection of scholarships with no clear
       policy goals.

       In 2012, the Government proposed a sweeping set of reforms to student financial aid. New resources,
       totaling in the billions of US dollar equivalents, were channeled to financial aid. Most importantly,
       however, the system was overhauled to become a comprehensive one to promote student attendance
       and completion of TE. The proposed reform sought improvements, inter alia, in the systems (i)
       governance; (ii) affordability of loans; (iii) maximum borrowing amounts (tuition reference rate); (iv) and
       the harmonization of the grant and loans systems.

       The table below provides an indication of the types of issues that required coordination in order for
       Chile to move to a comprehensive financial aid program. Indonesia may or may not share some or all
       of these issues. It could, however, benefit from an assessment of the ways in which Chile improved the
       cost effective of its publicly-provide financial aid while raising graduation rates and equity in TE.




30   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
ISSUE          Issue/Problem                           Proposed Solution
               A two-tiered student loan system that   Introduce a single, unified system of student
               provided substantial subsidies for      loans and grants (instead of the current two,
               less-needy university students while    parallel systems of loans for CRUCH and
               making non-university students pay      non-CRUCH institutions, and instead of the
               near-market interest rates for loans.   many scholarship programs).
               A historical proliferation of loan and
               grant programs administered by Have a single agency administer the system
               different agencies under different of TE student financial aid.
Governance     rules.
               Inability to control rent-seeking by
               private banks who originated and
                                                    Substitute banks in loan origination.
               managed student loans but did not
               share in the risk of non-payment.
               Persistently high default rates on Use the tax system (Internal Tax Service)
               student loans and lack of a culture of to monitor salaries and set and collect
               repayment.                             repayments
               Graduates taking on too much debt Introduce income contingency so that
               and therefor unable to pay back their students pay no more than 10 percent of
               loans.                                their income above the minimum salary.
                                                       Employed graduates would make monthly
                                                       repayments for up to 20 years, or until their
               Insufficient time to repay loans
                                                       balances are fully discharged, whichever
Financial                                              comes first.
terms of the
loans                                               Repayment would start no later than
                                                    18 months after departure from the TEI,
               Insufficient time to find a job (3
                                                    regardless of whether the student drops out
               months) before loan repayment starts
                                                    or graduates. This allows students up to a
                                                    year to transfer to another degree program.
               Loans not available to middle-class Make students from deciles 1 to 9 eligible
               but needy students.                 for loan funds.




                                                                                                   Chapter 3    31
                                                                     Making Tertiary Education More Equitable
       Table on Chile’s proposed solutions and issue/problem continued:
       ISSUE                    Issue/Problem               Proposed Solution
                                TEIs have no incentives
                                to provide good value       Reform the tuition reference rate (arancel de referencia)
                                or high performance for     system so that annual tuition, time-to-degree, dropout
                                students. They actually     rates, and employment outcomes, determine how much
                                make more money if          the state is willing to invest in degrees and institutions.
                                students drop out.
                                The need to give prior
                                to certain high-need
                                                       Open the door for the Government to give additional
       Tuition                  and socially-desirable
                                                       support to degrees that may be especially important
       reference rate           degree programs, such
                                                       despite their relatively low salaries.
       system                   as nursing , science,
                                math, and engineering
                                                         Any loan scheme should not seek to subsidize the gap
                                                         between the tuition reference rate and actual tuition
                                TEI have an incentive to
                                                         (“brecha”): it is the primary tool to modify behavior of
                                raise tuition when the
                                                         student borrowers, and its magnitude is the mechanism
                                Government provides
                                                         expected to enforce efficiency in the system. TEIs should
                                loans and grants
                                                         be forced to share the cost of the “brecha” via institutional
                                                         grants or other forms of aid.
                                                            Maintenance grants for Q1-Q3 students to defray
                                Grants   and    loans       the immediate costs associated with being in school.
       Harmonization
                                not coordinated or          Moreover, it is proposed that each Q1 student be given a
       of the grants
                                used to maximize            grant equal to 50 percent of the tuition reference rate for
       and loan
                                enrollment, retention       the programs he or she is attending. Q2 students would
       systems
                                and graduation.             be given grants equal to 30 percent or tuition and Q3
                                                            students would get grants equal to 15 percent.
                                PSU score thresholds
       Entrance Exams           for eligibility to some     Attention is to be paid to the fact that relying on college
       and equity –             existing      scholarship   entrance exam scores is problematic on the grounds
       Merit versus             programs to be lowered      of equity, given that results on merit tests are typically
       need.                    for students from the       correlated with wealth.
                                two lowest quintiles.




32   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
A good cornerstone of policy is a reasonable target for coverage which makes the pool of formal learners large and the pool of those who will not go beyond high
                                                                                                                                                   school smaller




   Chapter 4
   Broadening the Deﬁnition of Quality and
   Relevance while Raising these across the
   System

   Quality and relevance are perennial concern in TE. Students, parents, employers, policymakers, and the vast
   majority of professors/instructors and TEI administrators all want the education provided to be high quality.
   They also want it to be relevant and to provide knowledge and skills that will allow students to succeed as
   graduates, especially in their work lives.

   Concern for quality needs to be operationalized with an awareness that no valid and reliable objective
   measures of quality currently exist. Many different opinions and impressions can be heard about what
   quality and relevance mean, but getting any type of objective, comparable measure is extremely difficult
   and inherently imprecise. For this reason, quality and relevance must be gauged by proxies.

   The first policy question with respect quality and relevance is: what do we mean by these terms? Increasingly,
   the answer is based on the value that the education can add to any given student’s skills, knowledge, and
   capabilities. Schools add value by carefully defining their target student population and their needs and
   meticulously setting about satisfying these. Schools that do this well are said to be fit for their purpose,
   and “fitness-for-purpose” is the preferred definition of quality and relevance for modern TE systems. Policy
   Direction Three is framed with this in mind: “Fitness-for-purpose”—a TEI’s ability to respond to the needs of
   its students—should strongly complement or replace academic rigor as the main definition of quality in TE.
   Quality and relevance should be promoted in a wider range of disciplines and subjects aimed at the ability
   levels and aspirations of the typical high school graduate, not the most academically gifted one. Community




                                                                                                                                  Chapter 4       33
                                                   Broadening the Deﬁnition of Quality and Relevance while Raising these across the System
     colleges, short degree programs, and studies related to graduates’ near-term success in job markets should
     get preference for government financing and other policies that facilitate their creation.”

     Defining quality as the highest levels of academic rigor is now obsolete as a policy tool for countries with
     strong and dynamic TE policies. These leading countries recognize that rigor is important throughout
     the system but academic rigor is usually strongly associated with selectivity of students. Selectivity is
     appropriate for elite and flagship institutions, but is not a feature of TE systems that should be generalized.
     Among its many drawbacks, defining quality as academic rigor tends to favor the upper echelons of the
     socio-economic strata, especially those who can afford high quality basic education.

     Some initiatives are underway to construct internationally-comparable tests to measure the value-added of
     TE. The diversity of learning goals that inherent in TE prevents the development of tests for all but a narrow
     range of abilities that TE often seeks to improve: written expression, reasoning ability, and a few other generic
     cognitive capabilities. The College Learning Assessment in the United States is the best-known of these
     initiatives. It seeks to directly gauge whether and to what extent attending college increases knowledge
     and cognitive abilities. The OECD’s AHELO and PIACC programs have sought to devise comparable tests and
     performance, but neither focuses principally on value-added through TE.

     Given this situation, the main proxy for relevance is the labor market success of the graduate; a degree is
     deemed to be relevant to the extent that it leads to good employment outcomes for the degree holder. Many
     factors influence employment outcomes, so this proxy gives partial information only. But the information it
     provides is useful.

     The main proxies for quality are measures such as faculty qualifications, research productivity and impact
     (measured by number of publications and number of citations) and the outcomes of quality assurance
     processes. Along with surveys of perception, these proxies form the basis of international and national
     rankings. Vigorous debate about these proxies has shown how they tend to favor research institutions,
     wealthy institutions, and selective institution. They also potentially confound spending or resource
     availability with educational value-added.

     The proxies for quality mentioned above are more relevant to the university subsector than to the non-
     university subsector. Because the non-university sector more often relies on practitioners as instructors,
     faculty qualifications are seen as less germane to quality. Greater reliance is put on labor market outcomes
     to indicate both quality and relevance of non-university education.

     Chapter 1 discuss labor market outcome for tertiary graduates and provides evidence of the positive returns
     to this investment. In Indonesia, the main available indicators to estimate TE quality are:

         (i) The credentials and productivity of the teaching force gauged in terms of highest degree
               obtained and amounts and influence of published research;
         (ii) The outcomes of accreditation processes;
         (iii) The selectivity of the institutions as measured by entrance test scores.




34   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Exhibit 11. Highest Degree of the TE Institution teaching force, 2004-20107

                 100%         ,
                             6,794         ,
                                          7,138        12,257       13,181      12,608        9,969       16,523
                  90%
                  80%
                            68,280       69,627       87,336       93,725       60,524       40,097       84,330
                  70%
                  60%
                  50%
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                             108,222
                  40%                                 126,201      135,445
                            92,046       95,736                                  77,809
                  30%
                                                                                                          60,774
                  20%
                  10%
                             1,084         875         5,291        6,369        3,364
                    0%                                                                           -            -
                         2004/2005 2005/2006 2006/2007 2007/2008 2008/2009 2009/2010 2011/2012

                          S3 (Ph.D.)                   S1 (Undergraduate)
                          S2 (Post Graduate)           <=Dipl.-4 (Below Undergraduate)

Source: Statistik Pendidikan MOEC, Indonesia

Exhibit 12 provides the best-available estimates of credentials of the teaching force. The significant year-to-
year fluctuation per category indicate overall poor data quality and major methodological shortcomings
in data collection; these data must be considered in that light. Nonetheless, they point to a lack of a critical
mass of qualified professors is a serious problem in Indonesia. Only about 1 in 10 teachers in TE has a PhD.
More than one-third of teaching force has a Bachelor’s degree or less. It is difficult to produce high quality
TE when the teaching force does not have the required credentials. The low incidence of advanced degrees
among faculty will make accreditation both harder and less effective. Standards will need to be lowered
to compensate for less capable faculty and the ability to place a meaningful floor on acceptable quality
becomes strained.

One of the most effective ways to improve TE quality is to increase the quantity and quality of advanced
degree holders. As especially PhDs compete for academic positions, students benefit from better quality
instructors. Many countries whose TE systems are maturing will not manage to equal mature TE systems
when holding a PhD becomes a de facto pre-requisite for employment in a university.

Indonesia’s domestic PhD and Master’s degree production is too small to provide the amounts of human
capital needed for an increased critical mass of qualified instructors and professors in TE. Domestically, annual
graduation of Master’s and PhD programs seems to have grown steadily. Data for the latest available year
show 1,765 PhDs and indicate that 500 new PhDs from 2006 to 2010 are trained domestically. By contrast,
Brazil, with a smaller population, surpassed the milestone of 10,000 domestically-trained PhD several years
ago. The United States invested heavily in PhD production as it transformed its economy in the late 1950’s
and 1960’s. These efforts have helped both countries move from efficiency-driven economic production
toward innovation driven production. Reaching a critical mass will require a similar effort by Indonesia.




7   Data present the numbers of full-time lecturers only and for both private and public institutions




                                                                                                                              Chapter 4   35
                                               Broadening the Deﬁnition of Quality and Relevance while Raising these across the System
     Exhibit 12. Domestic PhD Production in the US Rose Ten fold in One Generation

                            45,000
                            40,000
                            35,000
                            30,000
                            25,000

                            20,000
                            15,000
                            10,000
                              5,000
                                   0
                                    1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 1999

                                                          Year of doctorate

     Source: NSF/NIH/USED/NEH/USDA/NASA, Survey of Eamed Doctorates and Doctores Records File (1920-99); U.S. Office of Education
     annual reports

     From year 1996-2011, Indonesia published 16,139 scientific papers, or about 1,000 papers per year. These
     numbers makes Indonesia ranks 11th within the region, but the 63rd in publications globally (Elsevier, 2013).
     MOEC data show the average researcher producing 0.4 publications per year; researchers at internationally-
     competitive research universities will publish at several times this average. The lack of autonomy for
     budgetary and human resources policy discussed in Chapter 5 is thought to create a strong disincentive for
     faculty to publish. DGHE policies have sought to encourage publication, but have done so with measures
     that do not seem to be particularly effective. Pressure to “publish or perish” is often most effective when TEI
     have high autonomy over hiring and career advancement of faculty. This creates a need for each individual
     faculty member to build and maintain a publications record as a means of convincing colleagues of his or her
     professional competence. These impressions then usually directly affect the persons career advancement
     and success. Most other types of incentives become formulaic and seldom effectively promote quality.


     The Role of Accreditation in Quality Assurance
     Another potential drawback of program accreditation is that it treats all programs as equally worthwhile
     and seeks only to determine whether or not they constitute quality in their chosen domain. Many countries
     have solved this problem by simplifying their legal structures for degrees. Such policies effectively ensure
     that no more than two types of first tertiary degrees are offered: a longer and a shorter degree. Indonesia
     would be well-served to consider such a simplification. It would involve eliminating D1 and D3 degrees so
     as to raise the “brand value” of D2 and D4 degrees with sharper distinctions.

     The accreditation system centered on the National Accreditation Board (BAN-PT in its Bahasa acronym) is
     considered—along with faculty credentials and productivity—to be a main proponent of improved quality.
     BAN-PT was established in 1994 as an independent body appointed by and reporting to the Minister of
     Education. BAN-PT reviews and accredits mostly degree programs, including Bachelor’s, Master’s, and PhD
     programs. It also conducted institutional accreditation in 2007-08 but a high failure rate forced BAN-PT to
     suspend this and review its instruments. Institutional accreditation was then reinstated in 2011.

     The accreditation review process involves self-evaluation by the program using standardized questionnaires,
     desk review and evaluation of these by BAN-PT assessors. In theory, site visits are done but in practice very
     few site visits had been conducted due to budget constraints. The process concludes with a review of the




36   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
revised evaluation report by the BAN-PT Council as the basis of the accreditation decision. Accredited
programs receive recommendations for development and improvement. Programs that are denied
accreditation are subject to a closure by DGHE. By Law, accreditation is compulsory and accreditation will
become a license to open a study program. Unaccredited programs are not allowed to produce certificate
for their graduates and their graduates will not be recognized by DGHE.

Accreditation of a study program is valid for 5 years, and needs to be renewed at the end of its validity.
There are around 4,000 TE institutions and 16,770 study programs in Indonesia. As of December 2012, 9,638
study programs had been accredited and 7,132 were in need of accreditation. BAN-PT’s annual budget
(over which it has no control, as noted in the World Bank’s QA paper) only allows it to accredit 2,200 study
programs per year.

Exhibit 13. The accreditation results (programs) from BAN-PT and DGHE as of year 2012

                 Public TEI                                  Private TEI                      Total #
                                                                                             Public &     Accredited
                                               # of                                          Private        study          %
 # of study                      Not yet                                      Not yet         study        program
              Valid   Expired                 study      Valid    Expired
 program                        accredited                                   accredited     programs
                                             program

   4721       2879      639       1203        12049      6759      1253         4037          16770          9638        57.47
Source: BAN-PT & DGHE

Many countries initiating formal accreditation processes in TE concentrate on program accreditation. For
countries with new and inexperienced accreditation agencies, the stakes are lower when one can fail to
accredit a single program and leave the bulk of any given institution in place. Institutional accreditation
is higher stakes because institutions that fail to win accreditation are often candidates for forced closure.
Forcing the closure of a TE institution is complicated and difficult, and tests the institutional capacity of the
entity charged with the responsibility.

Program accreditation may achieve some of the same ends while avoiding major conflicts, but often it
creates much more work and is less effective at promoting quality. Institutional issues, such as whether
“funding follows priorities” can be much more consequential for quality than reviews of the content of
programs. By emphasizing program accreditation countries often create a large and expensive system with
real but limited value. Program accreditation may be able to identify the programs that fall most egregiously
short of required standards, but they often lack the impact that comes with labeling a whole institution as
substandard. Institutional accreditations generally offer a better and more effective way to promote quality
and relevance. Thus, money spent by BAN-PT on program accreditation might have a more pronounced
impact if it were used for institutional accreditation or other purposes.

The government has progressed in strengthening its accreditation system. Higher Education Law 12/2012
regulated that all TEIs have to receive valid accreditation by 2015. New ministerial regulations are still under
debate on the specifics of establishing an independent accreditation body, which focuses on accrediting
study programs only. TEI accreditation will become BAN-PT’s only responsibility, and the government
should consider creating a separate accreditation system for non-university TEIs.

This move in the direction of institutional accreditation could potentially advance an important goal for
Indonesia TE: to use “generic” and cross-cutting measures of quality and relevance that gauge institutional
performance. This would balance and partially replace program accreditation, which by nature is concerned
with the adequacy of the given content of a given program.




                                                                                                                        Chapter 4   37
                                         Broadening the Deﬁnition of Quality and Relevance while Raising these across the System
     Institutional accreditation is often built around key generic and cross-cutting issues such as:

             Has the TEI defined its educational mandate and its target population?
             Does the TEI allocate resources in a way that supports its stated goals?
             Does the TEI measure student progress toward degree and labor market success?
             Does the TEI have a system in place to identify and redress obstacles to good performance?
             Is there evidence that the TEI takes systematic actions to improve quality?
             How do the TEI’s graduation rate and time-to-degree measures compare to other TEIs’ in a valid peer
               group?

     Such a focus on the value and purpose of institutional mandates might be useful for more than guiding the
     creation of new (mostly non-university) programs. It could also serve to guide other improvements, such as
     the potential consolidation of private universities, where warranted and desirable. It could also encourage
     the development of “niche” and liberal arts style universities. All of these actions would contribute to a
     greater diversity in the definition of quality and relevance. They would diminish the prevalence of a single
     model under which all TEIs conduct research and aspire to be “world class.”

     Building a quality assurance system around these types of issues would allow the government to use a
     single process to promote quality across a set of TEIs with very diverse goals and purposes. It stands to
     greatly reduce the work load—be doing less program-by-program review of content—while creating more
     and better information for students and TEI leaders.

     Policy Direction Three:


         “Fitness-for-purpose”—a TEI’s ability to respond to the needs of its students—should strongly
         complement or replace academic rigor as the main definition of quality in TE. Quality and
         relevance should be promoted in a wider range of disciplines and subjects aimed at the ability
         levels and aspirations of the typical high school graduate, not the most academically gifted one.
         Community colleges, short degree programs, and studies related to graduates’ near-term success
         in job markets should get preference for government financing and other policies that facilitate
         their creation.


     Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
         Eliminate D1 and D3 degrees to strengthen the value of D2 degrees and distinguish them from
            certificate-based technical education.
         Consider the creation of an accreditation system separate from BAN-PT for the non-university TE
            system.




38   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Box 3. Defining Quality and Relevance as “Value”: The US’s Proposed Aid-linked College
       Ranking System
The effectiveness of US Federal financial aid was hampered by perennial difficulties stemming from poor
quality schools. A small group of schools accounted had the highest dropout rates, worst employment
outcomes, and highest default rates among graduate borrowers from federal student loan programs.
Rather than attempt to discern the individual quality and relevance of each program, the US Department
of Education has proposed a ranking system to identify “value.”

The system measures each school against its peer group on the key performance indicators below. More
importantly, it ties continued access to federal financial aid programs—lifeblood for all TEIs in the US—to
acceptable performance levels. The ranking system has met with ferocious resistance from the TEIs, who
in the past have never been held accountable under a system like this one.

New College Ratings before 2015.
Before the 2015 school year, the Department of Education will develop a new ratings system to help
students compare the value offered by colleges and encourage colleges to improve. These ratings will
compare colleges with similar missions and identify colleges that do the most to help students from
disadvantaged backgrounds as well as colleges that are improving their performance. The results will be
published on the College Scorecard. The Department will develop these ratings through public hearings
around the country to gather the input of students and parents, state leaders, college presidents, and
others with ideas on how to publish excellent ratings that put a fundamental premium on measuring
value and ensure that access for those with economic or other disadvantages are encouraged, not
discouraged. The ratings will be based upon such measures as:

     Access, such as percentage of students receiving Pell grants;
     Affordability, such as average tuition, scholarships, and loan debt; and
     Outcomes, such as graduation and transfer rates, graduate earnings, and advanced degrees of
       college graduates.

Base Student Aid on College Value by 2018.
Over the next four years, the Department of Education will refine these measurements, while colleges
have an opportunity to improve their performance and ratings. The Administration will seek legislation
using this new rating system to transform the way federal aid is awarded to colleges once the ratings are
well developed. Students attending high-performing colleges could receive larger Pell Grants and more
affordable student loans.




                                                                                                                   Chapter 4   39
                                    Broadening the Deﬁnition of Quality and Relevance while Raising these across the System
40   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
                 In many countries, coverage and graduation rates are the cornerstone of TE policies. Importance lies in the commitment to help all those
                                                                               who want to further invest in their skills to do so well and cost-effectively.




Chapter 5
Institutional Autonomy is Needed for
Tertiary Education Institutions to Be
Responsive to Student Demands

Autonomy is a fundamental component of the both the COREHEG framework and the East Asia Human
Development flagship report. The value of autonomy is that—when conceded in tandem with proper
incentives and in a competitive environment—it facilitates continuous efforts by TEIs to meet the reasonable
demands and needs of students. When autonomy is low, student needs and demands often go unmet.

Students have the biggest stake in the investment in their own human capital. While they can never be
perfect judges of their future wellbeing, they are arguably the best judges of it. They therefore mostly
seek programs, degrees and education that is best for them, especially when they have good information.
The most successful policy environments create the incentives for TEI to monitor what students seek,
and, within reasonable limits, respond by providing it. When this system is properly structured, the most
effective TEI grow in enrollment, resources, and reputation while the least effective are shunned by students.
Governments then can play a “stewardship” role for the system as a whole and are not required to engage in
time consuming and ineffective micro-management of TEIs.

The COREHEG and East Asia HD Flagship frameworks both recommend expanding TEI autonomy in exchange
for accountability and as a means for increasing the efficiency of both TEIs and the TE system as a whole. The
latter outlines multiple disconnects that could be corrected if TEIs were empowered to make appropriate
strategic decisions and adjustments for themselves, and strongly recommends the “stewardship” role for
governments.




                                                                                                                                             41
     In recent years, the Indonesian primary and secondary education system has undergone several governance
     reforms intended to promote local (i.e., district and provincial) and community involvement in school
     decisions. Access to education has improved (especially for children from lower-income families) as
     control of schools has become less centralized. However, similar reforms have not occurred at the TE level;
     government control of the TE system is still rigidly centralized. The country’s 100 public TEIs are managed
     by national ministries (primarily the MOEC and the Ministry of Religious Affairs, or MORA), which control
     their internal governance, staffing, academic programming, tuition, budget, and all other major functions
     and activities. There have been some attempts to expand the autonomy of TEIs (especially universities),
     but inconsistency in public policies has prevented these initiatives from having a major impact on de facto
     TEI governance. The lack of meaningful autonomy represents a significant challenge for Indonesian TEIs,
     which must work within domestic regulatory frameworks that constrain operational flexibility while seeking
     to make progress and compete on the international level. This section of the paper examines the extent
     to which pubic TEIs in Indonesia have autonomy with respect to organization, staffing, academics, and
     finances.8

     TEIs in Indonesia would benefit from greater freedom to make their own decisions in at least four areas:
          How they are organized;
          How they are staffed;
          What they teach and how they teach it;
          How they use resources.


     Organizational Autonomy
     Indonesian TEIs can be grouped into three broad categories based on different governing mechanisms:
     public TEIs, private TEIs, and autonomous state-owned legal universities (PTN-BHs/BHMNs). Public TEIs’ by-
     laws, which govern all decision-making processes and academic and administrative structures, are approved
     by decrees from the DGHE and signed by the Minister of Education and Culture. (In contrast, private TEIs’
     by-laws are approved by the Chief Executives of the private foundations that fund them, while PTN-BHs’
     by-laws are approved by government regulations produced by inter-Ministry decisions and signed by the
     President of Indonesia.) Once the by-laws for a public TEI have been approved via MOEC statute, it has very
     little latitude to make decisions or structural changes. All proposed modifications to the by-laws require
     MOEC re-approval.

     Moreover, the MOEC has a great deal of control over public TEIs’ institutional leadership and management
     teams. Following Government Regulation 66/2010, public TEIs are governed by four major entities.

          The Rector (or Director or Chairperson), as the chief executive of a TEI, is responsible for the
            overall management of the institution. The person in this position is usually supported by three or
            four deputies.
          The Senate oversees the management of academic affairs. It is the main determinant in the
            governance process and is chaired by the Rector.
          The Oversight Unit oversees the management of non-academic affairs (with an emphasis on
            financial affairs).
          The Advisory Board advises TEI management on non-academic matter.

     The Senate is responsible for identifying and screening Rector/Director/Chairperson candidates, but
     the Minister of Education and Culture controls 35 percent of the voting rights for determining who will
     ultimately fill the Rector/Director/Chairperson position. This control becomes especially relevant when the
     Minister has a political interest in the outcome of the election. Even once the Rector/Director/Chairperson
     8    This chapter draws heavily upon the research and insights of Moeliodihardjo and Basaruddin (2013). Their “Autonomy and
         governance in higher education” provides a wealth of valuable information about TEI autonomy in Indonesia.




42   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
has been elected, he or she reports to the Minister and is subject to dismissal by the Minister. Although it
should be noted that the Minister has never actually dismissed a Rector/Director/Chairperson, it is clear that
the Minister wields tremendous power over the selection and work of the people in this position within
public TEIs.

The Senate is, in theory, the governing entity with the most power. However, because it is chaired by a TEI’s
Rector/Director/Chairperson (who is so closely influenced by the Minister of the MOEC), it has a limited
ability to make independent decisions on behalf of the institution. Furthermore, governance bodies like
the Oversight Unit and the Advisory Board (and even the Boards of Trustees at PTN-BHs) do not have nearly
enough external representation to ensure that TEIs are accountable to stakeholders and the public.

Because of these limitations on organizational autonomy, it is virtually impossible for public TEIs to make
appropriate strategic decisions for themselves. If executive leaders and bodies like Senates were empowered
to control university affairs to a greater extent, they would be able to create policies and administrative
structures that were more conducive to institutional progress.

Such policies might allow them, for example, to quickly respond to new demands emerging study areas in
fast-moving fields such as ICT. Or they might allow an institution to set institutional goals for quality that
could be backed up by alignment of other institutional resources. The ability of Indonesian TEIs to match
the agility of their peers in other parts of the world is directly affected by their ability to govern themselves.

Stafﬁng Autonomy
Public TEIs in Indonesia have very little latitude in making staffing decisions. All teaching and administrative
staff are considered civil servants, so hiring and firing are handled by the State Civil Service Agency (BKN)
rather than by the TEIs themselves. Such centralized control of human resources leads to a rigidity that is
not at all conducive to academic freedom or institutional autonomy. For example, newly-recruited teachers
are granted lifetime tenure after a maximum of two years at a TEI and face long, bureaucratic processes
if they wish to move from one TEI to another. (Within this context, it is worth noting that MOEC Decree
84/2013 demonstrates the government’s intention to impose stricter control over all TEI recruitment
processes. However, at the same time, the Indonesian parliament is now debating a bill that would give
TEIs more control over lecturer recruitment by hiring them to contracts that allow for more mobility.) Staff
appointments tend to be based more on seniority and loyalty than on merit, and promotions generally
occur automatically after employees have fulfilled specific administrative requirements. Termination is
extremely rare, even for staff members whose performance is poor. In fact, TEI leaders do not even have full
authority to adjust salaries and incentives in response to employees’ performance. Instead, remuneration
(like promotion) follows civil service regulations and is based largely on administrative criteria.

Any fully-functional TEI must have the ability to recruit and hire the faculty and staff members that it desires.
Successful TEIs around the world are empowered to pay salaries commensurate with employees’ abilities,
dismiss underperforming employees, etc. Indonesia’s civil service approach to TEI employment diminishes
the quality of teaching and encourages staff members to be more reactive than proactive. Professors and
researchers under the civil service system engage in less creative projects and activities and take fewer of
the risks that tend to correlate with innovation and progress. Until Indonesian TEIs are allowed to hire the
best available person for each position, Indonesian TE students will experience lower-quality educational
experiences.

It is hard to overstate the negative effects of the lack of autonomy in staffing decisions. Indonesians who
work as lecturers and instructors routinely talk of their frustration with a system that treats the excellent
and the very mediocre in exactly the same way. They describe a system where the smartest path forward is
to take one’s paycheck with as little effort as possible to help students, or where the effort stems from the
instructors personal dedication. This stands in stark contrast to many systems worldwide in which professors
and instructors face clear rewards and disincentives for performance, and their behavior is significantly
influenced by these.




                                                                                                                  Chapter 5     43
                                                                                Institutional Autonomy is Needed for Tertiary
                                                               Education Institutions to Be Responsive to Student Demands
     Academic Autonomy
     Public TEIs have very limited autonomy with respect to academics. By setting TEIs’ budgets and detailing
     appropriate activities and indicators, the MOEC ensures that there is close alignment between TEIs’
     individual strategies and its own strategy. It regulates the programs that TEIs may offer, the durations of
     these programs, standards for degrees, etc. Indeed, TEIs cannot offer new degree programs or discontinue
     old ones without the MOEC’s permission, and the process for obtaining approval is long and complex
     enough that it discourages many TEIs from trying to expand their academic offerings. Furthermore, despite
     numerous reports of irregularities, the DGHE rarely uses its power to close problematic programs.

     However, TEIs do have some academic autonomy. For instance, they are entitled to set their own curricula,
     which they do in consultations with various non-governmental academic and professional organizations.
     More significantly, they have complete control over the decision to admit or reject individual applicants
     and the number of applicants to admit to each degree program in a given year. To be sure, though, the
     government sets some admissions standards. TEI entrants must hold high school diplomas, and the Minister
     of Education and Culture has recently mandated that at least 50 percent of new students be admitted under
     the National Admission Scheme. New laws also require that specific percentages of entrant classes come
     from underprivileged backgrounds and less developed regions of the country.

     Fundamentally, then, although the government exercises a fair amount of control over some aspects of TEI
     academics, it also offers individual institutions some meaningful powers. Still, Indonesian TEIs that inspire to
     compete with their counterparts in other parts of the world need to have more control over their academic
     programming so that they can respond to labor market trends by offering students more relevant training.
     Public TEIs need to be allowed to open and close degree programs as they see fit to avoid stagnation and
     promote the development of critical skills for the country’s future.


     Financial Autonomy
     In 2002, Indonesia made a strong, clear commitment to education by passing a constitutional amendment
     mandating that at least 20 percent of the total government budget be allocated to education. As shown
     in Exhibit 5.1, the government has succeeded in meeting the demands of this “20 percent rule” since 2009.

     Exhibit 14. Education Expenditures in Indonesia
                           Total Education
                                                    TE Expenditure (% of Total       TE Expenditure (% of Gov.
        Year                 Expenditure
                                                     Education Expenditure)                  Budget)
                          (% of Gov. Budget)
        2007                       18.8%                        4.9%                             0.92%
        2008                       15.6%                        8.5%                             1.33%
        2009                       22.2%                       10.7%                             2.38%
        2010                       21.6%                       12.1%                             2.61%
        2011                       20.6%                       13.4%                             2.76%
     Source: MOF, Indonesia

     However, although Indonesia’s education spending is relatively high compared to the country’s budget, it
     is relatively low compared to its GDP (see Exhibit 16). This suggests that Indonesia’s funding for education is
     far lower in an absolute sense than it might initially appear, especially given the number of students in the
     country.




44   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Exhibit 15. Education Expenditure as a Percentage of Total Budget and GDP

                    Thailand                                                Norway
                  Indonesia                                                 Sweden
                                                                          Argentina
                    Vietnam                                             Ntherlands
                    Malaysia                                                  France
                                                                           Malaysia
                       Brazil                                                   Brazil
        Lower-Middle Income                                                 Vietnam
                     Norway                                                  Mexico
                                                                   Republic of korea
                 Philippines                                              Colombia
                  Argentina                                                Germany  y
                     Sweden                                                     Chile
                                                                               Japan
                         Lao                                               Thailand
                Netherlands                                               Indonesia
                                                                                  Lao
                      France                                             Singapore
                   Germany                                                      India
                  Singapore                                             Philippines
                                                                         Cambodia
                                0      5       10   15   20   25                         0     2       4        6       8
                       Share of total Government Expenditure                             Percentage of GDP

Source: World Bank Public Expenditure Review

The bulk of the financing available to public TEIs comes from government transfers (slightly over 60 percent)
and tuition revenue collected from students (slightly under 40 percent). Private TEIs are not required to
report much specific financial information to the government, but it is believed that most of their money
comes from tuition and the support of private foundations. The central government does not provide a
great deal of funding to private TEIs, although it does cover the salaries of professors with civil servant
employment states and provides some financial incentives for certified lecturers.

Public TEIs have very little financial autonomy, with all financial decisions overseen by the DGHE and the
State Auditor. All government funding (for both public and private TEIs) is rigidly pre-allocated into an
annual line-item budget determined by the MOEC. TEIs are not permitted to make adjustments to these
budgets, and their short-term nature makes funding long-term programs much more difficult (regardless of
the programs’ performance).

Moreover, whereas funding for most levels of Indonesian public education comes from multiple levels of the
government, universities and other TEIs receive virtually all of their public money from the central (national)
government (see Exhibit 5.3). As such, almost all of the public financing that TEIs receive is subject to the
strictest regulation and control; they do not have the option of achieving more financial flexibility through
the use of district and regional funding streams.




                                                                                                                        Chapter 5     45
                                                                                      Institutional Autonomy is Needed for Tertiary
                                                                     Education Institutions to Be Responsive to Student Demands
     Exhibit 16. Public Spending by Level of Education, 2008-2009

                            100    3           3       1        1       4              1
                                                                                 6

                             80

                                                       75      75       75      75
                                   75          75
                  Percent


                             60


                                                                                       99      100
                             40
                                                                                                      Central
                                                                                41
                             20                                                                       District
                                   23         26       32      38       31
                                                                                                      Province
                              0
                                  2008        2009   2008     2009     2008    2009   2008    2009

                                        ECD          Basic Education    Senior Sec.    Universities
                                                                        Education

     Source: Ministry of Finance (via World Bank Public Expenditure Review)

     Public TEIs also lack the power to control their acquisition of money through other sources; per Law 17/2003,
     revenue generated by public TEIs is considered the property of the government and is deposited into
     the State treasury. Recently, attempts were made to afford TEIs more control over their own tuition rates.
     However, in 2013, MOEC began regulating tuition again in response to mounting public dissatisfaction
     about the cost of attending TEIs. Decree 55/2013 and DGHE regulations now provide complex, detailed
     rules about tuition rates and collection. Once again, then, tuition is considered the property of the central
     government under Law 17/2003.

     When TEIs do receive access to their self-generated revenue eventually, it is allocated into the rigid line-
     item budget along with other government funding. TEIs are also prohibited from borrowing money and
     issuing bonds, so they have no way to obtain flexible funding that might be used to achieve a strategic
     vision different than that of the MOEC. A significant portion of government money remains unspent at the
     end of each fiscal year, partly as a result of the onerous, bureaucratic procurement process that university
     management must follow. By law, this unspent money must be returned to the State treasury.

     The lack of financial autonomy for public TEIs further restricts their ability to pursue relevant goals and
     improve the quality of education that they offer. Innovative programs and research are rarely supported
     by the government’s budget, and procedural obstacles limit the impact of the funding that they receive.
     If TEIs had the power to raise money and use it as their leaders saw fit, they would be in a much stronger
     position to experiment with new ideas, respond to labor market trends, and compete with TEIs in other
     countries. It should also be noted that, following the COREHEG framework, increased autonomy would be
     accompanied by increased accountability. At present, Indonesian TEIs are only financially accountable in
     the sense that they are required to follow government regulations and financial management practices.
     If TEIs were granted more financial autonomy, they would have to develop greater capacity to manage
     their resources and long-term plans to achieve their goals. Such improvements would lead to improved
     educational experiences and outcomes for TE students.

     Overall, then, public TEIs in Indonesia are essentially a part of the government bureaucracy. The only
     public TEIs with much real autonomy are the PTN-BHs. The country’s new Higher Education Law makes
     it possible for more public TEIs to become PTN-BHs, but this cannot happen without the approval of the
     MOEC. Unless the MOEC plans to grant PTN-BH status to all public TEIs, it must consider measures to expand
     their autonomy. Until it does so, the Indonesian TE system will face tremendous challenges as it tries to




46   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
offer relevant educations and compete with TE systems in other parts of the world. For this reason, Policy
Direction Four suggests that Indonesia “provide greater autonomy for institutions in the use of resources
and people.” Box 4 offers a detailed set of recommendations for bringing the country’s financing system
in line with international best practices. As a start, the Indonesian government would do well to consider
carefully the example offered by New Zealand’s TE Commission and transfer more money via block grants
that can be used at TEIs’ individual discretion to consider ways to maximize the flexibility of the proposed
unit cost fund system included in Law 12/2012. The operational details of this part of the law could either
add to or detract from the important freedom of institutions to use funds with reasonable discretion. More
generally, the Government should consider how it might advance the types of recommendations that
Singapore University Autonomy, Governance and Funding Steering Committee (UAGFSC) published as
goals for increasing autonomy with accountability (see Box 4).

Policy Direction Four:

   TEIs can only respond to student demand and need if they have the abilities and incentives to
   make key decisions for themselves. The most important among these decisions regards the
   autonomous but accountable use of resources. Providing greater autonomy for institutions is a
   necessary step to promoting the needed responsiveness within the TE system.


Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
    Expand the use of block grants
    Consider Singapore’s example of increased TEI autonomy (see Box 4 on page 48)


  Box 4. Goals for increasing autonomy with accountability

  Singapore released its preliminary report for publicly funded universities in January 2005 with four key
  recommendations that outlined the ideal relationship between the government and higher education.

       1. Give public universities greater flexibility in decisions related to internal governance, budget
          utilizations, tuition fees, and admission requirements in order to pursue their own independent
          strategies for maximum benefit to their stakeholders.
       2. Continue government support for the universities, but foster a greater sense of self-ownership
          and independence, which will allow for achieving excellence so that university stakeholders—
          council members, management, faculty, students, and alumni—are encouraged to have a more
          active role in shaping the future of the universities.
       3. Ensure that the universities’ missions continue to align with national strategy by making them
          accountable for using public funds. The appointment of council members by the ministry of
          education allows for such monitoring, in addition to a quality assurance framework and a policy
          and performance agreement between the ministry and the universities.
       4. While committed to being the principal source of funds, the government is providing incentives
          to universities to seek other sources by matching any funds raised privately. The government
          funding is on a fungible basis to allow universities greater autonomy to maximize value. At the
          same time, access to universities remains affordable and merit-based with various plans for the
          financially needy

  Source: Maroun, N., Samman, H., Moujaes, C. N., & Abouchakra, R. (2008). How to Succeed at Education Reform: The Case for Saudi
  Arabia and the Broader GCC Region. http://www.boozallen.com/media/file/How_to_Succeed_at_Education_Reform.pdf




                                                                                                                           Chapter 5     47
                                                                                         Institutional Autonomy is Needed for Tertiary
                                                                        Education Institutions to Be Responsive to Student Demands
48   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
     Policies that improve quality and relevance take time to develop and implement. The government is well served to move quickly to improve quality and
                              relevance to avoid a future drop in returns and a stalling of the efficiency and productivity gains associated with greater skills.




Chapter 6
Data and Information

The final point within the COREHEG framework is about giving students the information that they need
to make good decisions. Information has great value for aspiring students, and providing it is a key part of
helping their investments in themselves pay positive returns. At the same time, information is the lifeblood
of good policymaking. The Indonesian TE system involves millions of students and billions of US dollar
equivalents of resources; understanding it sufficiently well to make good policy requires time, effort, and
skill. When governments invest in information for policy, they too reap strong positive returns.

Obviously, readily-available data about TE outcomes and options are critical to the goals of both students
and policymakers. Poor information is among the key causes of disconnects described by the East Asia
Human Development flagship report (see Exhibit 18). Thus, high-quality data and information are essential
for the Indonesian TE system and all of its stakeholders. In any maturing TE system, policymakers, students,
and parents rely on such data and information to make sound choices for the future. However, Indonesia
currently lacks reliable basic information about most aspects of its TE system, from enrollment numbers to
dropout rates to graduate employment outcomes. Improving data and making information more accessible
are critical steps toward bolstering the system’s efficacy and efficiency.




                                                                                                                                   Chapter 6      49
                                                                                                                        Data and Information
     Exhibit 17. Conceptual Framework of Disconnects in TE

                                                                                                         employers




                                                                    poor information


                                                                                       Weak incentives
                                                                                                         companles as research users




                                                   Low capacity
                                                                                                         research Institutions

                                                                                                         others HEIs and training
                                                                                                         providers

                                                                                                         earlier education

             Higher education institution (HEIs)            Causes of disconnects                            Disconnected actors

     Source: World Bank, 2011

     Policy Direction Five for Indonesian TE is to “improve vastly the quality of information and data on the TE
     system and disseminate it (especially to aspiring students) to promote informed decision-making.” This
     recommendation might be followed in a number of ways. For instance, the government could seek to
     strengthen legal bases for the provision of information from TEIs. This would allow the MOEC and other
     ministries to verify institutional compliance with data-gathering regulations and then withhold the transfer
     of public funds as a penalty for non-compliance. Devising links between accurately-measured institutional
     characteristics and funding streams would also connect data with money.

     Most data about the Indonesian TE system are collected by the MOEC via its Statistics Department and
     DGHE or by the Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS) via its National Socioeconomic Survey (SUSENAS) and
     National Labor Force Survey (SAKERNAS). Unfortunately, data sets are frequently inconsistent across sources
     due to data collection and management methods.

     Because the Statistik Pendidikan and the DGHE are housed within the MOEC, they are publicly funded.
     However, data and information from the two departments are managed separately and come from different
     sources. Whereas the Statistik Pendidikan receives its data from provincial governments, the DGHE solicits
     periodic updates from TEIs. The response rate for the Statistik Pendidikan is below 20 percent, and it is
     unknown how many full-time staff members are responsible for managing and monitoring the department’s
     data collection process. The MOEC recognizes the inefficiency of this process and has made efforts to merge
     data collection responsibilities between the Statistik Pendidikan and the DGHE. However, these efforts were
     made five years ago, and the departments still have not successfully consolidated their data and findings.

     The BPS is also publicly funded, but it is managed by statisticians. Until 2001, it conducted the SUSENAS,
     which tracks a wide range of household socioeconomic information, and SAKERNAS, which deals specifically
     with labor force information, once per year. From 2002-2010, however, the surveys were conducted twice
     annually, and they have been conducted on a quarterly basis since 2011. Changes in the frequency with
     which the surveys are conducted have been accompanied by changes in their geographical coverage,
     sample size, level of representativeness, questions, and data weighting. SUSENAS and SAKERNAS data in
     this paper come largely from the 2012 February iteration of the survey, which was disseminated to a roughly
     representative sample of 71,000 households across the entire country.

     It should be noted that only about 100 public TEIs are supervised by the MOEC. Others fall under the authority
     of other ministries, especially the MORA. For all of the shortcomings associated data from the MOEC, other
     ministries are far weaker at collecting and processing information from TEIs. As such, MOEC currently
     supplies the best available TEI statistics and information. Furthermore, it has made multiple attempts to
     generate more accurate information through municipal- and district-level verification processes. However,
     staffing limitations, lack of expertise, and political constraints have prevented this potential remedy from
     improving the data situation in Indonesia.




50   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Understanding a TE system requires accurate information about a variety of factors. For example, it is important
to have thorough knowledge of students’ socioeconomic backgrounds, dropout rates, and progression and
time to degree. It is also important to know how many of each type of TEI exist, what degrees they offer, and
how many applicants and enrollees they have. Labor market data are also important to understand. These
include average salaries, historical demand trends, forecasts of future skill needs, and degree requirement
for specific jobs. A government should also keep careful track of education inputs, including the amounts
of public and private funding received by TEIs; the breakdown of TEI spending on salaries, infrastructure,
and other operating costs; lecturer and professor credentials; etc. Of course, education outputs—such as
research publications, intellectual and technical innovations, patents, and citations—are also important to
measure. This sort of information is essential to making sound policy decisions within any TE system.


  Box 5. Areas of improvements on data and information in Indonesia

   Student characteristics:
     o Enrollment numbers by student SES (total and annual)
     o Enrollment numbers by degree type
     o Enrollment numbers by institution type
     o Dropout rates (overall and by grade)
     o Number of applicants and aspirants
     o Average number of years to complete TE
   Labor market observation:
     o Degree types corresponding to skill levels in the labor market
     o Average salary for and returns to each type of degree
     o Historical patterns of labor market demand
     o Forecasts of future skill/talent shortages by job sector and type
   Education inputs:
     o Public funding and private investment in tertiary education by degree program and institution
        type
     o TEI spending by category (salary, infrastructure, etc.)
     o Credentials and quality within the TE teaching force
   Education outputs:
     o Research and development by discipline
     o Publications and citations by discipline
     o Patents by discipline


Because of the shortage of high-quality data and information, the analysis of labor market returns and
student characteristics in this paper relied heavily on information from the SUSENAS and SAKERNAS.
The MOEC has little information about students’ socioeconomic statuses and progression through the TE
system. The MOEC has been more successful in other areas. It tracks enrollment numbers and basic facts
about students’ educational attainment. It counts TEIs and categorizes them by type, records the number
of degree programs at each institutions, and analyzes the TE teaching force by degree holding. Still, the
government needs to facilitate more efficient internal communication among public data management
entities and commit more fully to enhancing the quality, scope, and accessibility of national information
systems.

TE data and information are useful in understanding the basic, broad characteristics of Indonesian TE, and
it has been featured throughout this paper. However, even these data sets must be improved if Indonesia’s
TE system is to mature. They do not always reflect the latest developments in the system, and they are
often difficult to relate to one another. To answer most critical TE questions, it is essential to have a four-
dimensional informational framework containing: (i) enrollment statistics, (ii) student characteristics, (iii)




                                                                                                         Chapter 6   51
                                                                                              Data and Information
     dropout and degree progression rates, and (iv) costs of study to students and families and how they pay.
     Future iterations of the SUSENAS and SAKERNAS would do well to investigate the family backgrounds of
     TE students, the amount of time it takes students to complete various TE degrees, the TE graduation rates
     for students of different backgrounds, the absorption of graduates into the labor market, etc. As this data
     becomes available, it should be supplemented with analyses and studies that shed light on the causes of
     drop out versus degree completion, labor market success, successful degree transfer, and different student
     and graduate experiences by socio-economic status and other characteristics.

     The experiences of other developing countries demonstrate that there are numerous benefits associated
     with strong data and information systems. The consolidation of information about TE (which, when
     disseminated transparently, helps to keep the general public informed about postsecondary educational
     options) and the expansion of TE systems are often complementary processes. Colombia, for example, has
     driven TE maturation partly through the successful management of data and information.

     Colombia’s 300 TEIs operate over 11,000 degree programs. The combination of sophisticated information
     systems run by government agencies and digital and print media produced by individual TEIs ensures
     that students have access to a wealth of information about the TE system and their options within it. The
     Colombian Ministry of National Education, which is main source of TE information within the country, began
     systematically gathering information from TEIs in 2002. This information was consolidated into four main
     information systems (see Exhibit 19) that are updated frequently and accessible through the Ministry’s
     website. Additional information (and other information systems) are available through different web
     portals. Although no system can ensure perfect data, the scope of Colombia’s information collection and
     dissemination system is an impressive model for other developing countries.

     Exhibit 18. Summarizing four main information subsystems on tertiary education in Colombia
      Information system                 Features
                                          Comprehensive; includes data on all TE programs and TEIs on
                                            Colombia’s Register of Qualified Programs
      The National System                 Collects and organizes information about institutions, programs,
      on Higher Education                   faculty and staff, students and their well-being, graduates,
      Information                           research, internationalization, infrastructure, finances, applicants’
                                            standardized test scores, tuition and fees, and financial aid and
                                            loans
                                          Tool for monitoring and analyzing TEI dropout rates
      The Higher Education
      Institutions Dropout                Features statistics about total enrollment and graduation rates.
      Prevention and Analysis
                                          Integrates information on student characteristics from other data
      System
                                            sources to increase depth and usefulness
                                          Focuses on information about TE graduates’ average earnings
                                            from 2001 to the present
      The Labor Market
      Observatory for Education           Tracks the percentage of degree holders (by type of degree,
                                            discipline, institution, and geographic location) active in the labor
                                            market
                                          Records program accreditation status

      The Higher Education                Allows TEIs to track and fulfill accreditation requirements
      Quality Assurance                   Shows updates on institutional characteristics and legal statuses
      Information system
                                          Provides accreditation information directly to prospective
                                            students
     Source: World Bank, 2012




52   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Many of the most pressing problems in Indonesian TE could be solved (or at least ameliorated) by a concerted
effort by the government to improve the quality and availability of relevant data and information. Students
would be able to make informed decisions about which type of TE they should pursue and understand
the financial aid systems and policies relevant to them. The MOEC would have a better understanding of
the costs and benefits of TE and the types of people employed by TEIs. Finally, TEIs would have empirical
bases for opening and closing degree programs in response to labor market demands. In recent years, for
example, many Indonesians have trained to become teachers because of the high salaries associated with
the profession. This has created a pronounced surfeit of teachers, which has forced many to work in lower-
paying jobs. However, because this information has not been disseminated widely or used to shape TEI
responses to the problem, demand for teacher training programs was at an all-time high in 2013. Collecting
better data and using it more effectively would improve such situations dramatically.

Policy Direction Five:


   Improve vastly the quality of information and data on the TE system and disseminate it (especially
   to aspiring students) to promote informed decision-making.


Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
    Strengthen the legal bases for information provision from TE institutions
    Verify compliance and withhold transfer of public funds for non-compliance
    Devise linkages of funding to accurately-valued institutional characteristics




                                                                                                      Chapter 6   53
                                                                                           Data and Information
     Annex
     Policy Directions and Potential Concrete Next Steps


     Finding One: Increased high school graduation rates are driving increased demand for TE. This trend will
     continue for years to come and define the type of TE most needed.

     Policy Direction One: Government policy should facilitate further expansion of the TE sector while
     improving quality and relevance at every level. Policies should not just expand enrollment, but should create
     conditions that promote a greater range of high quality providers, degree options, and affordability levels.

     Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
         Establish a target share of the age cohort enrolled with sub-targets for universities and non-
            universities according to capacity.
         Conduct a geographic analysis of non-university options to guide the creation of new community
            colleges.
         Conduct a labor market analysis of trends toward increased formal employment among new labor
            market entrants; promote programs related to these occupations.

     Finding Two: Students from families in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution represent only 10
     percent of TE enrollment.

     Policy Direction Two: The government should adopt a comprehensive financial aid policy that supports
     its goals for equity (i.e., increasing the enrollment and graduation rates of students from disadvantaged
     backgrounds). The new system should offer assistance to all financially needy TE students and provide the
     basis for increasing enrollment among students from the bottom two income quintiles.

     Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
         Create a system to assess financial need and examine options for reliably establishing family income.
         Move from fixed budget for scholarships to fixed share of tertiary education funding for student
            assistance.
         Replace the financing of professors at private TEIs with portable financial assistance to students.

     Finding Three: Quality and relevance need to increase throughout the system, but definition and
     understanding of these terms must change and broaden as this happens.

     Policy Direction Three: “Fitness-for-purpose”—a TEI’s ability to respond to the needs of its students—
     should strongly complement or replace academic rigor as the main definition of quality in TE. Quality and
     relevance should be promoted in a wider range of disciplines and subjects aimed at the ability levels and
     aspirations of the typical high school graduate, not the most academically gifted one. Community colleges,
     short degree programs, and studies related to graduates’ near-term success in job markets should get
     preference for government financing and other policies that facilitate their creation.




54   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
    Eliminate D1 and D3 degrees to strengthen the value of D2 degrees and distinguish them from
       certificate-based technical education.
    Consider the creation of an accreditation system separate from BAN-PT for the non-university
       tertiary education system.

Finding Four: Greater autonomy should be provided throughout the financing and regulatory framework.

Policy Direction Four: TEIs can only respond to student demand and need if they have the abilities and
incentives to make key decisions for themselves. The most important among these decisions regards the
autonomous but accountable use of resources. Providing greater autonomy for institutions is a necessary
step to promoting the needed responsiveness within the TE system.

Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
    Expand the use of block grants.
    Consider New Zealand’s example of decentralized TE regulation (see Box 4 on page 48).

Finding Five: Students and policy-makers lack information about the TE system.

Policy Direction Five: Improve vastly the quality of information and data on the TE system and disseminate
it (especially to aspiring students) to promote informed decision-making.

Potential Concrete Steps for Policy:
    Strengthen the legal bases for information provision from tertiary education institutions.
    Verify compliance and withhold transfer of public funds for non-compliance.
    Devise linkages of funding to accurately-valued institutional characteristics.




                                                                                                    Annex
                                                                                                             55
     References

     Ali, M., Kos, J., Lietz, P., Nugroho, D. F., Zainu, A., & Emilia, E. (2011). Quality of Education in Madrasah Main
                   Study. Ministry of Religious Affairs. Australian Council for Educational Research. Indonesian
                   University of Education.
     Al-Samarrai, S., Arlianti, R., Chang, M.C., De Ree, J., Iskandar, S., Ragatz, A., Shaeffer, S., & Stevenson, R. (2013).
                   Republic of Indonesia Teacher Reform in Indonesia: The Role of Politics and Evidence-Based Policy
                   Making. East Asia and Pacific. World Bank, Washington DC.
     Boothby, D., & Drewes, T. (2010). The Payoff : Returns to University, College and Trades Education in Canada,
                   1980 to 2005. C.D. Howe Institute. E-brief. August 24, 2010.
     Maroun, N., Samman, H., Moujaes, C. N., & Abouchakra, R. (2008). How to Succeed at Education Reform: The
                   Case for Saudi Arabia and the Broader GCC Region. http://www.boozallen.com/media/file/How_
                   to_Succeed_at_Education_Reform.pdf
     Carneiro, P., Lokshin, M., Ridao-Cano, C., & Umapathi. N. (2011). Average and Marginal Returns to Upper
                   Secondary Schooling in Indonesia. The World Bank Development Research Group & East Asia
                   Pacific Region Social Protection Unit. World Bank, Washington DC.
     Card, D. (1993). Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return to Schooling. NBER
                   Working Paper No. 4483.
     Cerdan-Infantes, P. (2013). Is the higher education system responding to the needs of the labor market in
                   Indonesia? World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
     Chen, D. (2009). Vocational Schooling, Labor Market Outcomes, and College Entry. The World Bank East Asia
                   and Pacific Region Human Development Sector Department. World Bank, Washington DC.
     Collins, K., & James, D. (2005). Carrots and Sticks: The Effect of Recent Spending and Tax Changes on the Incentive
                   to Attend University. Commentary No. 220, C.D. Howe Institute: Toronto.
     Dasgupta, B., Narayan, A., & Skoufias, E. (2009). Measuring the Quality of Education and Health Services
                   The Use of Perception Data from Indonesia. The World Bank Poverty Reduction and Economic
                   Management Network Poverty Reduction Group. World Bank, Washington DC.
     del Granado, F. J. A., Fengler, W., Ragatz, A., & Yavuz, E. (2007). Investing in Indonesia’s Education: Allocation,
                   Equity, and Efficiency of Public Expenditures. The World Bank Pover Reduction and Economic
                   Management And Human Development of the East Asia and Pacific Region. World Bank,
                   Washington DC.
     Fahmi, M., Maulana, A., & Yusuf, A. A. (2013). Complementary Policies to Increase Poor People’s Access to Higher
                   Education: The Case of West Java, Indonesia. Working paper in Economics and Development
                   Studies. Department of Economics, Padjadjaran University, Indonesia.
     Gropello, E. D., Kruse, A., & Tandon, P. (2011). Skills for the Labor Market in Indonesia Trends in Demand, Gaps,
                   and Supply. World Bank, Washington DC.
     Hanushek, E. A., Schwerdt, G., Wiederhold, S. & Woessmann, L. (2013). Returns to Skills around the World:
                   Evidence from PIAAC. (Discussion Paper No. 7850). Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit
                   Institute for the Study of Labor.
     Jamshidi, L., Arasteh, H., Naveh, E. A., Zeinabadi, H., Rasmussen, P. D. (2012). Developmental patterns of
                   privatization in higher education: a comparative study. Higher Education64.6 (Dec 2012): 789-803.
     Joseph, M., & Joseph, B. (2000). Indonesian students’ perceptions of choice criteria in the selection of a tertiary
                   institution: strategic Implications. The International Journal of Educational Management 14/1
                   [2000] 40±44. MCB University Press.
     Kane, T, J. & Rouse, C. E. (1993). Labor Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year Colleges: Is a Credit a Credit and Do
                   Degrees Matter? NBER Working Paper No. 4268. Issued in January 1993




56   Tertiary Education in Indonesia:
     Directions for Policy
Moeliodihardjo, B.Y. (2013). Access and equity in higher education, EFO, The World Bank Office Jakarta
Moeliodihardjo, B.Y. and Basaruddin, T. (2013). Autonomy and governance in higher education, Education
              Sector ACDP
Myriad. (2013). Improving Access and Equity to Indonesian Higher Education for Candidates from Economically
              Disadvantaged Backgrouds.
OECD. (2014). Report on Progress in Quality Assurance in Higher Education. Report from the commission to
              the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
              Committee of the regions.
Porter, M. E. (1990). The Competitive Advantage of Nations. Free Press. ISBN 0-684-84147-9.
Skof, K. (2010). Trends in the Trades: Registered Apprenticeship Registrations, Completions and Certification,
              1991 to 2007. Education Matters: Insights on Education, Learning and Training in Canada, 6(6).
              Statistics Canada: Ottawa.
Smith, C. (2006). Licensing and accreditation in Indonesian higher education. (Working paper)
Susanti, D. (2011). Privatisation and marketisation of higher education in Indonesia: the challenge for equal
              access and academic values. Higher Education61.2 (Feb 2011): 209-218.
Wie, T. K. (2012). Indonesian universities in transition: catching up and opening up Hill. Hal. Bulletin of Indonesian
              economic studies 48.2 (Aug 2012): 229-251.
World Bank. (2009). Investing in Indonesia’s Education at the District Level an Analysis of Regional Public
              Expenditure and Financial Management. World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World Bank. (2009). The Value of Vocational Education High School Type and Labor Market Outcomes in
              Indonesia David Newhouse Daniel Suryadarma. The World Bank Human Development Network
              Social Protection and Labor Division. World Bank, Washington DC.
World Bank. (2010). Indonesia Jobs Report Towards Better Jobs and Security for All. World Bank, Washington
              DC.
World Bank. (2010). Indonesia rising. Policy priorities for 2010 and Beyond Climbing the Education Ladder. World
              Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World Bank. (2010). Education, Training and Labor Market Outcomes for Youth in Indonesia. Human
              Development Department East Asia and Pacific Region. World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World Bank. (2010). Indonesia: Higher Education Financing. Human Development East Asia and Pacific Region
              Document. World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World Bank. (2010). Transforming Indonesia’s Teaching Force Volume II: From Pre-service Training to Retirement:
               Producing and Maintaining a High-quality, Efficient, and Motivated Workforce. Human
               Development East Asia and Pacific Region. World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World Bank. (2011). Revitalizing Public Training Centers in Indonesia: Challenges and the Way Forward. Human
              Development Department East Asia and Pacific Region. World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World Bank. (2012). Implementation of School-Based Management in Indonesia. Human Development East
              and Asia Pacific Region. World Bank, Washington DC.
World Bank. (2012). Indonesia: Preparing Indonesian Youth for Transition Issues and Policy Agenda for Senior
              Secondary Education. Human Development East Asia and Pacific Region. World Bank, Jakarta,
              Indonesia.
World Bank. (2012). Indonesia: Broadening Lifelong Learning Opportunities towards an Integrated Education
              and Skills Development System in Indonesia. Human Development East Asia and Pacific Region.
              World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World Bank. (2013). Spending more or spending better: Improving education financing in Indonesia. East Asia
              and Pacific Region. World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World Bank. (2013). Teacher Reform in Indonesia: The Role of Politics and Evidence in Policy Making. (Conference
              Edition). World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia.




                                                                                                                         57
As parts of its support for the Indonesian Tertiary Education, DFAT (Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade, previously known as AusAID) through the World Bank
has funded studies to support the Directorate General for Higher Education’s
strategic planning and provide on-demand policy recommendations. The findings,
interpretations and conclusions expressed in this publication does not necessarily
reflect the views of the Government of Indonesia and the Government of Australia.

Human Development Sector
World Bank Office Jakarta
Indonesia Stock Exchange Building,
Tower 2, 12th Floor
Jl. Jenderal Sudirman Kav. 52 – 53
Phone: (021) 5299 3000,
Fax: (021) 5299 3111
