                                                             89319




Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans




Establishing and Operationalizing an
Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund
Guidance Note
May 2014




Prepared by Dilip Limaye, Jas Singh and Kathrin Hofer
                          Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund




Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms ....................................................................................................... 3
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... 4
1. Purpose of this Guidance Note.................................................................................................. 7
2. Why Energy Efficiency Revolving Funds? .............................................................................. 7
   Public Building EE Market in the Western Balkans .................................................................... 7
   Challenges and Barriers to Improving EE in Public Buildings .................................................... 8
   Financing Options for Scaling Up EE in Public Buildings .......................................................... 8
3. What are EE Revolving Funds? ............................................................................................. 10
4. Characteristics of EE Revolving Funds ................................................................................. 10
   Structure ..................................................................................................................................... 10
   Legal Framework ....................................................................................................................... 11
   Fund Management and Governance........................................................................................... 11
   Financing Windows or Products ................................................................................................ 15
   Other Services ............................................................................................................................ 18
   Eligibility Criteria ...................................................................................................................... 19
   How Does an EERF Address the Barriers? ................................................................................ 20
5. Summary of Key Features....................................................................................................... 20
6. Operationalizing an EE Revolving Fund ............................................................................... 22
7. Lessons Learned ....................................................................................................................... 24
   Prerequisite Market Conditions.................................................................................................. 24
   Fund Organization Structure and Governance ........................................................................... 24
   Sustainability .............................................................................................................................. 24
   Selecting the Fund Manager (and Related Compensation Structure and Incentives) ................ 24
8. Roadmap for establishing an EE Revolving fund ................................................................. 25
References ..................................................................................................................................... 26
Annex A. Case Study: The Bulgarian Energy Efficiency Fund ............................................... 27
Annex B. Case Study: Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund ........... 29
Annex C. Case Study: Romanian Energy Efficiency Fund ...................................................... 32
Annex D. Case Study: Salix Finance .......................................................................................... 34




Guidance Note                                                     Page 2                                                               May 2014
                Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund




Abbreviations and Acronyms
General
CG          credit guarantee
DH          district heating
DSM         demand-side management
ECA         Europe and Central Asia
ECS         Energy Community Secretariat
EE          energy efficiency
EEO         energy efficiency obligation
EERF        energy efficiency revolving fund
ESMAP       Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
ESCO        energy service company
ESA         energy service agreement
ESP         energy service provider
ESPC        energy savings performance contract
EU          European Union
FI          financial institution
GEF         Global Environment Fund
GFA         guarantee facility agreement
GHG         greenhouse gases
GWh         gigawatt-hour
HOA         homeowner association
IFC         International Finance Corporation
IFI         international finance institution
kgoe        kilograms of oil equivalent
kWh         kilowatt-hour
MWh         megawatt-hour
M&V         measurement and verification
MB          management board
MOF         Ministry of Finance
mtoe        million tons of oil equivalent
NEEAP       National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
NPV         net present value
PIU         project implementation unit
PPP         public-private partnership
RE          renewable energy
TA          technical assistance
tCO2e       tons of CO2 equivalent
TRV         thermostatic radiator valves

Regional
The Western Balkan region comprises Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia:
AB          Albania
BiH         Bosnia and Herzegovina
KOS         Kosovo
MK          FYR Macedonia
MNE         Montenegro
SER         Serbia


Guidance Note                               Page 3                                      May 2014
                    Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund




Executive Summary
An energy efficiency revolving fund (EERF) is a viable option for scaling up energy efficiency
(EE) financing in the public sector in the Western Balkans. Under a typical EERF targeting the
public sector, loans are provided to public agencies to cover the initial investment costs of EE
projects; some of the resulting savings are then used to repay the EERF until the original
investment is recovered, plus interest and service charges. The repayments can then be used to
finance additional projects, thereby allowing the capital to revolve creating a sustainable
financing mechanism.
Since both the borrower and lender are publicly owned, such funds may often offer lower-cost
financing with longer tenors (repayment periods) and less-stringent security requirements than
typical commercial loans. Because EE projects have positive financial rates of return, capturing
these cost savings and reusing them for new investments creates a more efficient use of public
funds than typical budget- or grant-funded approaches. This can help demonstrate the commercial
viability of EE investments and provide credit histories for public agencies, paving the way for
future commercial financing.
This guidance note is intended for government decision makers interested in establishing such EE
revolving funds.1 It defines the typical structure of such funds, conditions under which they can
be useful and effective, ways they can address some of the financing barriers, and implementation
options. The note also provides examples, case studies, and lessons learned, and a "road map" for
establishing such funds.
The typical structure of an EERF is illustrated in Figure ES1.
Figure ES1. Typical Structure of an EERF




An EERF is generally capitalized from a range of sources, such as concessional loan or grant
funds from donor agencies, government budget allocations, special tariffs or levies on electricity
sales, petroleum taxes, revenue bonds, , environmental charges or other sources. The fund then
provides financing to public agencies to finance EE investments in public sector buildings and
other facilities, such as street lighting. The agencies can then use the accrued energy cost savings
to repay the principal and interest on the debt. The installation and other services for project
implementation would generally be provided by independent energy service providers (ESPs).
The establishment of an EERF generally requires the development of a legal framework
comprising national legislation as well as supporting secondary legislation or regulations that will


1
  There are many different types of EE funds, some of which provide budget- or donor-supported grants and
incentives to EE projects or specific financial assistance to EE programs. However, this guidance note focuses
only on EE revolving funds that finance EE projects and are repaid from the energy savings to allow the fund to
revolve in a sustainable manner.

Guidance Note                                     Page 4                                             May 2014
                 Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

define the structure of the EERF. Options include creating the fund under an existing ministry,
energy agency, or development bank; creating a new legal entity (independent corporation or new
statutory agency); not-for-profit entity; or establishing a public-private partnership (PPP).
The fund structure should also define the management and governance. This includes oversight
arrangements; selection of the fund manager or management team; and monitoring, evaluation,
and reporting procedures.
An EERF should be designed to serve the needs of all public agencies. Therefore, in addition to
debt financing (i.e., loans) for EE projects, the EERF may have other financing options, or
“windows,” that may include energy service agreements, risk guarantees, grants, and budget
capture; this guidance note presents a summary of these options.
The EERF should also provide technical assistance to public agencies and ESPs, and may provide
procurement and implementation services that will transfer some of the implementation risk to
ESPs and facilitate the development of an energy services market. The guidance note summarizes
how an EERF can overcome the barriers to scaling up EE in the public sector and provides a step-
by-step approach to operationalizing such a fund.
The key lessons learned from international experience (including the four case studies presented
in Annexes A–D) are as follows:
   •   There are six main prerequisite conditions: (i) government commitment to improving EE
       in public facilities; (ii) cost-effective opportunities for improving EE; (iii) an existing
       demand for financing EE projects; (iv) lack of available financing for EE projects; (v)
       existence of a mechanism to repay the fund from the achieved savings; and (vi) energy
       payment discipline with cost-reflective, consumption-based billing among public end
       users.
   •   An EE revolving fund is best established as an independent organization governed by
       a government-appointed board of governors or board of trustees comprising both
       public sector and private sector members.
   •   When selecting a fund manager—which may be an individual or an organization but
       is called the “fund manager” in either case—options include an independent, newly
       created organization; an existing non-independent public agency; a national
       development bank; a utility; or another public enterprise.
   •   To be sustainable, the EERF may require one or more accessible funding sources to
       ensure recapitalization over time.
The major steps involved in establishing an EERF are summarized in Figure ES2.




Guidance Note                                Page 5                                      May 2014
                 Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

Figure ES2 – Major Steps in Establishing an EERF




Guidance Note                                Page 6                                      May 2014
                    Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



1. Purpose of this Guidance Note
In the Western Balkans, improving energy efficiency (EE) in buildings has been identified as a
key priority, because it can contribute to efficient economic growth while providing one of the
lowest-cost measures for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (World Bank 2013a). While
the potential for EE is quite large, the actual implementation has been far short of potential due to
a number of barriers, of which financing barriers are among the most important. In the public
sector, these barriers arise because internal funds are limited and the incomplete state of fiscal
decentralization has left many municipalities with a limited borrowing capacity, limited ability to
secure loans, and a lack of borrowing history. Also, public agencies have a number of restrictive
procedures, such as budgeting and procurement, and often lack the capacity to identify and
implement EE projects.
Although the countries of the Western Balkans are gradually improving relevant policy
frameworks, completing fiscal decentralization, and developing municipal credit markets, one
viable option identified for scaling up EE financing in the public sector in the near-term is the
establishment of an EE revolving fund in each country. Such funds can (i) finance public sector
EE projects without the typical collateral requirements and with longer tenors and (ii) allow
public agencies to repay loans from energy cost savings. This in turn will help demonstrate the
commercial viability of EE investments—while providing credit histories for public agencies and
paving the way for expanded commercial financing options in future years.
This guidance note is intended for government decision makers interested in establishing such EE
revolving funds.2 It defines the typical structure of such funds, conditions under which they can
be useful and effective, ways they can address some of the financing barriers, and implementation
options. The note also provides examples, case studies, and lessons learned, and a "road map" for
establishing such funds.


2. Why Energy Efficiency Revolving Funds?
Public Building EE Market in the Western Balkans
Buildings in the Western Balkans represent about half of the total energy consumed in the region,
and estimated energy savings in buildings range between 20 and 40 percent, with the highest
potential expected in the public sector (35–40 percent). The 2012 regional market assessment
commissioned by the Energy Community Secretariat (ECS) concluded that potential annual
energy savings amount to about €462 million or 7,940 GWh (ECS 2012). A substantial portion of
this amount is in the public sector: although the study did not estimate energy savings for the
entire public sector, it identified annual energy savings in schools and hospitals to be €35.4
million or 515.4 GWh (see Table 1).
Table 1 – Projected Energy Savings in Schools and Hospitals in the Western Balkans
                             Potential Energy Savings             Investment Needed         Average Payback
Country                     GWh/year       Million €/year              Million €                 Years
Albania                       53.7               5.1                     33.3                     6.5
Bosnia & Herzegovina          69.8               4.5                     32.4                     7.2
Kosovo                        79.3               4.3                     23.3                     5.4
FYR Macedonia                 36.8               3.2                     18.8                     5.3



2
  There are many different types of EE funds, some of which provide budget- or donor-supported grants and
incentives to EE projects or specific financial assistance to EE programs. However, this guidance note focuses
only on EE revolving funds that finance EE projects and are repaid from the energy savings to allow the fund to
revolve in a sustainable manner.

Guidance Note                                     Page 7                                             May 2014
                      Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

Montenegro*                       7.1                0.7                     5.6                         7.6
Serbia                           268.7               17.6                   114.8                        6.5
Total                            515.4               35.4                   226.2                        6.4
* Estimated.
Source: ECS (2012).

Challenges and Barriers to Improving EE in Public Buildings
As earlier efforts in this World Bank project (World Bank 2013a) have shown, implementation of
EE projects in public facilities in the Western Balkans faces many key challenges and barriers,
including:
       •   Limited number of creditworthy municipalities and borrowing capacity;
       •   Restrictive budgeting and procurement regulations;
       •   Low energy tariffs;
       •   Norm-based billing systems for heating;
       •   Relatively high interest rates charged by commercial banks;
       •   Small project sizes, leading to high project development and transaction costs;
       •   Lack of development of energy service providers and performance-based contracting; and
       •   Low existing comfort levels.

Financing Options for Scaling Up EE in Public Buildings
Global experience with financing of public sector EE projects demonstrates a number of potential
financing mechanisms, as illustrated in the “financing ladder” in Figure 1.
Figure 1 – Public EE Financing Options Ladder




Source: World Bank (2013a).

Table 2 presents a comparison of the four options circled in Figure 1.3




3
    A more detailed comparison of all of the options listed in Figure 1 appears in World Bank (2013a).

Guidance Note                                       Page 8                                               May 2014
                                                         Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



Table 2 – Comparison of Financing Options for Public Sector EE Projects
    Option                Description                       Market conditions                   Examples                         Pros                                   Cons
MOF               Budget financing to public     •   Underdeveloped public/ municipal        Belarus, FYR        Builds market capacity, relatively     Requires MOF to allocate substantial
financing with    agencies/municipalities,           credit markets                          Macedonia           easy to implement, can directly        budget for financing, sustainability
budget            with repayment through         •   Limited equity among public             (MSIP),             finance municipalities that are not    relies on MOF PIU, scale relies on
capture           reduced future budgetary           agencies                                Hungary,            able to borrow, could allow funds to   PIU and borrower capacities,
                  outlays                        •   High commercial bank lending rates      Kosovo,             revolve (if MOF reinvests reflows),    reducing future budget provisions can
                                                     and low tenors                          Lithuania           no repayment risks                     be complex
                                                 •   Availability of budgetary space for
                                                     MOF financing
Utility           Utility borrows and            •   Requires regulations for utility        Brazil, China,      Streamlined repayments, lower          Requires changes in utility
(on-bill)         finances EE investments            participation                           India, Mexico,      repayment risk if risk of utility      regulations and billing systems,
financing         in public clients; recovers    •   Strong financial position and           Sri Lanka,          disconnection, builds off of utility   creates potential for monopolistic
                  investments through                financial management of utilities       Tunisia, United     relationships and services, can be     behaviors, financing competes with
                  customers’ utility bills       •   Payment discipline among public         States, Vietnam     done on a sustainable and scalable     local banks, may be easier for power
                                                     clients, adequate energy pricing and                        basis                                  utilities than heating ones
                                                     billing practices
EE revolving      Independent, publicly-         •   Underdeveloped public/ municipal        Armenia,            Builds market capacity, can directly   Recovering operating costs in early
funds             owned entity provides              credit market                           Bulgaria, India,    finance municipalities that are not    years is difficult, using private fund
                  financing for EE to public     •   Access to public budget or IFI          FYR Macedonia       able to borrow, can better leverage    manager to oversee public funds may
                  clients; repayments based          loans/grants to capitalize fund         (proposed),         funds by pooling, greater potential    not be politically desirable, heavy
                  on estimated energy cost       •   Credible and proactive fund             Romania,            for bundling of projects and           reliance on good fund manager, need
                  savings                            manager can be recruited                Serbia              development of simple ESCOs,           mechanisms to help ensure public
                                                                                             (proposed),         centralized implementation and         client repayment, fund can act
                                                 •   Public agencies able to enter into
                                                                                             Uruguay             procurement can lower costs, can       monopolistic
                                                     multiyear obligations and retain
                                                                                                                 recover operating costs through
                                                     energy cost savings
                                                                                                                 fees
Public ESCO       Publicly owned company         •   Underdeveloped public/ municipal        Armenia, China,     Builds ESCO market capacity            Public ESCO can be monopolistic
                  that provides financing for        credit market                           Croatia, Poland,    through subcontracting, helps          and may be subject to public sector
                  EE projects with public        •   No local, active, capable ESCOs         Ukraine, United     address public procurement and         bureaucracies (procurement, staffing,
                  entities, with repayments      •   Rigid public procurement rules          States, Uruguay     financing issues, centralized          budgeting), appropriate exit strategy
                  based on energy cost               make ESCO hiring difficult                                  implementation and procurement         may be needed if private
                  savings                                                                                        can lower costs, greater potential     ESCO/ESPs enter the market, public
                                                 •   Credible public entity exists with
                                                                                                                 for bundling of projects and           ESCO requires access to long-term
                                                     demonstrated capacity to
                                                                                                                 development of simple ESCOs            financing
                                                     subcontract/manage subprojects
                                                                                                                 models
Note: ESCO = energy service company. MOF = Ministry of Finance. MSIP = Municipal Services Improvement Project (FYR Macedonia).
Source: Prepared by authors based on information from World Bank (2013a and 2014a).




Guidance Note                                                                                  Page 9                                                                            April 2014
                   Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


3. What are EE Revolving Funds?
A financing mechanism that has received increasing acceptance in both developed and
developing countries is the special-purpose “revolving” fund established by a national or state
government for financing EE projects. There is a wide range of such EE revolving funds (EERF).
In some countries, international financial institutions (IFIs) such as the World Bank or
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW) have established them to help finance public sector
projects. In other countries, national or local governments have established funds that provide
grants or subsidies to public EE projects. In the U.K., the city of London has established a £100
million revolving fund (with funding from European Regional Development Fund and London
Green Fund) to finance public and private sector EE projects.4 In the United States, electricity
regulators at the state level have used a tariff surcharge called the “public benefit charge” (PBC)
that is partly used to provide revolving funds (as well as grants and incentives) for EE projects
(Limaye 2010).
This guidance note does not address funds that provide budget- or donor-supported grants and
incentives, or other grant-like financial assistance, to EE projects. Rather, it addresses funds that
are designed to be sustainable through the recovery of principal and interest from the clients.
EERFs can be established by national, state, or local governments to provide long-term financing
for public sector EE investments while also creating centers of expertise. Under a typical EERF
targeting the public sector, the EERF provides loans to public agencies to cover the initial
investment costs of EE projects; some of the resulting energy savings are then used to repay the
EERF until the original investment, plus interest and any fees or service charges, is recovered.
The repayments can then be used to finance additional projects, thereby allowing the capital to
“revolve.” Since both the borrower and lender are publicly owned, such funds may often offer
lower-cost financing with longer tenors and less-stringent security requirements than commercial
loans. And because EE projects have positive financial rates of return, capturing these cost
savings and reusing them for new investments creates a more sustainable program than typical
budget- or grant-funded approaches.
Moreover, these revolving funds can help demonstrate the commercial feasibility and viability of
EE projects, provide a credit history for the public agencies borrowing the funds, and help build
capacity among service providers such as auditors, installers, construction management firms,
and energy service companies (ESCOs). Thus, the revolving fund can help lay the groundwork
for increased commercial financing as the market evolves.


4. Characteristics of EE Revolving Funds
Structure
The typical structure of a revolving fund is illustrated in Figure 2. An EERF is generally
capitalized using a range of different sources of financing, such concessional loan or grant funds
from donor agencies, government budget allocations, special tariffs or levies on electricity sales,
petroleum taxes, revenue bonds, , environmental charges, etc. The Fund then provides financing
to public agencies that is then used to finance investments in EE projects. The energy cost savings
accruing from the results of the projects can then be used by the public agency to repay the
principal and interest on the debt. The installation and other services for project implementation
would generally be provided by independent energy service providers (ESPs).5 The public agency
may pay the ESPs directly for the services provided.


4
 http://www.leef.co.uk.
5
 Energy service providers may include energy service companies (ESCOs), engineering firms, installers,
contactors, construction management firms, or other service providers.

Guidance Note                                   Page 10                                           April 2014
                    Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

Figure 2 - Typical Structure of an EE Revolving Fund




Source: Prepared by Authors based on World Bank (2013a and 2013b).

The Fund is replenished by the repayments from the public agencies of principal and interest on
the investment made. This allows for the funds to revolve. However, since the loan repayment
periods may be long (sometimes as long as 7 to 10 years), it may be necessary to plan on periodic
replenishments to operate after the initial capital has been deployed. EERFs may have equity
bases to help cover some of their start-up and initial operating costs, but need to eventually cover
their costs from public sector clients through principal and interest payments and fees.

Legal Framework
The establishment of an EERF will require legislative action. The provision for establishing a
fund may be included in the general energy law or an EE law. For example, the Macedonian
Energy Law authorizes the establishment of an EE fund that would provide financial support for
the public and private sectors to implement the obligations for EE improvement (Macedonia
2011). In Serbia the establishment of an EE fund is authorized in the Law on Energy Efficiency
(Serbia 2013).
However, such provisions do not always imply the creation of a new, independent institution that
would serve as an EERF administrator. Sometimes, such a provision only implies a line item in
the budget (as is the case in Serbia) or funding through an existing entity, such as existing
environmental funds (as is the case in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, which typically
provide grants instead of loans).
Consequently, if the government has decided to establish a new EERF, secondary legislation
should specify its legal organization and ownership. Options include creating the fund under an
existing ministry, energy agency, or development bank; creating a new legal entity (independent
corporation or new statutory agency); not-for-profit entity; or establishing a public-private
partnership (PPP).

Fund Management and Governance
The key elements of fund management and governance include the following:
    •    Oversight arrangements
    •    Choosing the fund manager
    •    Monitoring and evaluation
    •    Reporting




Guidance Note                                      Page 11                                  April 2014
                    Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


Oversight Arrangements
Although oversight arrangements vary, they typically include all relevant ministries that have
some authority over EE, such as those responsible for finance, construction, economy/energy,
environment, or urban/regional development. For the Bulgarian Energy Efficiency Fund, or
BEEF (see Annex A), oversight is by a management board (MB) appointed by the national
government, as further explained in Box 1. Among other examples discussed in the annexes to
this note:
    •     The Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency (R2E2) Fund in Armenia (Annex B) is
          governed by a government-appointed board of trustees and comprises representatives
          from the government, private sector, NGOs and academia;
    •     The Romanian Energy Efficiency Fund (Fondul Român pentru Eficienţa Energiei, or
          FREE) (Annex C) is governed by a government-appointed board of administration
          consisting of seven members, of whom five are private sector representatives; and
    •     Salix Finance in the U.K. (Annex D) has a three-person board, of whose members two are
          from the private sector.
Most of these governance arrangements are similar in terms of featuring representation from both
the public and private sectors.

  Box 1 – Composition of the BEEF Management Board
  The Management Board is the primary governance body responsible for overall strategic management in
  compliance with its stated objectives and principles of operations. The board consists of nine members:
    • A representative of the Ministry of Economy, Energy and Tourism, designated by the Minister of
        Economy, Energy and Tourism and acting as chairman;
    • A representative of the Ministry of Regional Development and Public Works, designated by the
        Minister;
    • A representative of the Ministry of Environment and Waters, designated by the Minister;
    • The Executive Director of the Sustainable Energy Development Agency;
    • Five representatives elected by the General Donors’ Assembly, as follows:
            A representative of non-government organizations, the activities of which are focused on reducing
            the risk of global climate changes;
            Two experts with higher economic education with experience in funding of projects in the area of
            power generation;
            An expert in the field of EE with higher engineering education;
            An expert in the field of renewable sources with higher engineering education;
  The MB sessions are convened every month, on formal invitation by the chairman.
  Source: http://www.bgeef.com/display.aspx?page=structure.


The main functions of the oversight bodies include setting the investment strategy and policy of
the fund, hiring the fund management team, establishing the overall criteria for selecting projects,
approving the annual business plans and budgets formulated by the management team, preparing
and submitting an annual financial report to the government, and assuring that the fund is
operating in compliance with national EE strategy and plans.

Choosing the Fund Manager
Reviews of international experience with EE funds (Limaye 2010; Limaye and Patankar 2011)
have identified a number of options for the choice of a fund manager, including an existing
government agency or development bank, a utility, or a special directorate related to municipal
services or building management. Alternatively, a new organization may be created to manage
the fund—an independent agency, a new statutory authority, a public corporation, or a PPP. Any


Guidance Note                                      Page 12                                           April 2014
                   Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

of these types of organizations could also hire a fund manager or fund management team under a
contract.
In Bulgaria, an independent fund management team was appointed (World Bank 2010a). This
team was competitively selected and included a consortium of three firms (Econoler
International, EnEffect Consult, and Elena Holding).6 In the case of the recently established
Armenia R2E2 Fund (World Bank 2012), the government appointed an executive director (ED)
and supporting financial and technical staff to manage the fund. The day-to-day activities of
FREE are managed by an ED appointed by the board of administration, supported by a small
permanent staff and some short-term experts (FREE, n.d.). In addition, the ED engaged a fund
manager with professional structured finance and EE expertise to manage the fund's investment
portfolio.
A public sector management team (such as in R2E2) is likely be less costly because of public
salary caps, but the team may not be fully independent from political influence, and may have
less incentive to perform than a private sector management team (such as in Bulgaria) for whom
the compensation can be based on performance and incentives and penalties can be based on
successes or failures. FREE chose a combination approach: although its main management team
is from the public sector, it engages a fund manager with incentives based on performance.
Whatever form the fund manager takes, the fund management team must have expertise in a
number of areas, including knowledge and understanding of EE technologies and options; skills
in market assessment and pipeline development; capabilities in credit analysis, financial analysis,
and project appraisal; and understanding of EE and energy services markets.

Monitoring and Evaluation
The progress of the fund needs to be monitored and evaluated continually. Monitoring is the
process of routinely gathering information on all aspects of the EERF implementation.
Monitoring measures the quality and effect of the implementation process and procedures. The
board and management team must supply periodic performance reports, including annual reports,
to the funding sources for any EERF (governments and/or donor agencies); the latter may define
specific performance indicators and reporting periods (see under “Reporting” below). The fund
management team therefore needs to establish a monitoring system that will collect the data
needed to assess these indicators. Box 2 presents the performance indicators established by
FREE, which were required to be reported to the World Bank on a quarterly basis.
Monitoring
The fund needs to track the technical and financial status of projects. The following are suggested
guidelines for doing so:
    •   The fund should employ a monitoring system that is (i) appropriate for the type and scale
        of the projects and (ii) able to track both technical progress and financial status.
    •   The monitoring system should take into account all project stages and components
        (planning, implementation, outcomes and impacts, replicability, visibility, and so forth).
    •   Monitoring should include field supervision as appropriate and periodic audits as agreed.
    •   Periodic progress reports should form the basis for monitoring.
    •   Use of electronic reporting techniques is desirable.
In addition, a project review committee can help to appraise the progress of the project and to
resolve any problems encountered.




6
 The Consortium includes an energy efficiency consultancy (Econoler International), a Foundation (Center for
Energy Efficiency EnEffect), and a non-banking financial institution (Elana Holding PLC).

Guidance Note                                   Page 13                                            April 2014
                     Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


 Box 2 – Romanian Energy Efficiency Fund: Performance Indicators
 Output Indicators
   •   Number of projects received by the Fund Manager (by size, type, and client type)
   •   Number of projects appraised by the Fund Manager (by size, type, and client type)
   •   Number of the loans approved (by size, client type, and sector)
   •   Deals under preparation/under appraisal/ submitted to the Investment Committee (IC)
   •   Total principal, interests and fees received during the quarter
   •   Number of projects with first disbursement, if in tranches
   •   Number of projects with second disbursement, in tranches
   •   Total quarterly operating expenses
   •   Non-performing loans (by size, repayment schedule, type, and reason for non-compliance with the
       terms of contract)
   •   Co-financing, including actual contributions made to the investment projects
   •   Technical assistance (TA) delivered in terms of amount of time spent and nature of activities
   •   TA provided per development phases of deals
   •   Relevant news indicating factors that could affect energy prices and thus attractiveness of energy
       savings instruments, and any changes in the business environment that could impact project demand.
 Process Indicators
   •   Average time required for deal preparation (by type of investment, client type, and sector)
   •   Average time elapsed from submission (preparation) to approval by the IC
   •   Average time elapsed from submission (preparation) to final board approval
   •   Average time elapsed from approval to conclusion of the loan contract
   •   Average time elapsed from approval to the first payment, if disbursed in tranches
   •   Number of projects rejected by the Board (by reason of rejection)
   •   Number of projects with delays more than 30–60 days in the repayment of the installments/interest rate/
       commission by, with reason for delay /clarified with the client by the Fund Manager.
 Source: FREE (n.d.).



Evaluation
Evaluation aims to determine whether project objectives set in terms of expected outputs, effects,
and impact are being or will be met. Evaluation is an important part of good governance and is
needed to test planning assumptions, monitor overall results, compare program performance,
fine-tune implementation processes, and incorporate lessons learned into improving the fund's
future operations. Combining quantitative data with qualitative information, evaluations are
performed at specific times—such as mid-term, interim special studies, at completion, or after
completion—in order to compare the fund’s achievements relative to expected performance.
(Most World Bank funded projects include a mid-term and a final evaluation). Often the
evaluation of the fund’s performance is conducted by an independent third party.
Measurement and Verification
An important element of both monitoring and evaluation is measurement and verification
(M&V), which is designed at the project level to:
   •     Develop baseline characteristics and typical operating conditions;
   •     Lay out a clear methodology for measuring energy savings that is acceptable to all
         parties; and
   •     Develop estimates of the actual energy savings, cost savings, and other performance
         characteristics of a project.
M&V is an important part of establishing the baseline as well as modifying it as needed if
operating conditions change. There are many methodologies and protocols for M&V, ranging
from simple methods such as “deemed savings,” where the savings are calculated using stipulated
formulas, to detailed metering or simulation modeling (World Bank 2010b). Because the

Guidance Note                                    Page 14                                            April 2014
                 Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

accuracy and precision of the M&V results is proportional to its cost, and it is desirable to use a
pragmatic approach that balances the M&V costs against the required quality of the savings
estimates. The most important aspect is that all parties agree to the level of detail of the M&V
plans. For public agency projects involving efficient lighting, deemed savings may be adequate.
However, in the Western Balkans, where a large portion of the energy use is for heating, simple
commissioning tests may be used to determine the amount of energy needed to heat one square
meter of floor space by one degree before and after the renovation.

Reporting
Reporting involves providing information to the appropriate organizations (in this case the
funding sources) on implementation progress so that timely decisions can be made, if needed, to
ensure progress is maintained according to schedule and performance goals. The collected data—
both quantitative and qualitative—are provided in periodic reports to assess the status and quality
of project activities. For example, R2E2 provides semiannual and annual progress reports to the
World Bank.
The fund manager is usually required to prepare periodic reports that cover:
   •   Financial reporting—a periodic summary (usually monthly) of transactions, receipts, and
       disbursements by type, cash flows, outstanding balances, and so forth over the reporting
       period;
   •   Technical reporting; and
   •   Annual reports—annual reporting of technical, financial, and administrative results to the
       Board of Directors or Trustees and to the major stakeholders including the funding
       sources.

Financing Windows or Products
The EERF should be designed to serve the needs of all public agencies. Some of these agencies
may not be creditworthy, or have no borrowing history; others may not have available borrowing
capacity; and others may not have the internal capacity to identify, design, and manage the
implementation of EE projects. To address some of these issues, the EERF may offer several
financing products and “windows,” such as the following:
   •   Debt financing window
   •   Energy services window
   •   Risk guarantee window
   •   Budget capture
   •   Grants window
   •   Forfeiting

Debt Financing Window
For creditworthy municipalities that can borrow and are able to identify, design, and implement
projects, the fund can offer debt financing. One of the advantages of an EERF is that—unlike
commercial financing, which may require an equity contribution from the borrower—the EERF
may provide up to 100 percent debt financing. Also, the fund may not require the type of
collateral typically requested by commercial borrowers because the public agencies may not be
legally able to pledge public assets. Instead, the EERF could implement other payment security
mechanisms, such as:
   •   Establishing an escrow account into which the public agency pays funds equal to the
       baseline energy bills. The EERF then pays the reduced energy bills from this escrow
       account and uses the remaining funds to repay the principal and interest on the invested
       funds. Thus, if the public agency does not keep up payments, the EERF has the option to
       not pay the energy bills, creating a risk of energy supply disruption;

Guidance Note                                Page 15                                     April 2014
                  Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

   •   Pledging future tax collections, revenues, or transfers that will be received from the
       Ministry of Finance (MOF) or other sources; and/or
   •   Obtaining guarantees from MOF to back up the loan repayment.
The tenor (repayment period) of the loan will be based on (i) the type of project and (ii) the
anticipated cash flows resulting from the energy cost savings; usually the repayment period will
be structured in such a way that the loan repayments are less than the energy cost savings. Often,
EERF tenors can be longer than typical commercial bank loans. In some cases, EERFs are used in
concert with bank loans, through co-financing schemes, to involve banking partners in the EE
business.

Energy Services Window
For municipalities that lack the capacity to borrow funds or to effectively implement EE projects,
an energy services agreement (ESA) can offer a full package of services to identify, finance,
implement, and monitor EE projects. The public agency is usually required to pay some or all of
its baseline energy bill into an EERF-established escrow account to cover the investment cost and
associated fees during the contract period. Figure 3 illustrates the basic concept of a public
agency’s cash flows under the ESA, with payments equal to its baseline energy bill during the
contract period.
Figure 3 - The Energy Services Agreement Model




       Source: Adapted by authors from World Bank (2013a).

For example, let us assume that the monthly energy bill for the public agency prior to the EE
project implementation is €10,000. The ESA will specify this as the baseline amount, and the
public agency will agree to pay this amount each month into an escrow account for the duration
of the ESA, which is assumed to be five years. The EERF will then make the EE project
investment (assumed in this example to be €150,000). This investment will reduce the energy
costs by 30 percent, to €7,000 per month. During the five-year ESA period, the agency will pay
into the escrow account (i) its monthly energy bill of €7,000 and (ii) the remaining €3,000 per
month, thus allowing the fund to recover its investment (plus interest and fees). Following the
five-year period, the agency will be able to retain its energy cost savings and its overall energy
bill will fall to the assumed €7,000.
In some cases, the contract duration is fixed; in other cases, the contract can be terminated after
an agreed number of payments have been made to the EERF—thereby offering a greater
incentive for the agency to save more energy. Either way, one of the main advantages of Energy
Services Window model is that the ESA payments generally do not count as public debt, allowing
public entities that are not allowed to borrow, or municipalities that do not have sufficient debt
capacity, to implement EE measures. In this way, the model also helps public agencies to use


Guidance Note                                    Page 16                                  April 2014
                    Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

their limited budget/debt space for higher-priority investments while still being able to implement
EE. In addition, the repayments to the EERF and energy payments are bundled to together,
providing some added leverage to the EERF to cut off the energy supply should the public agency
default on its ESA repayment obligations.

Risk Guarantee Window
The EERF may also use a risk-sharing mechanism by providing credit or risk guarantees to
commercial banks and other financial institutions (FIs) in order to leverage commercial financing
for EE projects. Risk-sharing programs are designed primarily to address the common perception
of lenders that EE projects are inherently more risky than traditional investments (a major
financing barrier), or to allow them to lend to marginally creditworthy clients with very attractive
EE investment opportunities. They provide commercial banks/FIs with a partial coverage of the
risk involved in extending loans for EE projects. The risk-sharing facility generally includes a
subordinated recovery guarantee7 and may also have a “first-loss reserve”8 that may be used to
absorb up to a specified amount of losses before the risk sharing occurs.
The Bulgaria EE Fund provides three types of guarantees: (i) a credit guarantee covering up to 80
percent of the credit value to secure loans for EE projects, with individual guarantee
commitments not to exceed Lev 800,000 (about $500,000); (ii) an uncollateralized guarantee to a
portfolio of receivables of energy service companies (ESCOs) for their energy performance
contracts (EPCs), covering the first 5 percent of the delayed payments of the portfolio covered;
and (iii) a residential portfolio guarantee covering the first 5 percent of defaults within the
portfolio of projects.9

Budget Capture
The budget capture option may be used when the public agency receives dedicated funds from the
MOF or another government agency to pay its energy bills. In such cases, after the EERF invests
in EE projects implemented by the public agency, the government (i) reduces its budgetary
outlays to that public agency by an amount equivalent to the amount of energy cost savings
(thereby “capturing” the savings) and (ii) redirects these funds to the EERF. This would require
that the government agrees to provide the same amount to the public agency for energy bill
payments in subsequent years.

Grants Window
If an independent, sustainable financing source is available, an EERF may also offer a grant
window. For example, if a government (through special taxes, levies, or surcharges, for example)
or a donor agency commits to funding the EERF for a given number of years, a portion of the
funding may be used for grants to public agencies to improve the economics of the EE project
from the public agency perspective.


7
  In a subordinated recovery guarantee, the guarantor ranks behind other lenders in the recovery of the
guarantee funds it pays out in case the borrower defaults on the loan. This allows lenders to offer better loan
terms, such as lower interest rates or longer tenors. A subordination provision may be useful, for example, when
interest rates are high due to higher perceived risk, or if a new technology with limited operational experience is
being deployed.
8
  In the event of a loan default, a first-loss reserve pays for all losses incurred until the maximum first-loss
reserve amount is exhausted. The lender incurs losses only if the total loan loss exceeds the first-loss amount.
By covering all or a large share of first losses and sizing the definition of first losses to be a reasonable
proportion of the loan portfolio (usually higher than the estimated default or loss rate), a first-loss reserve can
provide meaningful risk coverage to the lender, but with a low level of total guarantee liability relative to the
total size of the portfolio.
9
  The residential portfolio guarantee was not used. The available funds were committed to the ESCO portfolio
guarantees.

Guidance Note                                      Page 17                                              April 2014
                    Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

However, if a revolving fund is established to operate on a fully commercial basis, it is unlikely
that it will provide grant financing—except when such grant financing is available from another
source and can be combined with the loan financing provided by the revolving fund. If such funds
are made available, it should be made clear that these are limited; failing to do so may create false
expectations for more grants, which may undermine the fund’s long-term sustainability.

Forfeiting
A possible service that the EERF can provide or arrange is forfeiting, or the sale of receivables.
Forfeiting is useful in situations where an ESP is providing its own equity for project financing. It
is a form of transfer of future receivables from one party (the seller – an ESP) to another (the
buyer – a financial institution).10 An example of forfeiting is the Bulgarian ESCO Fund (BEF)
established under the under the Law for Special Investment Companies by the Bulgarian
company Enemona. This fund received a loan of €7 million from the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) to buy receivables under the energy saving contracts
signed by Enemona.11 The fund allows Enemona to use its capital for further development of
projects in both the industrial and public sectors including kindergartens, schools, hospitals, and
other municipal buildings.

Other Services

Technical Assistance
An important feature of successful EERFs is the technical assistance (TA) provided. The types of
TA may include the following:
     •   Program marketing to and capacity building of the target public agencies to address the
         information and knowledge gaps related to EE, build demand for financing, and improve
         the sustainability of energy savings. Examples of activities include program workshops
         and flyers, development of a program website, development of successful case studies for
         broader dissemination, market studies, advertising, and educational programs for schools
         and other organizations.
     •   Developing procedures that help public agencies engage ESPs under PPPs such as
         performance-based contracts; preparing performance-based bidding documents for
         procurement of various elements of project implementation services; and refining these
         bidding documents based on the implementation experience to provide standard
         documents for future use.
     •   Identifying way to bundle procurements by multiple public entities implementing similar
         projects, thus reducing transaction costs and equipment costs through bulk purchases.
         Under some financing arrangements, the EERF can even conduct the preliminary audit,
         procure the ESP, and monitor the project on behalf of the clients.
     •   Identification, assessment, and recommendation of changes, if needed, in rules for public
         accounting, budgeting, and procurement to facilitate the financing of EE projects and
         procurement of EE services. These may include policy development related to existing
         public procurement and budgeting rules for EE services, development of alternate
         financing models for EE in the public sector, and so forth.
     •   Carrying out capacity building for ESPs and other market actors to enhance their ability
         (i) to conduct energy audits and (ii) to screen, design, evaluate, appraise, finance,
         implement, and measure EE investments in the public sector.


10
   The original creditor (the ESP) cedes his claims to future revenues from the project and the new creditor (the
FI) gains the right to claim these future receivables from the debtor (the client). The ESP receives a discounted
one-time payment from the FI that then allows it to invest in new energy savings performance contract (ESPC)
projects.
11
   EBRD, Bulgarian ESCO Fund, http://www.ebrd.com/projects/psd/psd2007/38100.htm.

Guidance Note                                     Page 18                                              April 2014
                     Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

     •     Developing or adapting appropriate methodologies for M&V and providing M&V
           training to public agency staffs, facility managers and engineers, and private sector ESPs.
     •     Developing the terms and conditions of the ESAs with public agencies for the ESA
           option, including establishment of the baseline conditions and identification of the
           baseline changes that would require an adjustment of the fixed annual payments.
     •     Training in post-project operations and maintenance.

Procurement of Implementation Services
Under the ESA option, the EERF can engage private energy service providers to provide some
implementation services using simple performance-based contracts. This approach can help
transfer some of the project implementation risk to the private sector. It can also help build the
capacity of the ESPs and facilitate the development of an energy services market.
The EERF can use output-based procurement for project implementation services. Traditionally,
procurement of services such as auditing, installation, or commissioning is input-based, meaning
that the contracts and payments to the service providers are time- or delivery-based. Output-based
contracts, on the other hand, tie contracts and payments to performance and/or results (such as
improved equipment efficiency, energy savings, and cost savings). Such contracts require clear
definitions of the baseline, performance indicators, and M&V approaches.12

Eligibility Criteria
The eligibility criteria used to assess whether public agencies that express interest in the EERF
should proceed to the preliminary audit stage may include the following:
         A. For debt financing:
            o Creditworthiness of the public agency
            o Existence of consumption-based payments for heating
            o Good energy bill payment discipline
            o Existing comfort level of at least 50 percent13
            o Building in reasonably sound structural shape
            o No current or imminent plans for closure/privatization
            o Ability to retain cost savings to allow loan repayments14
            o Potential use of commercially available technologies
            o Minimum and maximum loan amounts
            o Proper project preparation and documentation
         B. For energy service agreements:
            o Availability of historical energy bill data
            o Consumption-based billing and good energy-bill payment discipline
            o Building in reasonably sound structural shape
            o No plans for closure or for major changes planned in building operations
            o Willingness and ability to sign ESA agreement spanning multiple years
            o Willingness to work with the fund’s payment security mechanism




12
   An excellent discussion of output-based procurement of energy services can be found in World Bank (2010c).
13
   The "comfort level" in a building is defined as the ratio of the actual energy consumed for providing heating
comfort to the amount of energy that would be needed to provide the desired or standard comfort level. If this
ratio is small, it is unlikely that the EE project that will be designed to provide the desired comfort level can
provide cost savings.
14
   Alternatively, existence of a payment security mechanism that will assure loan repayment.

Guidance Note                                     Page 19                                             April 2014
                     Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


How Does an EERF Address the Barriers?
An EERF can address some of the important barriers to scaling up EE in the public sector
mentioned previously. Table 3 provides a summary.
Table 3 - Addressing the Financing and Implementation Barriers
             Barrier                                     How Addressed
Limited number of creditworthy    Finance projects directly with creditworthy municipalities with
municipalities and borrowing      borrowing capacity and engage in ESAs with others
capacity
Restrictive budgeting and         Since the fund will most likely be considered a public entity, it
procurement regulations and       can enter into loan agreements or ESAs with public agencies
procedures                        without facing the restrictive regulations/procedures
Low energy tariffs                Provide longer tenor on loans and longer terms for the ESAs
                                  to allow public agencies to repay the loans from cost savings
Norm-based billing systems for    Install heat meters in the selected buildings and measure
heating                           consumption before and after implementation of the EE
                                  project
Relatively high interest rates    Provide lower interest rates than commercial banks and
charged by commercial banks       engage in ESAs
Small project sizes, leading to   Standardize agreements and procedures; aggregate similar
high project development and      projects across public agencies
transaction costs)
Lack of development of energy     Engage energy service providers in project implementation
service providers and             and develop their capacity for performance-based contracting
performance-based contracting
Low existing comfort levels       Work only with agencies that meet minimum comfort level
                                  standards; provide longer tenor loans and longer term ESAs
                                  to assure desired comfort levels and yet allow the public
                                  agencies to repay the loans or pay the ESA payments
Source: Prepared by authors.


5. Summary of Key Features
A summary of the key features of EERFs is provided in Table 4. For a more detailed explanation,
Annexes A through D provide four relevant case studies.




Guidance Note                                      Page 20                                            April 2014
                                                                   Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



Table 4 – Summary of Selected EE Revolving Funds
                                               Bulgarian Energy                                                                Romanian Energy
Characteristics                                 Efficiency Fund                        Armenia R2E2 Fund                        Efficiency Fund                         Salix Finance (U.K.)
Year Established                  2005                                          2006                                   2003                                    2004
Funding Sources                   World Bank, GEF, and governments of           World Bank                             GEF                                     U.K. Department of Energy and Climate
                                  Austria and Bulgaria                                                                                                         Change (DECC)
Fund Objectives                   Support the identification, development       Decrease GHG emissions by              Help energy users adopt modern          Improve public sector EE and reduce
                                  and financing of viable EE projects,          removing barriers to the               technologies for the efficient use of   GHG emissions
                                  resulting in substantial reduction of         implementation of EE investments in    energy
                                  GHGs                                          the public sector
Legal Basis                       Established under Energy Efficiency Act       Law on Energy Efficiency and           Government Emergency Ordinance          Established by the U.K. Department of
                                  of 2004                                       Renewable Energy                                                               Energy and Climate Change (DECC)
Legal Organization                Independent organization                      Independent NGO                        Independent organization                Independent, publicly funded company
Governance                        Management Board with 9 members (4            Board of Trustees - members             Board of Administration with 7         Board of Trustees
                                  government, 5 non-government)                 include government, private sector,    members (2 government, 5 non-
                                                                                NGOs and academia                      government)
Fund Management                   Private sector fund management team           Fund Director, Financial Manager,      Executive Director (ED) appointed       CEO appointed by the Board
                                  selected competitively                        Investment Coordinator, and TA         by Board; Fund Manager manages
                                                                                Coordinator                            investment portfolio to
Main Components                   Debt Financing Facility; Partial Credit       Loans, ESAs, and TA                    Debt financing and TA                   Provide interest-free capital through
                                  Guarantees; and TA                                                                                                           Recycling Fund and Energy Efficient
                                                                                                                                                               Loan Scheme
Typical Projects                  Rehabilitation of public buildings            Improvements in individual heating     Replacing old energy generation         Insulation
                                                                                systems                                equipment (boilers, CHP, hydro,
                                  EE in industrial processes                    Rehabilitation of public buildings     geothermal)                             LED lighting and controls
                                  EE Streetlighting                             EE improvement in homes and             Modernizing process industry           Building energy management systems
                                                                                buildings                              equipment and public lighting
                                  Improvements in heat distribution             Heat metering and regulating                                                   Heat recovery systems
                                  systems                                       equipment
                                  Off-grid renewable energy                     Cogeneration                                                                   Cogeneration
No. of Projects                   81 loans                                      14 ESAs                                20 loans                                7,400 loans
Loan/ESA Volume                   $16 million                                   $2.4 million                           $11.4 million                           £115 million
Lifetime Energy Savings           90,000 toe                                    32.3 GWh                               36,533 toe                              N/A
Lifetime GHG Reductions           900,000 tCO2e                                 7,906 tCO2e                            183,237 tCO2e                           2.5 million tCO2e
Note: tCO2e = metric tons of C02 equivalent. toe = tons of oil equivalent.
Source: Prepared by Authors.




Guidance Note                                                                                                Page 21                                                                       April 2014
                Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



6. Operationalizing an EE Revolving Fund
This section summarizes the major sequential steps involved in setting up and operating an
EERF. For each step the options are identified and, where appropriate, the preferred option is
identified based on international experience.
   •   Establish the legal framework for the fund. This may exist in prior legislation. If not,
       new legislation may need to be enacted. A key decision is to agree on whether to use an
       existing entity or establish a new one. The options include creating the fund within an
       existing ministry, energy agency, or development bank; creating a new legal entity
       (independent corporation, NGO, or new statutory agency); or establishing a PPP. Most
       important is a governance structure will incentivize EERF management to perform well
       while still providing a public service function.
   •   Develop reliable and sustainable funding sources. It is important that the EERF be
       capitalized with sufficient funds from the government, donor agencies, and/or other
       sources to initiate operations and fund a number of projects. The funding sources may
       also need to provide additional funding once the initial funds are deployed to ensure that
       the EERF can continue its operation over the long term.
   •   Define the fund objectives and target markets. An EERF cannot be expected to serve all
       the energy consuming sectors. The government needs to focus the initial activities on a
       few targeted markets. The public sector, particularly schools and hospitals, represents a
       good target market for the initial deployment of the fund, because these markets offer
       high EE potential, lack internal financial resources and/or access to commercial
       financing, and have very limited capacity to implement EE projects.
   •   Develop the governance structure. The governing body is generally a board of trustees
       (or administrating board) appointed by the government. The preferred approach is to
       include both government and private sector representatives on the board because the latter
       provide knowledge and experience while helping to prevent political capture of the
       EERF, which helps maintain a clear strategy and policy for the fund.
   •   Select and recruit the fund management. The governing board will define the fund
       management options (existing ministry staff, an independent fund management
       organization, government agency with a fund management consultant, etc.). The preferred
       option is to engage a professional fund management team (“fund manager”) using a
       competitive bidding process, because a private sector fund manager (i) brings financial
       structuring experience that may be very difficult to get from government officials, (ii) can
       be engaged using a performance-based contract that rewards success and penalizes
       failure, (iii) provides incentives for performance that can be a great motivator, and (iv)
       can be terminated and replaced if performance falls substantially short of expectations.
       However, a private sector fund manager is likely to result in a higher fee structure.
   •   Hire the staff. The fund manager will recruit qualified staff to the management team. It is
       important that the staff have relevant experience in areas such as EE project financing,
       energy services, investment management, credit and risk assessment, and loan
       disbursement and recovery. Some of the staff will therefore need to be recruited from the
       private sector. However, the management and staff must also be responsive to public
       sector needs and perspectives and the public-benefit role of the fund. For example, when
       selecting EE projects for implementation, the management team needs to avoid “cream
       skimming” (picking only the most economically attractive projects) and instead must
       cater to the needs of a wide range of public agencies and protect the public interest.
   •   Define the major financing products. A major focus of the fund will be on debt
       financing (i.e., loans) to public agencies. However, to serve all public agencies, some of


Guidance Note                               Page 22                                      April 2014
                  Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

         which may not be creditworthy or have borrowing capacity, the EERF should consider
         the ESA option as one of the major components. The fund may also consider, depending
         on the financial markets, the option of credit- or risk-guarantee products.
     •   Define TA and other service offerings. Another very important project component is TA,
         which is often critical to ensuring high quality deal flow and strong portfolios. For
         example, the fund may conduct procurement of equipment and services for a bundle of
         projects (centralized procurement) for a number of agencies to obtain better pricing for
         equipment and services and reduce administration and transaction costs.
     •   Develop and document eligibility criteria. As discussed in Section 3, the fund should
         develop and document the eligibility criteria for the various financing windows and
         products offered.
     •   Define the application procedures and prepare related forms. Based on the eligibility
         requirements and the major components, appropriate procedures and forms should be
         prepared. The EERF should also have an operations manual that lays out the principles
         and implementation rules governing the fund’s operations. It provides guidance to all the
         key participants involved in fund management, project implementation, and results
         monitoring, thereby providing a common understanding of all operational principles and
         practice for all stakeholders.
     •   Develop a marketing strategy and approach. This step involves identifying the public
         agencies for each of the fund components, along with eligibility criteria. Then a
         marketing strategy and approach should be developed for each target market. This may
         include collecting energy consumption data and assessing the creditworthiness and
         borrowing capacity of specific agencies, conducting walk-through audits, and so forth.
     •   Develop the project pipeline. Using the marketing strategy and approach, specific
         projects shall be identified and a project pipeline established.
     •   Subcontract to private ESPs to build their capacity. The fund manager should develop
         simple performance-based business models for engaging ESPs in the implementation
         process. Such models may include equipment leasing, supplier credits, one-year ESP
         contracts, and so forth.15 The fund should develop a plan to engage private sector energy
         service providers in the implementation process of the ESAs. In this effort, the fund
         should try to develop standardized audit templates, agreements, contracts, and M&V
         procedures; and also introduce performance-based contracts for energy services.
         Participation by the ESPs in project implementation will build their capacity for
         undertaking future energy services projects and contribute to the development of an
         energy services industry.
     •   Develop approaches for project aggregation to reduce transaction costs. EE projects
         generally have relatively high project development and transaction costs. In the public
         sector there may be examples of similar projects across a number of different public
         agencies (for example, street lighting projects). By aggregating such projects or at least
         standardizing them, the fund may be able to reduce transaction costs and improve project
         economics.
     •   Develop and document the monitoring, reporting, and evaluation procedures and
         approaches. As discussed in Section 3, these are important functions, and the fund
         management team must develop the monitoring system, define the data sources and
         databases to be developed, and specify the evaluation procedures and protocols.



15
  These ESP models are described in the Guidance Note on Energy Services Market Development (World Bank
2014c).

Guidance Note                                 Page 23                                        April 2014
                  Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


7. Lessons Learned
This section summarizes the major lessons from the assessment of EE revolving funds.

Prerequisite Market Conditions
The prerequisite market conditions for an EE revolving fund focusing on the public sector are:
    •   Government commitment to improving EE in public facilities;
    •   Potential opportunities for improving EE;
    •   An existing demand for financing EE projects;
    •   A lack of available financing for EE projects;
    •   The existence of a mechanism to repay the fund from the achieved savings; and
    •   Energy payment discipline, with consumption-based billing among public end users.

Fund Organization Structure and Governance
    •   An EE revolving fund is best established as an independent organization—either a
        corporation or an NGO.
    •   The fund governance is usually by a government-appointed board of governors or board
        of trustees made up of both public sector and private sector members.
    •   The governing board and the management team need to provide a balance between public
        interest (since the fund will be targeting public agencies) and private sector perspectives
        regarding financial structuring of projects, risk assessment, and market development.

Sustainability
For the EERF to be sustainable, it needs one or more reliable and continuing funding sources.
Once the fund deploys its initial capital, the replenishment of that capital through loan
repayments will take a number of years (sometimes as long as 5 to 7 years or more). The fund
thus needs access to financing to enable it to continue operations and finance additional projects.
In Bulgaria, the government demonstrated strong commitment at the project’s outset by
contributing significant budget funds for setting up BEEF. However, the government’s
involvement was reduced gradually so that by the end of the project there was a lack of
ownership and it did not assist BEEF in its efforts to increase its capital base (World Bank
2010a). Because sustaining political commitment across administrations can be a big challenge,
public campaigns—involving local politicians in building commissioning, satisfaction surveys,
and so forth—can help build broad support.

Selecting the Fund Manager (and Related Compensation Structure and Incentives)
There are many options for selecting a fund manager. It may be an independent, newly created
organization; a professional organization or consortium; an existing, non-independent public
agency; a national development bank, utility, or other public enterprise; or a public sector employee
dedicated or seconded to the fund. Whatever the choice, it should be competitively selected.
If the fund manager is a public agency (as in Romania; see Annex C), it is likely that the fund will
be responsive to the public interest need, but there will be limited incentives to take risks and be
innovative. The World Bank (2009) review of FREE’s performance concluded that the fund
manager contract structure should have included performance incentives rather than employing a
standard retainer.
If the fund manager is a private organization or private consortium (as in Bulgaria), the
management team is likely to be more expensive but also more innovative and responsive to
market needs. However, in smaller countries and markets, it may be difficult to recruit the talent
needed for effective fund management and administration.

Guidance Note                                 Page 24                                      April 2014
                 Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


8. Roadmap for establishing an EE Revolving fund
The major steps in establishing an EE revolving fund are shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4 – Road Map for Establishing a Revolving EE Fund




Guidance Note                                Page 25                                     April 2014
                Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



References
Energy Community Secretariat (ECS). 2012. Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the
Contracting Parties of the Energy Community. Prepared by ENSI. Vienna, Austria, February.
Romanian Energy Efficiency Fund (FREE). n.d. “Romanian Energy Efficiency Fund: Operational
Manual.” Bucharest, Romania.
Limaye, D. R. 2010. “Financing DSM and Energy Efficiency: The Role of State Energy
Conservation Funds.” Energy Manager Journal, April-June 2010.
Limaye, D. R. and Mahesh Patankar. 2011. “Clean Energy Funds: A Review of International
Experience.” Paper presented at the Workshop on Design and Road Map for State Clean Energy
Funds, Mumbai, India.
Macedonia. 2011. “The Energy Law of the Republic of Macedonia.” Skopje, Macedonia.
Serbia. 2013. “Law on Efficient Use of Energy.” Official Gazette of Serbia No. 25/2013, dated
March 15, 2013, Belgrade, Serbia.
World Bank. 2009. Implementation Completion and Results Report (TF-50705) on a Grant From
the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund in the Amount of US 10.0 Million to the Romania for
an Energy Efficiency Project. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2010a. Implementation, Completion and Results Report (TF-54515) on a Grant
from the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund in the Amount of US$10 mil to the Rep of
Bulgaria for an Energy Efficiency Project. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2010b. Jas Singh, Dilip Limaye, Brian Henderson and Xiaoyu Shi. Public
Procurement of Energy Efficiency Services. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2010c. Public Procurement of Energy Efficiency Services: Getting Started.
Guidance Note. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2012. Project Appraisal Document for an Energy Efficiency Project in Armenia.
Report No. 67035-AM. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2013a. Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans, Interim
Report, Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2013b. Xiaodong Wang, Richard Stern, Dilip Limaye, Wolfgang Mostert, and
Yabei Zhang. Leveraging Commercial Financing for Clean Energy in East Asia. Washington,
DC.
World Bank. 2014a. Guidance Note: Financing Municipal Energy Efficiency Projects,
Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2014b. Armenia: World Bank Energy Mission, January 27–31, 2014. Aide
Memoire. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2014c. Guidance Note: Energy Services Market Development. Washington, DC.




Guidance Note                               Page 26                                     April 2014
                   Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



Annex A. Case Study: The Bulgarian Energy Efficiency Fund
Introduction
The Bulgarian Energy Efficiency Fund (BEEF)16—was established under the Energy Efficiency
Act of 2004. The fund is designed as a revolving facility to create broad-based, sustainable
commercial financing for EE projects. Its main objective is to support the identification,
development and financing of viable EE projects, resulting in substantial reduction of greenhouse
gases (GHGs). BEEF operates as an independent, not-for-profit organization, managed by a
professional fund manager, and income from fees charged to fund clients covers the operating
costs and losses from defaults.
Capitalized with $10 million in GEF funding, BEEF was designed to support the establishment
and operation of BEEF as a commercially oriented public-private finance facility. GEF funds
were used to provide seed capital for BEEF and cover set-up and operating costs until BEEF
reached financial self-sufficiency; and also to partially cover initial costs of EE capacity building.
Additional financing was secured from the Bulgarian government (US$1.8 million) and the
Austrian government (US$2.0 million).

Management and Governance
Three entities manage and govern the fund. The Donors’ Assembly consists of representatives of
the donors. It convenes at regular sessions every two years and reviews and modifies (as needed)
the regulations for the operation and organization of the fund's activities.
The Management Board is responsible for the fund’s overall strategic management. Its
members—board composition is summarized in Box 1 in Section 3—convene monthly.
The Fund Manager (FM)17 is responsible for the fund’s day-to-day operation. Its objective is to
operate the fund as a profit-oriented business that promotes EE investments and helps the
development of a sustainable EE market in Bulgaria. The FM selects and applies the appropriate
financing tools based on specific project circumstances and overall project portfolio management
considerations.
The FM is compensated through a combination of fixed fee (about 30 percent) and a success fee
based on the number of signed contracts and project investment volume. Of the success fee, the
payment based on the number of signed contracts is about 54 percent; the remainder is based on
the project volume.

Main Components
BEEF has three main components:
     •   A Loan Financing Facility to co-finance bankable EE projects on a commercial lending
         basis using a Loan Account
     •   Partial Credit Guarantees (PCG) to share in the credit risk of EE finance transactions
         and to improve loan terms for project sponsors
     •   Technical Assistance (TA) to finance, on a grant basis, a portion of EE project
         development, capacity building, information barrier removal, and administration costs




16
     This Fund is now known as the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Sources Fund (EERSF). See
http://www.bgeef.com.
17
   As indicated earlier, the FM is a Consortium of Econoler International, the Center for Energy Efficiency
(EnEffect), and Elana Holding PLC.

Guidance Note                                  Page 27                                          April 2014
                   Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


Funding
GEF provided grant financing of US$10 million for (i) providing seed capital for BEEF; (ii) defraying
the initial set-up and operating costs until BEEF reached financial self-sufficiency; and (iii) partially
defray initial costs of EE capacity building (project development, financial packaging, etc.).
The indicative GEF amount for the loan account was US$4.0 million, which was expected to trigger
investments of US$16.34 million. The GEF allocation for the technical assistance was US$1.5
million. Additional funding was provided by the governments of Bulgaria (US$1.8 million) and
Austria (US$2.0 million).

Projects
BEEF has both technical project development and financial structuring capability and is designed
to be flexible in the financial products it offers for the evolving EE finance market. It finances
the following types of project:
    •   Investments in improved EE in industrial processes
    •   Rehabilitation of industrial, commercial, multifamily residential, single family
        residential and municipal buildings, health care facilities, schools, universities, and
        cultural facilities
    •   Improvements to the heat source and distribution system, including EE street lighting
        and other energy end-use applications such as off grid renewable energy generation

Eligibility Criteria
The main eligibility criteria for project financing are as follows:
    •   The project should involve the application of well-proven technology.
    •   The project cost should range between €15,000 and €1,500,000
    •   Minimum equity of 10 percent under co-financing and 25 percent for stand-alone
        financing.
    •   Payback time of up to five years.
    •   Required collateral: mortgage, pledges under Special Pledges Act, claims on accounts and
        commercial contracts, financial risk insurance, bank guarantees, etc.

Implementation Results
By the end of the World Bank project in March 2010,
    •   The fund had awarded 81 loans (with another 4-5 loans being in the process of final
        approval). The total loan volume was US$16 million, and the total investment financed
        by these loans was US$24 million.
    •   The lifetime energy savings from these loans were 0.09 mtoe, and the GHG-savings at 0.9
        mtCO2e.
    •   The average simple payback period was 4.7 years. The typical loan size was
        US$250,000–500,000.
The fund had also:
    •   Contributed to EE financing for public sector projects in local municipal governments and
        other public institutions for which commercial banks were unwilling to finance; and
    •   Contributed, along with a number of other initiatives by EBRD and others, to an increase
        in the number of ESCOs from 14 to 38 and the number of banks extending loans to EE
        projects from 2 to 13.




Guidance Note                                  Page 28                                        April 2014
                    Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



Annex B. Case Study: Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund
Introduction
The government of Armenia established the Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency (R2E2)
Fund in 2005, initially as a PIU for a World Bank supported EE/renewable energy (RE) project
(World Bank 2012b). It was structured as an independent NGO following the provisions of
Armenia's “Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy” and began operation in 2006. Its
local objective is to reduce the energy consumption of social and other public facilities; its global
environmental objective is to decrease greenhouse gas emissions by facilitating the
implementation of EE investments in the public sector.

Management and Governance
The primary governing body of the R2E2 Fund is the Board of Trustees, which includes
representatives from the government, private sector, NGOs, and academia. The Board is
responsible for the overall management of the Fund in accordance with the objectives and
operational principles as defined in the Fund Charter. The Board also establishes the strategy and
operating rules of the Fund, appoints the top management, and approves the budget and specific
investments.
The Fund’s day-to-day activities are managed by the Fund Director, who is appointed by the
Board. Other key management include the Financial Manager, Investment Coordinator, and
Technical Assistance Coordinator.
The organization chart of R2E2 is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5 – Organization Chart: R2E2 Fund




Source: http://r2e2.am/en/about-us.




Guidance Note                                   Page 29                                     April 2014
                   Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


Main Components
The Fund is currently implementing a World Bank/GEF-supported project that provides EE
services in public sector facilities—including EE investments in schools, hospitals, administration
buildings, and street lighting—using a revolving fund scheme. The Fund offers two financing
products to eligible public entities:
    1. For municipalities and public entities with revenue streams independent of the state
       budget, loans are provided. These loans do count as municipal debt, with fixed repayment
       obligations to be made within their budget provisions in future years. The amounts of the
       repayments are designed to allow clients to repay the investment costs and service fees
       from the estimated energy cost savings.
    2. For schools and other public entities that are not legally or budget independent, ESAs are
       used. Under the ESA, a public entity pays the Fund its baseline energy costs (with
       adjustments for energy prices, usage, and other factors) over the contract period. The
       Fund designs the project, hires subcontractors, oversees construction and commissioning,
       and monitors the project. In this case, the client incurs no debt; the Fund directly pays the
       energy bills to the utility on the client’s behalf, and retains the balance to cover its
       investment cost and service fee.
R2E2 uses simplified performance contracts to shift some performance risks to private
construction firms/contractors and to support the build-up of an ESCO industry in Armenia.
Under these contracts, firm selection is based on the net present value of the projects they
propose, and a portion of their final payment (around 30 percent) is based on a commissioning
test.

Funding
The initial funding is US$8.7 million for investments in public facilities and US$1.96 million for
TA.

Projects
By January 2014, the Fund had commissioned 19 projects for public clients. The Fund has (i)
strengthened its implementation capacity by hiring EE, institutional, and procurement consultants
and (ii) initiated a marketing campaign to increase the demand for investment funds from
prospective public clients and build the 2014 pipeline.

Eligibility Criteria
The R2E2 Fund addresses financially viable projects in public facilities. The selection criteria are
as follows:
    •    The facility is publicly owned.
    •    The facility is structurally sound (there is no major structural damage that may jeopardize
         integral stability of the building).
    •    There are no plans for closure, downsizing, or privatization of the facility.
    •    The “comfort level” of the project is more than 50 percent.
A secondary set of eligibility criteria, which will be based on due diligence by the R2E2 Fund,
are as follows:
    •    There should be a minimum of 20 percent energy savings.
    •    There should be a simple payback period of less than 10 years for EE investments.
    •    Project investment should be at least US$50,000 and not more than US$500,000.
    •    Borrowers should be in good financial standing and demonstrate payment discipline.




Guidance Note                                  Page 30                                     April 2014
                 Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


Implementation Results
The total estimated cost of the 19 projects is US$2.35 million (World Bank 2014b). Assuming a
20-year useful life of the project investments, the estimated lifetime energy savings are 32.3 GWh
and GHG reductions are 7,930 tons of CO2e. Actual energy savings for completed projects varied
from 41 to 53 percent, with actual payback periods of six years or less.




Guidance Note                                Page 31                                     April 2014
                 Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



Annex C. Case Study: Romanian Energy Efficiency Fund
Introduction
An independent fund providing commercial financing for EE investment projects, the Romanian
Energy Efficiency Fund (Fondul Român pentru Eficienţa Energiei, or FREE) was established
under the Government Emergency Ordinance no. 124/2001 regarding the Fund’s establishment,
organization, and operation. The relevant legal framework was adopted at the end of 2001 and the
Fund started operations in June 2003 with a grant of US$10 million from the GEF, with the
World Bank as the grant implementing agency. The main objectives of the Fund are to enable
companies in the industrial sector and other energy consumers to adopt and use energy-efficient
technologies, financed under commercial criteria by FREE and co-financiers.

Management and Governance
The Fund is governed by a seven-member Board of Administration representing the public and
private sector, with one each from the Ministry of Industry and Resources and the Ministry of
Water and Environmental Protection, and five representatives of the private sector, of whom at
least two are financial experts. The Board has appointed an investment committee comprising
several financial experts with training and experience in credit analysis, in order to conduct final
reviews of investment proposals.
The Fund’s day-to-day activities are managed by the Executive Director (ED) appointed by the
Board using a competitive process, with criteria regarding professional training and experience as
required by the nature of the Fund’s activity and as agreed with the World Bank. The ED is
supported by a small permanent staff and short-term personnel and external professionals such as
lawyers, auditors, technicians, environmental experts, and other experts. The Finance and
Administration function of FREE is ensured by a highly qualified Financial Controller who has
the overall responsibility for all financial management functions.
The ED has appointed a Fund Manager to manage the Fund's investment portfolio. The Fund
Manager provides professional structured finance experience and EE expertise to develop and
finance commercially viable EE investments that can provide sustainable and increasing
reductions in GHG emissions in Romania. The FM is responsible for the investment aspects of
the Fund and is expected to establish a portfolio of projects that allows the Fund to become self-
financing within three or a maximum of four years.
The Fund Manager's compensation includes a base fee plus a performance-based incentive based
on the number of new loans and the loan repayment performance, plus a deal origination fee paid
by the borrowers. In addition, the Fund Manager received a success fee calculated as a percentage
of the increase in the net asset value of the Fund at the end of five years. The organization chart
of FREE is shown in Figure 6.

Funding
The initial GEF Grant funding for FREE was US$10 million, of which US$8 million was for loan
financing and $2 million for technical assistance.

Projects
During the five-year implementation period of the GEF grant, FREE disbursed over US$9.73
million from the GEF grant, including 100 percent of the US$8 million GEF allocation for
investment financing. FREE also used a part of the repayments in the revolving fund for
additional loan commitments. All loans are being repaid punctually, without any late payments or
defaults.



Guidance Note                                Page 32                                      April 2014
                   Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund

Sixteen projects have been completed, of which 12 were in the private sector, representing 83
percent of loan value and 93 percent of overall investment facilitated by FREE; the balance was
in the public sector. The major technologies included replacing old energy generation equipment
(boilers, combined heat and power [CHP], hydro, geothermal) and modernizing process industry
equipment and public lighting (four projects).
Figure 6 – Organization Chart: Romanian Energy Efficiency Fund




Source: http://www.free.org.ro/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=109&Itemid=125&lang=en.

Eligibility Criteria
The major project eligibility criteria are as follows:
    •   Relatively short payback time (generally under three to four years);
    •   Project investment to be in the range of US$50,000 to $800,000;
    •   At least 50 percent of each project’s benefits must be from energy savings (process or
        capacity improvements that have ancillary energy savings benefits are not eligible); and
    •   The technology must be well proven in the proposed application to avoid all
        technological risk.
The main EE technologies that meet these criteria are burners and boilers, variable-speed drives,
condensers for power factor improvement, compressors, controls, and steam traps.

Implementation Results
During the five-year implementation period of the GEF grant, FREE signed 20 loan contracts, of
which 18 proceeded to implementation with a commitment of US$11.4 million from the fund, for
a total investment of US$34.19 million. Three commercial banks offered a total of US$18.2
million for four large projects.
By the end of 2008, 16 projects had been completed, with an estimated energy savings of 36,533
toe (tons of oil equivalent) from the completed projects. These resulted in annual CO2e savings of
183,237 tons. The GHG reduction resulting from these 16 completed projects, aggregated over
their lifetimes, was estimated to be 2.18 million tons of CO2e (World Bank 2009).



Guidance Note                                   Page 33                                            April 2014
                        Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund



Annex D. Case Study: Salix Finance
Introduction
Salix Finance Limited was established in 2004 in the U.K. as an independent, publicly funded
organization dedicated to providing the public sector with loans for EE projects to reduce their
energy consumption and costs by replacing dated, inefficient technologies with modern, energy
efficient technologies.18 Salix Finance operates in England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern
Ireland.
Salix is the Fund manager for funds provided by the U.K. Department of Energy and Climate
Change (DECC) and delivers 100 percent interest-free capital to the public sector to improve
their EE and reduce their carbon emissions. The administrative costs of the organization are paid
by DECC.

Management and Governance
Salix Finance is a public limited company owned by the government. The governing body is the
Board of Directors, whose chairperson is appointed by the DECC. Two other private sector
members are appointed by the chairperson and the company’s CEO.

Main Components
There are two types of Salix funding programs available. The first type is the Recycling Fund,
which provides long-term interest-free funding to local authorities, emergency services,
universities and hospital trusts. These loan funds are managed by the public sector organizations
that also provide matching funds. The loans are provided for specific EE projects and are repaid
into the fund from the financial savings delivered by the projects. This allows the fund to be
continually used for EE projects; hence the term recycling fund (this is analogous to the term
revolving fund used elsewhere in this guidance note). At the same time, the public agencies
continue to benefit from the savings that accumulate once the project has been fully repaid.
The second type is the Salix Energy Efficient Loans Scheme. As an example: a school borrows
£10,000 to put in new lighting and a new boiler that will save the school £2,000 per annum from
reduced gas and electricity usage. For the first five years these savings are used to pay back the
interest-free loan. Once the loan is repaid, the continued savings enable the school to use the
capital for other budgets, such as the purchase of equipment.
Salix also facilitates knowledge sharing through quarterly regional meetings, technical
workshops, and project case studies. There is an extensive knowledge and enthusiasm for EE
within the public sector, and enabling the sharing of this knowledge between organizations helps
support our clients in delivering long-term, cost-effective savings.

Funding
Salix Finance Ltd is an independent, not-for-profit company funded mainly by the U.K. DECC,
with some funding also provided by the Welsh Assembly Government and the Scottish
government. Salix also works in partnership with The Higher Education Funding Council for
England on its Revolving Green Fund.
Salix was established by the UK Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA),
the predecessor to DECC, in 2004 to ensure that the public sector in the UK has access to interest
free capital loans to increase EE. Since 2004 DECC has provided a total of £148m to Salix for the
funding of EE loans and for the funding of its operations.


18
     http://salixfinance.co.uk.

Guidance Note                                       Page 34                                     April 2014
                   Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund


Projects
The Recycling Fund of Salix has financed a large number of public sector projects:
    •   Salix currently has 138 Recycling Fund partner organizations, including local authorities,
        higher education institutions, emergency services, and the National Health Service
        (NHS).
    •   The fund has financed over 7,400 projects collectively worth more than £115 million, and
        is expected to deliver over £456 million of financial savings and over 2.5 million tons of
        carbon dioxide over the lifetime of the projects.
    •   On average, projects have realized a payback of 3.5 years.
    •   The size of an individual Recycling Fund ranges from £100,000 to £1 million. A typical
        fund size would be £500,000, with Salix providing £250,000 and the client match-funding
        the other half.

Eligibility Criteria
Over 120 technology types are supported by the funding programs. These include building energy
management systems, cavity wall insulation, combined heat and power systems, evaporative
cooling, heat recovery systems, LED lighting, lighting controls, loft insulation, pipe insulation,
server virtualization, T5 lighting, and variable speed drives.
Salix funding includes all public sector organizations including schools, higher and further
educational institutions, emergency services, hospitals, leisure centers, local authorities, prisons,
and the NHS. There has been a focus to commit more resources to increasing EE and driving
down energy costs, which Salix aims to address and to assist the public sector in doing.

Implementation Results
The results to date (including both the Recycling Fund and the Energy Efficient Loans) are as
follows:
    •   Number of projects funded: 11,449
    •   Value of projects funded: £273 million
    •   Value of lifetime financial savings: £1,019 million
    •   Lifetime carbon savings: 5,750,877 tons of CO2




Guidance Note                                  Page 35                                     April 2014
