                                                                89323




Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans


Municipal Budgeting and Finance
Guidance Note
May 2014




Prepared by the Network of Associations of Local Authorities in South-East
Europe (NALAS)
Contents

Abbreviations and Acronyms ....................................................................................................... 3
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... 4
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 6
2. Review of Existing Municipal Budgeting and Financing Practices and Identification of
Key Barriers for EE Investments in Public Buildings ................................................................ 7
   2.1 Municipal budgeting and financing practices in the region ................................................... 7
   2.2 Energy Expenditures in Municipal Budgeting and Finance ................................................. 10
   2.3 Key barriers for EE investments in public buildings resulting from municipal budgeting and
   financing practices...................................................................................................................... 12
3. Potential Solutions Derived from International Experience ................................................ 16
4. Lessons Learned ....................................................................................................................... 21
5. Roadmap for Scaling Up EE in Public Buildings in the Western Balkans ......................... 22
References ..................................................................................................................................... 25




Guidance Note                                                    Page 2                                                              May 2014
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AAM             Albanian Association of Municipalities
AKM             Association of Kosovo Municipalities
BiH             Bosnia and Herzegovina
EBRD            European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ECS             Energy Community Secretariat
EE              energy efficiency
EEA             European Energy Award
EERF            Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund
EIB             European Investment Bank
EMS             energy management system
EPSC            energy performance service contract
ESA             energy supply agreement
ESCO            energy service company
ESMAP           Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
EU              European Union
EU27            The 27 European Union member states before Croatia joined the EU in July 2013
EU7             The seven Eastern European countries among those that joined EU in 2004 (Czech,
                Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and Slovakia)
FBiH            Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina)
GDP             Gross domestic product
GIZ             Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH
GTZ             Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH
IFI             international financial institution
KfW             Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (German Financial Cooperation)
LG              Local government
kWh             kilowatt-hour
MEEAP           Municipal Energy Efficiency Action Plans
MTEF            Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
MOF             Ministry of Finance
MUNEE           Municipal Network on Energy Efficiency
NALAS           Network of Associations of Local Authorities in South-East Europe
PPMRN           Public Performance Measurement and Reporting Network
PPP             public-private partnership
RS              Republika Srpska (entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina)
SCTM            Standing Conference of Towns and Municipalities (Serbia)
SDC             Swiss Development Cooperation
SEE             South-East Europe
SOGFBiH         Association of Municipalities in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
TRACE           Tool for Rapid Assessment of City Energy
UNECE           United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
UOM             Union of Municipalities of Montenegro
USAID           United States Agency for International Development
ZELS            Association of the units of local self-government of Macedonia
WB              World Bank




Guidance Note                              Page 3                                     May 2014
Executive Summary
To support energy efficiency (EE) capital investments in municipal public buildings and services
in the Western Balkans region, this guidance note outlines current regional policies and
procedures for municipal budgeting and financing, identifies shortcomings, and presents a “road
map” of recommended options for improvement. These recommendations can help support
capital investments for providing a variety of municipal services, not just those for EE.
In general, municipal budgeting is more centralized in the region than in the rest of the EU, with
local government revenues representing only about 11-25 percent of consolidated public
revenues. Further, the heavy use of “conditional transfers” from national to local budgets further
diminishes municipalities’ authority to allocate funding based on their priorities. In three
countries—Albania, Kosovo, and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia—local
governments receive more than 40 percent of their revenues from conditional or earmarked grants
from their national governments. Despite this, capital investments (and the need for additional
investments) are higher than in the rest of the EU because of chronic underinvestment over the
past two decades. Although the current process of fiscal decentralization is designed to increase
local governments’ budgetary autonomy, progress has been relatively slow.
Municipal budgeting practices and lack of access to finance further restrict municipal efforts to
reduce operating costs through EE. Municipalities’ one-year budgeting, inability to retain energy
cost savings in future years, line item budgeting, and other practices make investing in EE much
more difficult. Similarly, many municipalities in the region face substantial limitations on
borrowing, some do not have sufficiently strong accounting for commercial bank lending, most
do not have credit ratings or borrowing histories, and many are prohibited from assigning public
assets to collateralize loans; all this makes it increasingly difficult for viable EE projects to secure
appropriate financing.
The guidance note describes these barriers and points to a range of solutions that other
countries—from across the EU and beyond—have used to overcome these same difficulties. The
Western Balkan countries will need to carefully select and adapt these solutions to suit their
individual needs.
Selected main findings and lessons are as follows (See Section 4):
       EE investments in public buildings are usually not a high priority for local government
        officials. The major reason for this is the lack of information and awareness of local
        decision makers regarding the need and economic potential for improving EE in
        municipal public buildings; this is urgently needed.
       Municipal energy planning can be an important means of improving EE in municipal
        public buildings; its application is supported by national EE Laws.
       Implementation of EE measures identified in Municipal Energy Efficiency Action Plans
        (MEEAPs) needs financial support either from the national government or from the
        private sector in the form of energy service companies (ESCOs).
       A legal framework that allows municipalities to establish long-term contracts with
        ESCOs is in place in four of the six countries, with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
        Macedonia being the exceptions. The development and implementation of ESCO projects
        are now impeded by the local municipalities’ lack of relevant capacity. Both
        municipalities and potential ESCOs lack experience and trust in long-term cooperation.
Recommended milestones in the fields of municipal finances and budgeting, which should be
including in a roadmap for the scaling up EE in public buildings in the Western Balkans are as
follows (see Section 5):
(1) Implementation of EE issues as a criterion for allocating national investment funds
    (“conditional subsidies”).
(2) Earmarking of funds provided through national EE funds for municipalities.

Guidance Note                                 Page 4                                          May 2014
(3) Establishment of specific national support programs for EE in municipalities.
(4) Development, implementation, monitoring, and regular updating of local EE action plans
    (MEEAPs and SEAPs).
(5) Introduction of energy accounting in municipal budgeting and finance.
(6) Establishment of national grant programs supporting the development of local energy action
    plans and energy audits in municipal buildings.
(7) Establishment of national support programs for the introduction of energy management
    systems in municipalities.
(8) Establishment of national support programs for the setup and implementation of ESCO
    models in municipal public buildings and services.
(9) Improvement of the ability of municipalities to access credit.
Further development and implementation of this roadmap should be based on a broad consensus
among the six national governments, local authorities and their associations, and the international
donor community. It should be reviewed and updated on an annual or similar basis.




Guidance Note                               Page 5                                       May 2014
1. Introduction
Within the Western Balkans region,1 a secure and reliable energy supply is critical for sustainable
economic growth. Expensive, imported energy and inefficient energy use place a huge burden on
municipalities that require affordable and reliable infrastructure services to attract investment and
provide services to their citizens. With energy prices projected to rise, service delivery costs will
increase, further straining municipal budgets and disproportionally affecting poorer households.
The ability of municipalities to adequately budget for and finance reductions in energy use thus
will be a critical need in the years ahead. Saving energy can also help cities renew their building
and infrastructure stock while helping to create employment opportunities —all paid for through
the reductions in their energy bills.
The municipal budget is the main financial planning document at the local level. It contains a list
of municipal revenues and expenditures for the coming year, the latter of which are divided into
operating and capital expenditures. Typically, municipal budgets are for a single year.
With respect to how countries plan and implement capital investments, including those in energy
efficiency (EE), the municipal budget, and the rebalance2 of the budget are the most important
documents. Therefore, the municipal budget is the starting point for understanding how EE
investments can be implemented.
The municipal budget also communicates investment priorities, among which EE investments
rarely rank high in Western Balkan countries because of other pressing investment needs,
particularly in infrastructure. This is due to the chronic underinvestment in energy and other
infrastructure over the past two decades. If the municipal budget is to be an effective tool for
supporting EE investments, municipal sector representatives (managers of public buildings, street
lighting, and other areas) must be able to (i) communicate to decision makers the importance of
such investments—in particular their potential for reducing the operating costs of municipal
buildings—and (ii) provide the tools and financial means necessary to implement them.
However, municipal budgeting practices also require some adjustments to allow EE investments
to be more readily financed and implemented:
        Typical one-year budgeting often prevents municipalities from signing multi-year
         contracts with energy service companies (ESCOs) which can help amortize investment
         costs over longer periods by paying from the energy savings;
        Municipalities need to be able to retain budgetary energy cost savings in later years in
         order to repay any debts incurred from EE investments; and
        Line item budgeting and separate accounts for capital and operating expenditures can
         make investments in EE (i.e., “capital investments”) difficult to repay out of energy cost
         savings (i.e., reductions in “operating expenses”).
For a variety of reasons, municipal financing (i.e., borrowing) is also difficult. For example,
many municipalities face substantial limitations on borrowing, some do not meet the accounting
standards required for commercial bank lending, most lack credit ratings or borrowing histories,
and many are prohibited from assigning public assets to collateralize loans.
This guidance note will review current policies and procedures for municipal budgeting and
financing in the region, identify shortcomings, and present a “road map” for improvement based
on several proposed “milestones.” These recommendations can help support capital investments
for providing a variety of municipal services, not just those for EE.




1
  The Western Balkans region comprises Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia.
2
  The budget “rebalance” is usually published annually following publication of the budget.


Guidance Note                                    Page 6                                             May 2014
2. Review of Existing Municipal Budgeting and Financing Practices
and Identification of Key Barriers for EE Investments in Public
Buildings
Public revenues and expenditures at the local level are subject to annual budget plans approved
by local councils. The municipal budget is a political tool reflecting the political agenda and the
investment priorities of the majority of elected council members. The fiscal regulations and
decision-making rules comprising the framework for municipal budgeting include the following
mechanisms:
           Forecasting on planned revenues and expenditures
           Assessment of fiscal consequences of public policies
           Authorization of the use of public funds
           Allocation of public funds according to expenditure ceilings
           Controlling and monitoring public spending and revenue collection
The municipal budget provides the basis for administrative accountability and serves as an
evaluation instrument over local public activities.
The extent to which municipal budget plans provide for EE investments in public buildings
depends on two things: the priority accorded to EE issues by local decision makers and the
amount of available investment funds. In cases where local councils put a high priority on EE
investments in public buildings but municipalities’ budgets are insufficient, the implementat ion
of EE investments depends on the availability of grants, government transfers, or loans—
including third-party financing from entities such as energy service companies (ESCOs).

2.1 Municipal budgeting and financing practices in the region
In all European countries, municipal budgeting and financing practices are determined by fiscal
rules and regulations set by national governments. The availability of public funds for EE
investments of municipalities depends on, among other things, how these rules and regulations
affect (i) allocations to municipalities, (ii) mandatory expenses incurred by municipalities, and
(iii) limitations on local borrowing. This section describes how these issues influence local
governments’ ability to invest in improving EE in public buildings.

Revenues allocated to municipal budgets by national governments
Compared to the EU273 member states, the regional share of consolidated public revenues—
including public revenues at all levels of national, regional, and local government—in the GDP of
the six analyzed countries is relatively high. Conversely, the share of local government revenues
in the total of consolidated public revenues is relatively low (Figure 1).4
Thus, the influence of municipal councils on how public funds are spent in their countries is lower than in the EU27
lower than in the EU27 member states. This is especially the case in Albania, FYR Macedonia, and Kosovo, where more than
and Kosovo, where more than 40 percent (Kosovo is as high as 57 percent) of local government revenue comes from
revenue comes from regional or national governments in the form of conditional, or earmarked, grants (see Note: BiH =
grants (see Note: BiH = Bosnia and Herzegovina. RS = Republika Srpska (entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina). FBiH=
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina).


This overall effect can be both good and bad for EE investments. ).
Municipalities must apply each year to regional or national authorities for these grants. However,
because the total amount of funds applied for may exceed the total amount of financial assistance


3
    EU27 = the 27 European Union member states before Croatia joined the EU in July 2013.
4
    NALAS: Fiscal Decentralization Indicators for South-East Europe: 2006-2012 (3rd edition, April 2014), 21.


Guidance Note                                           Page 7                                                  May 2014
provided, they may receive less than, or none of, the requested amount. Municipalities thus
cannot plan in advance their receipt of these funds. Further, eligible investments for such
conditional grants may or may not align with local government priorities.
Figure 1. Consolidated Public Revenue and Local Government Revenue, 2012




Note: BiH = Bosnia and Herzegovina. LG = local government.




Guidance Note                                        Page 8                       May 2014
Figure 2. Composition of Local Government Revenues5 in 2012




Note: BiH = Bosnia and Herzegovina. RS = Republika Srpska (entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina). FBiH= Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina (entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina).

This overall effect can be both good and bad for EE investments. On one hand, local governments
that wish to invest in EE improvements for public buildings are constrained if regional and
national governments themselves do not prioritize EE in public buildings through these grants.
On the other hand, the conditional grants may also be used to motivate local governments to
adopt specific national investment priorities, significantly influencing municipal investments in
EE.6 The more municipal budgets depend on conditional funds offered by their national
government, the more municipalities depend in their budgeting and financing on regional and
national investment priorities.
As long as EE is not a criterion for the awarding of national government transfers to
municipalities for the implementation of their own investments, municipalities’ motivation to
prioritize EE investments in their own expenditure planning tends to be low. In countries such as
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Serbia, where municipalities can rely on their own
revenue sources for more than 80 percent of their annual budgets, local investment priorities
usually do not include EE. A 2006 World Bank survey of FYR Macedonia showed that local
stakeholders are traditionally more interested in improving infrastructure —especially local roads,
water supply and treatment systems, regional landfills; public marketplaces, parks and green
spaces; and facilities for sports and recreation, education, health care, and community centers.7




5
  In Figure 2, shared taxes are taxes that are by law shared between different government levels; the municipalities need not
apply to receive their share because they are entitled by law to receive them directly from the tax authorities. Unconditional
grants are funds transferred from central government budgets to local budgets, usually on a legal basis. No conditions are
attached, and the effect on local budgets is similar.
6
  I. Bishoff and F. Blaeschke, Conditional grants to independent regional and local governments: The trade-off between
incentive and wasteful grant-seeking (No. 30-3010, Joint Discussion Paper Series in Economics by the Universities of
Aachen, Gießen, Göttingen, Kassel, Marburg, Siegen).
7
   World Bank, Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia: Issues in Urban and Municipal Development (Policy note,
Sustainable Development Department, South East Europe Country Unit, Europe and Central Asia Region: November 2006),
5.


Guidance Note                                           Page 9                                                    May 2014
The more municipalities rely on their own revenues and taxes, the more it becomes important to
raise awareness at the municipal level of the potential benefits of EE improvements in municipal
buildings. Awareness raising among political decision makers regarding the socioeconomic
benefits of promoting EE in municipal facilities is important to motivate them including EE
investment in municipal buildings in their municipal budget plans.

High investment rates are typical for the municipal budgets in the six countries
Municipalities in all six countries managed in 2012 to allocate 19 –35 percent of their budgets to
capital investments, which is a much higher share than the EU27 average of 11 percent.8 This is
due to the substantial need for infrastructure upgrades and rehabilitation caused by the historic
underinvestment in municipal infrastructure over the past two decades.
A similar situation was observed a few years ago in the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and the Slovak Republic (see Figure 3, in which these countries are
collectively referred to as “EU7”) when they joined the EU in 2004. In 2012, municipalities in
those countries were still spending an average of 18 percent of municipal revenues on
investments in public service infrastructure. It will likely be necessary to keep municipal
investment rates similarly high in the six countries of the Western Balkans, for at least another 10
to 20 years, in order to gradually upgrade public service infrastructure to European standards.

The priority of investments to improve EE in municipal buildings is low
As part of the EU pre-accession efforts, several of the Western Balkan countries have passed EE
laws requiring municipalities to prepare and implement Municipal Energy Efficiency Action
Plans (MEEAPs). These MEEAPs usually include a prioritized pipeline of EE investment
projects. However, development of the MEEAPs, even though legally required in most countries,
is often donor-driven and few identified investments are actually financed and implemented.
Almost all of the EE improvements by municipalities in the six countries have been financed by
donors through a combination of grants and concessional loans.




8
    NALAS, Fiscal Decentralization Indicators, 29.


Guidance Note                                        Page 10                              May 2014
Figure 3. Composition of Local Government Expenditures, 2012




                                                                                     rd
Source: NALAS: Fiscal Decentralization Indicators for South-East Europe: 2006-2012 (3 edition, April 2014).
Note: EU7 = the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and the Slovak Republic.

Municipal spending on EE improvements in public buildings is still marginal compared to other
budget items. In Albania, for example, where municip alities accounted for a total of €478 million
of investments in 2013, municipalities reported investments in EE improvements of only €92,600
(i.e., 0.02 percent) for the same year.9
(The extent to which municipalities in the other five countries are contributing to the
improvement of EE in municipal buildings—either directly or as a side-effect of rehabilitation of
public buildings—is not accounted for in the municipal budgeting systems, and not reported in
official statistics.)
As long as citizens experience deficits in public service infrastructure, EE investments in
municipal buildings are likely to remain a low priority for municipal decision makers. Where
municipal investment priorities include public building rehabilitation, they usually focus on
critical and structural issues or the beautification of facades, rather than on EE improvements. In
most cases, municipalities see EE as important only when necessary to comply with EE priorities
set by international financial institutions (IFIs) or bilateral donors providing funds for building
rehabilitation demonstration projects.

2.2 Energy Expenditures in Municipal Budgeting and Finance
Although energy prices are increasing in all six countries, the political relevance of total energy
expenditures of municipalities is still low. None of the mayors and council members interviewed
by NALAS experts in the six countries was aware of the amount of the total annual energy bill of
their municipality. This is because energy is not a separate category in any of the municipal
budget plans (it is usually subsumed under “goods and services”), and energy costs are scattered



9
    Data source: AAM.


Guidance Note                                         Page 11                                                 May 2014
within a variety of budget categories. Energy costs also tend to form a relative low share of total
municipal budgets—about 1-3 percent.
In 2012 in Macedonia, for example, all municipalities together spent €1.46 million on electricity,
€210,961 on central heating, and €494.175 on fuel for heating. Total municipal expenditures for
electricity and heating in Macedonia were €2.165 million, which was equivalent to approximately
€1 per inhabitant and to almost 0.5 percent of total revenues of municipalities in the country in
the same year.10 If local health clinics, schools and social buildings are included, which are
generally managed by municipalities, energy costs are an additional €20 million each year. 11
Energy expenditures (buildings, transport, street lighting) by municipalities in Albania in 2013
totaled €21.4 million, of which energy expenditures for buildings were €5.7 million ,12—which is
equivalent to approximately €2 per inhabitant and to approximately 2 percent of total municipal
expenditures.13
                                                                                                  14
Against this background, a World Bank’s 2013 National Building Energy Efficiency Study for Kosovo calculated the total
        14                                                                                                    15
Kosovo calculated the total energy expenditures in Kosovo for all of their public buildings as €33.96 million, which
               15
€33.96 million, which would be equivalent to almost €20 per inhabitant and to about 9.5 percent of total municipal
of total municipal revenues in Kosovo, which were €352.4 million in 2012. While the share of goods and services (including
goods and services (including energy) in the municipalities’ total expenditures accounted for only 9 percent of the overall
9 percent of the overall expenditures of municipalities in 2012 (see Source: NALAS: Fiscal Decentralization Indicators for
                                 rd
South-East Europe: 2006-2012 (3 edition, April 2014).

Note: EU7 = the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and the Slovak Republic.

), this figure also includes central government buildings, many of which do not flow through
municipal budgeting systems.
The National Building Energy Efficiency Study for Serbia,16 published by the World Bank in
December 2012, estimated the total energy expenditures in all public buildings (central and local
level) in the amount of €269.4 million,17 which would be equivalent to approximately 2 percent of
the US$13.3 billion in government expenditures Serbia has budgeted for 2014.18 This is in the
same range as the figure provided for Albania by the Albanian Association of Municipalities.
The figures given above for Albania, Macedonia, and Serbia indicate that the municipalities’ total
expenditures on energy in public buildings tend to be in the range of 1 to 3 percent, which while
small as a percentage is a large budget item if aggregated at the national level. However, energy
cost are disguised in municipal budgets in all six countries behind the headline “Goods and
Services,” and this is scattered to many different budget positions, which makes it difficult for
local decision makers to have a clear picture of the importance of energy expenditures in their
municipal budgets. Considering many of these buildings do not achieve a basic comfort level of
20–22° C, the actual energy use could be even higher.
Below-norm comfort levels and the lack of detailed energy accounting are major barriers to
public and political awareness of the potential for energy savings in individual public buildings
and in specific public services. This is one reason why local governments in the region have not
placed a high priority on realizing energy savings—despite, for example, the potential for an


10
   Data sources: ZELS, and author’s calculation.
11
   Ministry of Economy, “National Program for Energy Efficiency in Public Buildings in the Republic of Macedonia until
2019 (Phase 1),” February 2013.
12
   Data source: AAM.
13
   Author’s calculation based on data from AAM presented earlier.
14
   World Bank, National Building Energy Efficiency Study for Kosovo (February 2013).
15
   No reference year mentioned by EPTISA. Other data in the report referred to 2010.
16
   Econoler/World Bank: National Building Energy Efficiency Study for Serbia, December 2012.
17
   No reference year mentioned.
18
   Data source: Bloomberg. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-12-13/serbia-adopts-2014-budget-with-europe-s-highest-
fiscal-deficit.html.


Guidance Note                                         Page 12                                                   May 2014
estimated 515 GWh in annual energy savings in schools and hospitals identified in a 2012
regional market assessment commissioned by the Energy Community Secretariat (ECS) 19 across
the six countries. (The assessment calculated the average payback for EE investments to be 6.4
years.)
Another reason is that the municipalities do not employ proper energy accounting—measuring
energy consumption and related energy cost at the level of individual buildings or specific public
services—because it is not mandatory to do so in any of the six countries.
Energy accounting could help identify the biggest energy losses in municipal buildings and
motivate local decision makers to focus on improving EE in those buildings that would provide
the highest energy saving potential and the shortest payback periods. Proper energy accounting
could illustrate to local politicians (i) the relatively high share of energy costs in the budgets for
these specific services and (ii) the potential for budgetary savings, helping to motivate them to
invest in improving EE in these buildings.
A final reason for the municipalities’ lack of interest in EE is that the process of fiscal
decentralization has not sufficiently progressed in the region. In Macedonia, for example,
although many municipalities have jurisdiction over the elementary schools, they are not yet
responsible for the schools’ financial obligations, including the cost of the electricity, heating,
and water being provided by the national authorities. The region’s Ministries of Finance transfer
funds to the Ministries of Education, which in turn transfer budgets to municipalities, which then
provide funds to the schools to cover these costs. Funds for capital improvements are typically
not included in these transfers, so any EE investments in the schools would have to be made by
the municipalities themselves.
Because they are not directly paying the energy bills, then, the municipalities see little benefit in
investing in EE for schools.20 However, if schools received budgets based on the number of
students, they would be able to retain operating cost savings from EE and other measures,
providing a clear incentive to be more energy efficient.
In those rare cases where a well-informed administration or a motivated mayor in the region is
aware of the potential economic benefits of EE investments in schools or hospitals, they usually
lack access to an appropriate financial mechanism within their municipal budget that would allow
for the direct amortization (payback) of EE investments from the achieved energy cost savings. 21

2.3 Key barriers for EE investments in public buildings resulting from municipal
budgeting and financing practices
In its interim report dated September 2013,22 the World Bank identified four major barriers for EE
investments in public buildings that are related to municipal financing and budgeting rules and
procedures:
    A one-year budgeting process that prevents municipalities from amortizing the current
     year’s EE investments through future energy savings.
    Separate accounts for capital and operating expenditures makes EE investments (which
     are considered capital expenditures) difficult to repay using energy cost savings
     (considered operating expenses).



19
   Quoted with reference to World Bank: Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans (Interim
Report), September 2013.
20
      T. Milchevski and M. Stojanovik, “Financing municipal energy efficiency in Macedonia.”
http://web.worldbank.org/archive/website01354/WEB/IMAGES/TODORMIL.PDF.
21
   Results of many stakeholder consultations performed by NALAS and its experts during the past five years.
22
   World Bank, Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans (Interim Report), September 2013.


Guidance Note                                     Page 13                                             May 2014
      Line-item budgeting prevents municipalities from using money budgeted for paying
       energy bills for the repayment of loans for EE investments instead.
      There is a lack of budgetary provisions for retaining energy cost savings in future years
       to repay any debts incurred.
Additional barriers identified by the NALAS team of experts include:
      The short-term perspectives of local political decision makers makes EE investments,
       which often have payback periods longer than five years, less attractive.
      Municipalities’ lack of budget autonomy prevents them from investing in EE if this is not
       in line with central government priorities.
      National laws impose social costs on municipal budgets.
      There are limitations on local borrowing.

A One-Year Budgeting Process and Retention of Energy Savings
In Albania, Montenegro, and Serbia, municipalities lack reserves or other means to carry over
budget provisions from one year to the next. They must balance their annual expenditures with
revenues received in the same budget year, or by means of loans taken from financing institutes
in the same year. Municipal budget rules do not provide for any internal accounting mechanism
that would allow for the direct amortization of one year’s investments using the next years’
additional revenues or energy savings. This applies also for EE investments in municipal public
buildings.
When municipalities depend on state budgets for their operational budgets,23 future energy
savings would result in a deduction from their operational budgets, and the saved energy cost
cannot be used for other local purposes—creating a huge disincentive to save energy.
A Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) could help to establish a medium-term
perspective in public investment plans. MTEFs are currently used at the national level in all EU
member states as well as in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, and Macedonia—but not in
Albania, Montenegro, and Serbia. However, even those cases where an MTEF is established at
the local level, EE is not yet included as an investment priority. 24

Separate Accounts for Capital and Operating Expenditures
It is common practice in municipal budgeting all over Europe to separate the accounts for
operating expenditures (such as salaries, goods and services, and fees) from those for capital
expenditures (such as investments, reserves, and loans). Where local authorities have full local
budget autonomy—as in Germany, for example—they may in their budget plans foresee the
transfer of a surplus from their operating budget to their capital budget, and vice-versa.
This is impossible where local authorities have limited budget autonomy—particularly in
countries like Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Macedonia, and Serbia, where
municipalities depend on state transfers for both capital and operating budgets. If EE investments
generate savings on a municipality’s energy bill, the saved operating funds may remain unused if
they cannot be transferred to the capital budget (which would require prior national government
approval). Further, the saved amount is usually deducted from the operating budget approved by
the national government in future years, since budgets are often based on the prior year’s actual
expenditures.




23
     Compare NALAS: Fiscal Decentralization Indicators.
24
     Information sources: ZELS, AKM, SCTM, UOM.


Guidance Note                                        Page 14                            May 2014
Line-Item Budgeting
The use of standard line-item budgeting means that the amount set aside in a municipality’s
budget to pay energy bills (measured, for example, in cost per liter, cubic meter, ton, or kWh of
purchased energy) usually cannot be used for other purposes—in particular if it is taken from
state subsidies.
This creates a high uncertainty among local decision makers (as reported, for example, in BiH
and Macedonia25) as to whether and how they can use this money to procure EE services instead
of purchase energy.
This is independent from the question of whether energy supply is organized by the municipality
itself, or one of its public utilities, or any other third party.

Short-Term Perspective of Local Political Decision Makers
The office term of mayors and councils in the Western Balkans ranges from three years (Albania)
to four years (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Macedonia, and Serbia) to five years
(Montenegro). The elected politicians are usually focused on the creation of visible and tangible
improvements for their voters within their office term, to improve their chances of being
reelected. Therefore, 6-8 year payback periods for EE investments, as presented in the ECS
average calculated for hospitals and schools in the Western Balkans, are usually not compatible
with the investment horizons of local politicians.

Lack of Municipal Budget Autonomy
State government control of municipal budgets is high in the region’s six countries. In each
country the national government must regularly approve investment budgets, and then provide the
municipalities with some or all of the necessary investment funds from the national budget. While
this does not necessarily constitute a barrier for EE investments, per se, it does mean that the
municipal priorities must align with those of the national government which creates some
unpredictability for budget planning purposes. In cases where a national government does not
place a high priority on EE investments and building refurbishment, particularly when compared
with other investment needs, such investment proposals may run the risk of being rejected by the
Ministry of Finance. Loans taken by municipalities are also usually subject to national
government approval.

Mandatory social cost incurred on municipalities imposing additional restrictions on local
budget autonomy
The more the budgetary autonomy of municipalities is restricted by nationally mandated
expenditures, the less financial means are available from the municipal budget for EE
investments. In some Western Balkans countries, municipal decision making is further restricted
by mandatory expenditures imposed on them by national law. 26 This has a strong influence on the
structure of local expenditures. In Kosovo, where municipalities must pay the full cost of
preschools, primary schools, secondary schools, and primary health clinics, wages and salaries
consume 59 percent of overall municipal expenditures. By contrast, in Montenegro, where the
cost of schools and hospitals are paid by the central government, the share of wages and salaries
in the municipal budgets is only 18 percent.27




25
   Result of a series of intensive stakeholder consultations performed by NALAS in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia,
and Ukraine during 2010–13.
26
   NALAS: Fiscal Decentralization Indicators, 20.
27
   NALAS: Fiscal Decentralization Indicators, 20.


Guidance Note                                      Page 15                                                May 2014
Limitations on local borrowing
Most of the municipalities in the six countries have borrowing restrictions, are not creditworthy,
or have limited access to credit. Those that are able to borrow often have debt levels near or at
their legal limitations for municipal borrowing. Debt limits are defined by law for municipalities
in each of the six countries.
In Kosovo, for example, most municipalities are simply not allowed to borrow from commercial
banks. This is because municipalities in Kosovo may not incur any debt unless they have received
unqualified audit opinions from the Office of the Auditor General as part of the mandatory annual
audits for at least the previous two years. Only two municipalities, Pristina and Prizren, met this
condition in 2012.28
An overview of debt limits for municipalities in the six countries is given in Error! Reference
source not found.. Others may not be deemed creditworthy by commercial lenders due to their
heavy reliance on state transfers, less certain conditional grants, lack of borrowing histories or
underdeveloped bookkeeping practices.
Table 1. Legal Limitations on Municipal Borrowing




                                                                                                                 Montenegro
                                                                                                     Macedonia
                                                                               FBiH, BiH



                                                                                           Kosovo
                                                                    RS, BiH
                                                         Albania




                                                                                                                                 Serbia
 Limitation
 Maximum ratio of debt to budget
            29                                                                                                   50%
 revenues
 Maximum ratio of debt service to budget                                                                   a
            30                                               18%        10%       10%       30%       10%        15%
 revenues
 Maximum ratio of net operating revenues
                        31                         1.4
 to total debt service
Source: NALAS, Fiscal Decentralization Indicators.
Note: BiH = Bosnia and Herzegovina. RS = Republika Srpska (entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina). FBiH= Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina (entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina).
a. 10 percent of realized current revenues.

Even in cases where a municipality is creditworthy, new loans are in most cases subject to
national government approval in terms of both purpose and amount. Other municipalities have
expressed reluctance to borrow from commercial banks for reasons including perceptions of very
high interest rates, onerous documentation requirements, and difficulties with providing
appropriate collateral.32
Experience shows that national governments that do not accord a high priority to EE
investment—as is the case in all six Western Balkans countries—tend to approve municipal loans
only for investments in tangible public service infrastructure, such as roads or wastewater
treatment plants, rather than for investments in EE improvements in municipal buildings. 33




28
   Eptisa, National Building Energy Efficiency Study for Kosovo (2013).
29
   Debt from all sources, including loan guarantees issued by the municipality.
30
   Debt service is the sum of the repayments of principal and interest.
31
   A ratio of net operating revenues to total debt service (interest plus principal payments) of less than 1 would indicate that a
municipality is not be able pay for its debts repayments and interest rates.
32
   Information provided by SCTM, UOM, AKM, SOGFBiH, ZELS, and AAM.
33
    Wilhelm, B. et.al.: NALAS Study on EE Measures in South-East European Municipalities and the Role of National
Associations – a Study of NALAS Task Force Energy Efficiency in cooperation with NALAS Member Associations and the
GTZ Open Regional Fund Energy, May 2010.


Guidance Note                                            Page 16                                                              May 2014
3. Potential Solutions Derived from International Experience
The barriers to EE investment in municipal buildings described in Section 2 can be grouped into
three “action areas”:
         Barriers related to political investment priorities
         Barriers related to municipal budgeting and accounting rules and requirements
         Barriers related to financial restrictions in the municipal funds available for EE
          investments in municipal public buildings
International experience suggests potential ways to overcome barriers in to all three areas. Table
2 (see next page) summarizes these potential solutions, and the remainder of Section 3 provides
concise explanations of some of the major issues. Recommendations are focused on small,
incremental adjustments to existing rules and procedures rather than those that would require
substantial changes in the municipal budgeting systems.34

Municipal EE Action Plans (MEEAPs) and Sustainable Energy Action Plans (SEAPs)
MEEAPs—as required by EE laws in Albania, Kosovo, and Macedonia35—are similar to the
concept of SEAPs promoted by the Covenant of Mayors in Europe, although SEAPs are
voluntary. The Covenant of Mayors—a movement led by Energy Cities, the European
Association of local authorities in energy transition —has been signed by 5,500 European
municipalities so far, including one from Albania, 15 from Bosnia and Herzegovina, two from
Macedonia, three from Montenegro, and two from Serbia.36 Through a number of projects,
international donors are providing municipalities in all six Western Balkan countries with
technical assistance and capacity development services to help them develop MEEAPs and
SEAPs.37
Each MEEAP or SEAP approved by a local council includes a prioritized list of EE and
renewable energy projects; this list then provides a basis for negotiations with national
government as well as with the private sector and with IFIs. The first SEAPs were approved by
cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2012 and 2013. Some of these cities —Zenica, for example—
managed to begin implementing the first projects as soon as their SEAPs were approved.
However, in most cities that have developed SEAPs or MEEAPs, implementation has not
occurred due to a lack of both internal capacity and access to budget or loan funds. 38




34
   As the total energy saving potential of municipal local buildings is usually in the range of 1 to 3 percent of the total
municipal budget, it is not expected that tackling these energy saving potentials, or a part of it, would be accepted by
national governments as rationale for proposals changing the entire budget regime of municipalities.
35
   Information source: NALAS, EE Measures, 12.
36
   http://www.covenantofmayors.eu/about/signatories_en.html.
37
   For example, GIZ has Open Regional Funds addressing EE in all six countries, and bilateral projects are particularly
active in Serbia as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina. See http://www.giz.de/fachexpertise/downloads/giz2013-en-flyer-
energieeffizienz.pdf.
38
   Information provided by AAM, SCTM, UOM, ZELS, and SOGFBiH.


Guidance Note                                         Page 17                                                  May 2014
Table 1. International Solutions for Overcoming Barriers to EE Investments in Municipal Buildings
 Action Areas        Barriers                                     Potential solutions
                                         Obligations to develop and implement Municipal EE Action Plans
                                          (MEEAPs) or Sustainable Energy Action Plans (SEAPs)
                Low priority of EE
                                         Conditional budgetary/grant transfers from MOFs for EE
                in municipal
                investment plans         Public ranking of municipal EE performance (Ukraine)
                                         Use of energy service agreements (ESAs) or ESCO contracts where
Political                                 EE investments can be financed off-budget (Armenia)
investment
priorities                               Introduction of energy accounting and energy management systems
                Lack of political         in municipalities (Germany)
                awareness of             EE benchmarking of public facilities (e.g., ESMAP’s TRACE)
                potential for major
                                         Information dissemination and awareness raising
                energy savings in
                municipalities           Appointment of energy managers, use of universal metering
                                         Penalties for the wasteful use of energy
                Conditional state        Integration of municipalities as privileged beneficiaries of national EE
                subsidies                 Fund schemes
                Centralized              Fiscal decentralization
                budget control           Increased local revenue sources
                One-year                 Integration of EE investments into Medium-Term Expenditure
                budgeting                 Frameworks (MTEFs) with rolling three-year budgetary plans (EU)
Budgeting and   preventing multi-        Reclassifying EE investments as utility services, where long-term
accounting      year contracting          contracts are implicitly allowed
rules and                                Performance-based budgeting
requirements
                                         MOF exemptions on project basis for EE/ESCO projects (Armenia,
                                          India)
                Line-item                Changes to budgeting rules for EE and other cost-saving measures
                budgeting                 (Germany, United States)
                                         Energy service agreements (Armenia, Macedonia – proposed)
                                         Utility on-bill financing, allowing bundling of energy and energy
                                          savings payments (United States)
                                         EE revolving funds (Bulgaria, Romania, United Kingdom)
                                         National support for municipal EE programs
                Lack of                  Third party financing/leasing, including ESCO models mobilizing
                municipalities’           private capital (Czech Republic)
                own investment           Credit lines
                funds                    Conditional budgetary/grant transfers from MOF
                                         Accelerate fiscal decentralization—allowing greater budgetary flows
                                          to, and autonomy for, municipalities
                                         Exclusion of energy service performance contract (EPSC)
                                          repayments from public debt
                Limitations for          Energy service agreements (Armenia, Macedonia —proposed)
                local borrowing          Accelerate fiscal decentralization
                                         Allowing municipalities greater autonomy in borrowing without MOF
Financial                                 approval
constraints
                                         Loan guarantees and risk-sharing facilities (Hungary)
                                         Development of municipal shadow credit ratings (informal credit
                Lack of                   ratings where formal ones do not exist)
                creditworthiness         Initial use of public financing (e.g., EE Fund) to establish credit history
                                         MOF budget capture for municipal loans (Mexico, RS in BiH)
                                         Strengthening of municipal bookkeeping
                Limited collateral
                                         Pledging of future revenues and assets against debt
                for commercial
                bank loans               Increased use of escrow and other reserve accounts
                                         Grants for energy audits
                High transaction         Bundling of public facilities at municipal level
                costs                    Bundling of public projects through ESCOs
                                         Standardization of documentation and procedures




Guidance Note                                   Page 18                                                  May 2014
Conditional budgetary/grant transfers from MOF / National support programs for EE in
municipalities / Integration of municipalities as privileged beneficiaries into national EE Fund
schemes / Credit lines / Conditional budgetary/grant transfers from MOF
Motivated by the EU’s climate protection targets, the German government is offering specific
grants and subsidies to German municipalities. Since 2008, it has supported more than 2,500
municipal projects. As of 2014, the program is focusing on, among other things, investments in
the rehabilitation of lighting (30 percent of subsidies) and ventilation systems (25 percent) in
public buildings. In the past, the rehabilitation of kindergartens and schools (65 percent of
subsidies) has been another focus of the project, initiating investments all over the country. 39 The
driving forces for this program have been both the national German priority on climate change
issues and the political will to create public investments in order to avoid negative effects of the
European financial crisis on the German economy. 40
In addition to these grants and subsidies, the German Climate Initiative, which is carried out
through the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW), makes EE-related concessional loans to
German municipalities for the rehabilitation of street lights, water supply and wastewater
treatment facilities, and buildings. It does not require collateral.41
The transfer of similar programs to the Western Balkans usually depends on the availability of
funding from IFIs such as the World Bank, EIB, EBRD, and other donors, including the use of
EU-IPA funds. The potential for implementing future loan programs, if any, for EE in municipal
public buildings must be assessed in the light of existing restrictions on municipal loans (see
above) as well as potential limitations on national public. Macedonia recently announced that it
will establish an EE revolving fund and provide municipalities with ESAs that will not count
against their public debt; this is a good example of how other countries in the region could
address some of these challenges.

Grants for energy audits / local energy action plans
In Germany and the Czech Republic, the provision of grants for municipal energy audits and
plans is a major component in the framework of national EE support schemes for municipalities
(see above). The energy audits are necessary to create reliable information concerning actual
energy saving potentials in buildings; identify suitable measures to address these issues; and
provide cash flow estimates for use by lenders.42 In the Western Balkans, grants for energy audits
and local energy planning are provided so far only by international donors in the context of
demonstration and capacity-building programs. Over the long term, this will not be sufficient to
substitute for national support programs, which must be developed by local municipalities—for
example, on the basis of mandatory provision made in the national EE Laws.

Information and awareness raising / EE benchmarking of public facilities / public ranking of
municipal EE performance
Experience from the EU over the past two decades43 indicates that information and public and
political awareness of the needs and potential for improving EE in municipal public buildings has
always been the first step towards making actual investments.


39
   Service Center “Kommunaler Klimaschutz.” http://kommunen.klimaschutz.de/foerderung/kommunalrichtlinie/auf-einen-
blick.html.
40
   http://www.energieeffiziente-kommune.de.
41
   https://www.kfw.de/KfW-Konzern/Service/Download-Center/Förderprogramme-(Inlandsf.)-(D-EN)/Barrierefreie-
Dokumente/IKK-Quartiersversorgung-(201)-Merkblatt/index.html.
42
   Service Center “Kommunaler Klimaschutz.” http://kommunen.klimaschutz.de/foerderung/kommunalrichtlinie/auf-einen-
blick.html.
43
   The author of this report has for more than 25 years been involved in the “Rational Use of Energy“ programs of the
European Commission as well as a number of international cooperation projects promoting EE in municipalities in Europe
and abroad.


Guidance Note                                       Page 19                                               May 2014
In the United States, the government-backed ENERGY STAR program follows this logic when
offering tools for benchmarking EE in individual buildings. San Francisco, Seattle, and an
increasing number of other cities have joined this initiative and started their own local energy
benchmarking campaigns for public and private buildings. 44
The ESMAP Tool for Rapid Assessment of City Energy (TRACE) is a decision-support tool
designed to help cities quickly identify under-performing sectors, evaluate improvement and cost-
saving potential, and prioritize sectors and actions for EE intervention. It covers municipal
buildings as one of six sectors and consists of three modules: (i) an energy benchmarking module,
which compares key performance indicators (KPIs) among peer cities; (ii) a sector prioritization
module, which identifies sectors that offer the greatest potential with respect to energy-cost
savings; and (iii) an intervention selection module, which functions like a “playbook” of tried-
and-tested EE measures and helps select locally appropriate EE interventions. 45 As of the end of
2013, TRACE had been deployed in 25 cities in Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, and Latin
America.46
GIZ also promotes municipal EE benchmarking in Ukraine in cooperation with the Union of
Energy Efficiency Cities in that country. A commercial tool developed by a Ukrainian
engineering company has been introduced to provide municipalities with information on energy
use.47
The European Energy Award (EEA) tries to create a competitive environment for local decision
makers in which they can qualify with their municipalities as “Members ,” “Members with
Distinction,” or “Gold Members.” Begun in Austria, France, Germany, Italy, and Luxembourg,
Monaco, and Switzerland, the EEA is now being piloted in Hungary, Morocco, Romania, and
Ukraine. 48 (In Ukraine it will be supported by the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC) in
cooperation with GIZ.)

Use of Energy Supply Agreements (ESA) / Energy Service Company (ESCO) model
Energy supply agreements (ESAs) are described in detail in a separate guidance note on EE
revolving funds.49 Simply put, an ESA allows a municipality to make “baseline” energy payments
equivalent to its existing energy expenditures into an escrow account; energy bills are then repaid
from this account, with the balance going to the financier of the EE project, such as an EERF or
ESCO. This allows the baseline energy budget to be more easily secured so that it cannot be
reduced in later years; further, ESAs have generally been classified as a long-term service
agreement and not municipal debt.
The ESCO model is another important instrument for promoting EE in municipal public
buildings. It has been used to encourage private sector participation in the financing of
investments in EE of municipal public buildings in Germany, Denmark, Austria, Slovenia, and
the Netherlands.
In the past few years, several Western Balkans countries have developed the legal framework
necessary to implement the ESCO model. Municipalities may now use ESCO contracts in
Albania, Montenegro, and Serbia (since 2013), independent from whether the ESCO is a private
enterprise, another public body, or a municipality’s own utility. 50 In Bosnia and Herzegovina and



44
   https://www.energystar.gov.
45
   http://esmap.org/TRACE.
46
   ESMAP: Annual Report 2013, 48. See also http://esmap.org/TRACE.
47
   GIZ project on EE in Municipalities in the Ukraine, started in 2013.
48
   http://www.european-energy-award.de/european-energy-award/award.
49
   Dilip Limaye, Jas Singh, and Kathrin Hofer, “Establishing and Operationalizing an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund”
(World Bank guidance note, forthcoming).
50
   Information provided by SCTM and UOM.


Guidance Note                                       Page 20                                                May 2014
Macedonia, such a framework is not yet in place.51 In Kosovo there are no legal barriers
preventing municipalities from concluding ESCO contracts, but developing a reliable calculation
of ESCO fees on the basis of achieved energy savings is seen by the municipalities as a major
challenge.52 A variety of donor projects in the region are helping to develop adapted ESCO
models, such as a model contracts for dissemination and replication.53 However, in these
countries it remains difficult to establish ESCOs with balance sheets large enough to finance
long-term municipal EE projects.

Introduction of energy accounting and energy management systems (EMS) in municipalities /
appointment of energy managers, universal metering
The USAID-financed Municipal Network on Energy Efficiency (MUNEE) in Southeast and
Eastern Europe has developed a standard methodology, including a software tool,54 for
introducing energy accounting and energy management system (EMS) to municipalities.55
Because the biggest technical problem impeding the establishment of proper energy accounting is
the lack of metered energy consumption data, a local metering campaign is therefore usually the
starting point of any campaign for the introduction of municipal EMS.
Typically, a precondition of a successful EMS is the appointment of a municipal energy manager
(or, in bigger cities, of an energy management unit) within the public administration. Although
energy managers are required in some of the region’s countries, EMSs are not mandatory in any
of the six countries so far. However, more and more of the cities joining the Covenant of Mayors
are considering establishing an internal working group, or similar, on energy management on a
voluntary basis in their administrations.
Role models for the establishment and operation of local EMSs can be found in all EU member
states. The existing EE networks municipalities in Southeast Europe (such as the NALAS Task
Force on Energy Efficiency, MUNEE, Energy Cities, and the Covenant of Mayors East) can help
establish bilateral exchange of know-how and experience between cities in the Western Balkans
and cities using EMS in other European countries.

Fiscal decentralization / Accelerate fiscal decentralization—allowing greater budgetary flows
to, and autonomy for, municipalities
Although fiscal decentralization has begun in all six countries, progress has been slow and
variable among countries. NALAS, a major stakeholder in fiscal decentralization in South-East
Europe, publishes monitoring reports on fiscal decentralization in the region every 2 –3 years.56
Because EE in municipalities is not yet a major concern for local governments, it is not a driver
of further fiscal decentralization. It may benefit, however, if the trend leads to greater municipal
freedom regarding the transfer of funds between operating and capital expenditure budgets, the
acquisition of loans for EE investments, and the conclusion of long-term ESCO contracts.

Performance-Based Budgeting
Performance-based budgeting is a way to allocate resources to achieve specific objectives based
on program goals and measured results (such as the number of students in schools, or the number
of medical treatments in hospitals). In the United States, for example, most federal agencies in the



51
   Information provided by SOGFBiH and ZELS.
52
   Information provided by UOM.
53
    E.g., UNECE Programme Financing Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Investments for Climate Change
Mitigation.
54
   Energy accounting software ASE 2.3.
55
   http://www.munee.org/node/32.
56
   See NALAS, Fiscal Decentralization Indicators, various years.


Guidance Note                                 Page 21                                          May 2014
United States and many local governments (> 25 states, and over 100 cities or counties) currently
use a performance-based budgeting approach.
According to a survey performed by the U.S. Governmental Accounting Standards Board, more
than 50 percent of all respondents (state and local officials) indicated that the implementation of
performance measures had increased the efficiency and effectiveness of their various
governmental programs.57

Reduction of high transaction costs / Bundling of public facilities at municipal level / Bundling
of public projects through ESCOs
In Austria, Denmark, Germany, and other countries where the development of the ESCO market
started one or two decades ago, the bundling of public facilities for ESCO contracts is common,
particularly in large municipalities owning sufficient number of buildings themselves. The City of
Berlin, for example, has been implementing the ESCO model since 1996. In more than 500
properties with more than 1,300 public buildings—including the Rotes Rathaus (Berlin’s town
hall), public swimming pools, and the Deutsche Opera—existing energy saving potentials are
tapped in this way. This allows Berlin to achieve its climate-protection and energy-policy goals
even with a tight budget, saving money at the same time. Both innovative and standardized
technical solutions are implemented. The average energy savings in Berlin’s 25 energy saving
partnership pools is 26 percent.58
To achieve similar economics of scale, most of the municipalities in the Western Balkans would
have to form a joint project pool with their neighboring municipalities. This would require inter-
municipal cooperation—which, in the facility management sector, would be new for most of the
potential partner municipalities. Bundling similar types of facilities, such as schools or street
lighting, could also result in lower prices from service and equipment suppliers.


4. Lessons Learned
    Although the relative share (in percent) of investments in municipal spending is higher in the
     Western Balkans than in the average of EU27 member states, the amount of available
     investment funds (in euros, per capita) is much lower.
    In 2012, the current available municipal investment funds per capita (in euros) in five of the
     region’s six countries ranged from 9 percent (Kosovo) to 18 percent (Macedonia) of the
     average of available investment funds in the EU27. Only in Montenegro was this somewhat
     higher: the municipal investment funds spent per capita in 2012 reached 43 percent of the
     EU27 average.
    In all six countries, the small municipal investment budgets are usually earmarked for
     investments in tangible public service infrastructure, rather than for EE investments in public
     buildings.
    EE investments in public buildings are usually not a high priority for local government
     officials. The major reason for this is the lack of information and awareness of local decision
     makers regarding the need and economic potential for improving EE in municipal public
     buildings; this is urgently needed.
    Further fiscal decentralization, while giving municipalities greater budget autonomy, will not
     necessarily make EE investments in public buildings a higher priority for local governments
     deciding how to spend their limited investment budgets.



57
   Jeremy Carter: “Performance-Based Budgeting: Interpretations and Best Practices.” Presentation to the 2012 PPMRN
Conference.
58
   http://www.berliner-e-agentur.de/en/topics/energy-performance-contracting.


Guidance Note                                     Page 22                                               May 2014
   Municipal energy planning can be an important means of improving EE in municipal public
    buildings; its application is supported by national EE Laws.
   Implementing EE measures identified in MEEAPs or SEAPs for municipal public buildings
    requires financial support either from the national government or from the private sector in
    the form of ESCOs.
   A legal framework that allows municipalities to establish long-term contracts with ESCOs is
    in place in four of the six countries, with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia being the
    exceptions. The development and implementation of ESCO projects are now impeded by the
    local municipalities’ lack of relevant capacity. Both municipalities and potential ESCOs lack
    experience and trust in long-term cooperation.


5. Roadmap for Scaling Up EE in Public Buildings in the Western
Balkans
It is recommended that the governments of the Western Balkans scale up EE in their public
buildings by following a “roadmap” containing the milestones shown in Table 3.
Further development and implementation of this roadmap should be based on a broad consensus
among the six national governments, local authorities and their associations, and the international
donor community. It should be reviewed and updated on an annual or similar basis.




Guidance Note                              Page 23                                       May 2014
Table 3. Roadmap, Including Recommended Milestones, Supporting the Scaling-Up of EE in Public Buildings
 Milestone                             National government level                         Local government level                                  International support
 1. Implementation of EE            Adaptation and publication of revised       Lobbying for the inclusion of EE in the           Policy advice at the national and local levels
 measures as criterion for           criteria for conditional subsidies           award criteria for conditional subsidies          Technical assistance at the local level:
 allocating national                 including EE improvements as a              Assessment of expected EE effects for all           o Introduction of appropriate methods and
 investment funds                    criterion                                    planned investments and revision of the                  tools (e.g., ESMAP TRACE)
 (“conditional subsidies”).                                                       investment priorities according to expected         o Training and capacity building
                                                                                  EE effects                                          o Demonstrations
 2. Earmarking of funds             Establishment of national EE                Lobbying for the establishment of a national      Policy advice at the national and local levels
 provided through national           Revolving Funds for municipalities           EE Fund and for the privileged inclusion of       Technical advice at the national level for the
 EE funds for municipalities        Definition of funding criteria com-          municipalities in the beneficiaries of the         establishment and management of national EE
                                     patible with actual need and                 Funds                                              Funds (preferred in the form of revolving funds)
                                     potential, respecting the financial         Development and submission of EE                  Financial support for the establishment of EE
                                     constraints of local government              investment measures compatible with the            Funds
                                    Adoption of MTEFs and revised                funding criteria of the EE Fund                   Technical assistance at the local level:
                                     budgeting to prevent disincentives                                                               o Introduction of appropriate methods and
                                     for EE investments by municipalities                                                                  tools
                                    Acceleration of fiscal                                                                           o Training and capacity building
                                     decentralization
 3. Establishment of specific       Development of support programs             Lobbying for the establishment of a national      Policy advice at the national and local levels
 national support programs           (grants and loans) for the promotion         EE Fund and for the privileged inclusion of       Technical advice at the national level for the
 for EE in municipalities            of EE in municipalities in cooperation       municipalities in the beneficiaries of the         establishment and management of national EE
                                     with commercial banks and IFIs               Funds                                              Funds (preferred in the form of revolving funds)
                                    Inclusion of municipalities as              Development and submission of EE                  Financial support for EE Support programs (risk-
                                     beneficiaries of EE Funds                    investment measures compatible with the            sharing, guarantees, loans, etc.)
                                    Definition of funding criteria               funding criteria of the EE Fund                   Negotiation of conditions and terms and
                                     compatible with actual need and                                                                 conclusion of contracts with national governments
                                     potential, respecting the financial                                                             and banks
                                     constraints of local government                                                                Technical assistance at the local level:
                                    Adjustment of procurement rules to                                                               o Introduction of appropriate methods and
                                     facilitate ESCO contracting and                                                                       tools
                                     purchase of EE equipment                                                                         o Training and capacity building
 4. Development,                    Enforcement of the obligation of            Development and implementation of local           Technical assistance at the local level:
 implementation, monitoring,         municipalities, in those countries           MEEAPS (metering campaign, energy                   o Introduction of appropriate methods and
 and regular updating of local       where appropriate, to develop and            consumption baseline studies, energy                     tools
 EE action plans (MEEAPs             implement municipal energy action            saving objectives and targets, project              o Training and capacity building
 and SEAPs)                          plans                                        pipeline, investment priorities, action
                                    Provision of financial support for the       planning, etc.)
                                     development of MEEAPs



Guidance Note                                                                           Page 24                                                                            April 2014
 Milestone                             National government level                       Local government level                                   International support
 5. Introduction of energy          Publishing of high and low municipal      Introduction of local energy accounting            Technical assistance at the local level:
 accounting in municipal             performers in terms of EE                  systems and procedures                                o Introduction of appropriate methods and
 budgeting and finance              Benchmarking of key municipal                                                                        tools
                                     services to identify areas for                                                                   o Training and capacity building
                                     improvement                                                                                   Financial support at the local level:
                                                                                                                                      o Subsidies for the procurement and
                                                                                                                                          installation of energy meters and computer
                                                                                                                                          hardware
 6. Establishment of national       Launching an energy auditing              Implementation of energy audits in                 Technical and financial support to the national
 grant programs supporting           program for municipal public               municipal public buildings                          government for the setting up and implementation
 the development of local            buildings that provides grants for                                                             of a national grant program
 energy action plans and             implementing energy audits                                                                    Technical assistance at the local level:
 energy audits in municipal                                                                                                           o Introduction of appropriate methods and
 buildings                                                                                                                                tools
                                                                                                                                      o Training and capacity building
 7. Establishment of national       Establishment of national support         Development of local capacity for the              Technical and financial support to the national
 support programs for the            programs                                   performance of energy audits in public              government for the setting up and implementation
 introduction of energy                                                         building and for the development and                of a national support program
 management systems in                                                          implementation of local energy action plans        Technical assistance at the local level:
 municipalities                                                                Establishment of local energy management              o Capacity development
                                                                                system                                                o Technical advice
 8. Establishment of national       Establishment of national support         Selection and pooling of public buildings for      Financial assistance:
 support programs for the            programs                                   ESCO projects                                         o Guarantees, risk-sharing facilities, loan
 setup and implementation of        Risk-sharing facilities                   Specification of the scope of ESCO                        programs for ESCOs
 ESCO models in municipal           Guarantees                                 services                                           Technical assistance:
 public buildings and services                                                 Tendering of ESCO projects                            o Expert advice
                                                                                Implementation and monitoring of ESCO                o Local capacity development
                                                                                contracts
 9. Improvement of the ability      Fiscal decentralization                   Lobbying for the further promotion of fiscal       Technical and financial assistance to national
 of municipalities to access        Credit lines                               decentralization                                    governments for the establishment of credit lines
 credit                             EERFs                                                                                          and EERF
                                    Shadow credit ratings




Guidance Note                                                                         Page 25                                                                             April 2014
References
Albania 2013 Progress Report: Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the
Council: Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2013-2014 (2013).
Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance, The Austrian Federal Budget Reform (2011).
Black Sea Energy Research Centre, www.bserc.eu
CIA. CIA Factbook.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) – Open Regional Fund for South-East Europe
(ORF) Energy Efficiency. Preliminary Report on Implementation of the First National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for 2011 in Bosnia and Herzegovina (2012).
Energy Agency of the Republic of Serbia website: http://www.aers.rs/Index.asp?l=1&a=21.05&tp=TarifeEE.
Eptisa. National Building Energy Efficiency Study for Kosovo (2013).
Eurostat website: http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Energy_price_statistics.
Government of the Republic of Serbia. Fiscal Strategy for 2014 with Projections for 2015 and 2016 (2014).
Kasek, L. and D. Webber, eds. Performance-Based Budgeting and Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks in
Emerging Europe (World Bank, 2009).
Milchevski, T., and M. Stojanovik. Financing municipal energy efficiency in Macedonia (World Bank)
(undated). http://web.worldbank.org/archive/website01354/WEB/IMAGES/TODORMIL.PDF.
Ministry of Economy of Macedonia. National Program for Energy Efficiency in Public Buildings in the
Republic of Macedonia until 2019 (Phase 1) (February 2013).
Ministry of Finance of Serbia. Debt statistics (January 2014).
NALAS. Fiscal Decentralization Indicators for South-East Europe: 2006-2012 (3rd edition, April 2014).
National Bank of Serbia. Analysis of the Republic of Serbia’s Debt (March 2012).
Novović, T. Report on assessment of capacities for budgeting at the local level in Montenegro (2011).
Power, A. and M. Zulauf. Cutting Carbon Costs: Learning from Germany’s Energy Saving Program (London
School of Economics, 2011).
Republic of Kosovo. Law on public debt (2009).
Republic of Macedonia. First National EE Action Plan 2010-2018.
Republic of Serbia. Report on Implementation of the First National Energy Efficiency Action Plan in the Period
2010-2011 (June 2012).
Rakocevic, Lucija, and Igor Kovacevic. Case Study: Montenegro. An Analysis of the Policy Reform Impact on
Energy Performance in Buildings (2012).
Republic of Serbia. The First Energy Efficiency Plan of the Republic of Serbia for the Period from 2010 to
2012.
Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia. Statistical yearbook of the Republic of Serbia 2012.
Steger, Gerhard. “Budget Reform in Austria: From traditional to modern budgeting.” Presupeusto y Gasto
Publico 69/2012: 147–62.
UNECE: Development of energy service companies market and policies (2013).
WBiF. Financing Energy Efficiency Investments in the Western Balkans . (2013)
World Bank: Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans (Interim Report, September
2013).
