                                                          89320




Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans



Energy Services Market Development
Guidance Note
May 2014




Prepared by Dilip Limaye, Jas Singh and Kathrin Hofer
Contents

Abbreviations and Acronyms ....................................................................................................... 3
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... 4
1. Purpose of this Guidance Note.................................................................................................. 6
2. Scaling up EE in the Western Balkans..................................................................................... 6
3. What is an Energy Service Provider? ...................................................................................... 7
    Benefits of Energy Service Providers .......................................................................................... 7
4. ESP Business Models ................................................................................................................. 8
    Engineering Services Business Model ......................................................................................... 8
    Financial Services Business Model .............................................................................................. 8
    Energy Savings Performance Contracting Business Model ......................................................... 9
    Outsourced Energy Management Business Model .................................................................... 10
    Summary .................................................................................................................................... 10
    Challenges to the Development of ESPs .................................................................................... 11
5. How Governments Can Foster ESPs...................................................................................... 12
    Creating a Demand for Energy Services in the Public Sector.................................................... 13
    Removing Barriers to Public Procurement of EE Services ........................................................ 14
    Facilitating the Financing of ESP Projects ................................................................................. 16
6. International Examples of Government Initiatives to Foster the Energy Services Market
........................................................................................................................................................ 18
7. Lessons Learned from International Experience .................................................................. 19
    Policies and Regulations ............................................................................................................ 19
    Technical Assistance .................................................................................................................. 19
    Conclusion.................................................................................................................................. 20
8. Roadmap for Establishing an Energy Services Market ....................................................... 20
References ..................................................................................................................................... 22
Annex A. International Examples of Government Initiatives to Foster the Energy Services
Market ........................................................................................................................................... 24
    1. Armenia .................................................................................................................................. 24
    2. Croatia .................................................................................................................................... 25
    3. Czech Republic ...................................................................................................................... 26
    4. Hungary .................................................................................................................................. 27




Guidance Note                                                        Page 2                                                                 May 2014
Abbreviations and Acronyms
General
CG          credit guarantee
DH          district heating
DSM         demand-side management
ECA         Europe and Central Asia
ECS         Energy Community Secretariat
EE          energy efficiency
EEO         energy efficiency obligation
EERF        energy efficiency revolving fund
ESMAP       Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
ESCO        energy service company
ESA         energy services agreement
ESP         energy service provider
ESPC        energy savings performance contract
EU          European Union
FI          financial institution
GEF         Global Environment Fund
GFA         guarantee facility agreement
GHG         greenhouse gases
GWh         gigawatt-hour
HOA         homeowner association
IFC         International Finance Corporation
IFI         international finance institution
kgoe        kilograms of oil equivalent
kWh         kilowatt-hour
MWh         megawatt-hour
M&V         measurement and verification
MB          management board
MOF         Ministry of Finance
mtoe        million tons of oil equivalent
NEEAP       National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
NPV         net present value
PIU         project implementation unit
PPP         public-private partnership
RE          renewable energy
TA          technical assistance
tCO2e       tons of CO2 equivalent
TRV         thermostatic radiator valves

Regional
The Western Balkan region comprises Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia:
AB          Albania
BiH         Bosnia and Herzegovina
KOS         Kosovo
MK          FYR Macedonia
MNE         Montenegro
SER         Serbia




Guidance Note                          Page 3                                 May 2014
Executive Summary
The development of private sector energy service providers (ESPs), including energy service
companies (ESCOs), that specialize in energy efficiency (EE) project development and
implementation can help overcome some of the important barriers to scaling up implementation
of energy efficiency (EE) projects, particularly in the public sector. ESPs can offer a range of
services spanning the energy services value chain and provide the technical skills and resources
needed to identify and implement EE opportunities, perform services using performance based
contracts (thereby reducing the risks to the energy users), facilitate access to financing from
commercial lenders, and enable the energy users to pay for the services from the cost savings
achieved. However, the development of energy services markets faces a number of challenges
and there are few active ESPs in the Western Balkan countries.
International experience shows that the public sector market can encourage the establishment and
growth of ESPs by providing a stable demand for services, clear procurement rules, and access to
public financing. This guidance note defines a strategy and “road map” designed to help
governments in the Western Balkans develop ESPs in their countries.
The business models typically utilized by ESPs are illustrated in Figure ES-1.
Figure ES-1 – Summary of Energy Services Business Models




Source: Adapted by authors from World Bank 2006.

While ESPs can provide many services using these business models, the establishment and
growth of ESPs face a number of challenges. In most developing countries, ESPs are small and
have limited technical and financial capabilities. Their ability to obtain commercial financing is
constrained by (i) their limited assets and weak balance sheets; (ii) their lack of or limited track
record in the market; (iii) the perception of commercial lenders that EE projects are highly risky;
and (iv) the lenders’ unfamiliarity with, and lack of technical due diligence capabilities to
properly appraise, EE projects. These constraints prevent them from accessing financing or
guaranteed savings, as with ESCOs in Western Europe and North America.
Governments can encourage the establishment and growth of ESP industries by undertaking a set
of legislative, regulatory, and policy initiatives targeted at (i) creating a large and stable demand
for energy services projects in the public sector; (ii) removing barriers to public procurement of


Guidance Note                                      Page 4                                  May 2014
EE services and establishing clear regulations, rules, and procedures for public agencies to work
with ESPs; and (iii) facilitating adequate and affordable financing for ESP projects. As these
markets are catalyzed, ESP activity can then extend to private industry and commercial buildings,
this time using its stronger track record to access commercial financing.
This guidance note provides examples of actions taken by governments in many countries (such
as Armenia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, and India) to foster the
energy services market and help establish and grow ESPs in their countries. Experience from
these countries shows that governments need to adopt a three-pronged approach—involving
policy and regulatory initiatives, technical assistance (TA), and financing strategies—to build
ESP and public agency capacity, implement ESP projects in the public sector, and provide the
platform for moving to more complex implementation and financing models in the future. TA or
financing alone does not offer an effective strategy to overcome the multidimensional challenges
of ESP market development; efforts in all three areas are needed.
Key conclusions of this guidance note are that (i) there is no specific formula that can be
prescribed to instruct governments on how to develop energy services markets; and (ii) fostering
the ESP market requires governments to undertake a concerted set of legislative, regulatory,
policy, financing, and awareness/information initiatives. The roadmap in Figure ES-2 provides
guidance to governments on the various initiatives that may help them develop the energy
services markets in their countries.
Figure ES-2 – A Roadmap for Developing the Energy Services Market
                                  Identify existing ESPs and assess their capacity, strengths and limitations;
 Identify and assess current      assess budgeting and procurement regulations; understand public agency credit
       market situation           and borrowing capacity, financial markets, and their willingness to finance public
                                  agencies


                                  Consult with public officials (budgeting, procurement, technical, legal), existing
     Conduct stakeholder
                                  and prospective ESPs, financiers, etc. to identify needs and challenges; identify
        consultations
                                  barriers to public procurement of ESPs

                                  Increase knowledge, awareness and capacity of public agencies to
    Create demand for EE          identify/assess projects, establish goals and action plans, provide
          services                recognition/awards, standardize documents, bundle projects, conduct
                                  workshops, and accredit and/or certify ESPs
               v

                                  Allow multi-year contracts, allow agencies to retain energy cost savings, use
  Remove barriers to public
                                  "most value" instead of least cost in public bid evaluation, facilitate PPPs, allow
 procurement of EE services
                                  leasing of EE equipment, and exclude ESP payments from public debt

               v
                                  Consider options such as establishing EE revolving funds, energy services
  Facilitate financing of ESP     agreements, funding energy audits of public agencies, providing grants or
            projects              guarantees, creating risk-sharing facilities, creating public ESCO or Super
                                  ESCO, or facilitating forfeiting
                v
                                  To facilitate public agency procurement of ESP services, develop a simple and
   Develop and test simple
                                  transparent procurement system with well-defined rules, regulations, and
    procurement models
                                  procedures and supporting documents
                v
                                  Learn from results of the simple models to develop scale-up strategies;
   Expand to more complex         disseminate results; introduce more complex models involving greater
          models                  engagement of ESPs and financiers; develop standardized documents/M&V
                                  protocols
Source: Prepared by Authors based on World Bank 2010c.



Guidance Note                                       Page 5                                                  May 2014
1. Purpose of this Guidance Note
The scaling up of energy efficiency (EE) projects in the Western Balkan countries is critical in
order to achieve national targets and move towards a more sustainable energy future.
Unfortunately, implementation has been limited by a number of significant barriers, which
include the lack of know-how and high transaction costs associated with such projects. A
potential mechanism to bridge these gaps is the development of private sector energy service
providers (ESPs), including energy service companies (ESCOs), that specialize in EE project
development and implementation. The term ESP is meant to be broader than ESCO, as it can
include a range of companies that contribute to the delivery of EE projects, such as design and
engineering firms, equipment suppliers, contractors and installers, construction management
firms, utilities, and ESCOs.
ESPs can provide the technical skills and resources necessary to identify and implement EE
opportunities. They can also perform their services using performance-based contracts, thereby
reducing the risks to the energy user; facilitate access to financing from commercial lenders; and
enable the energy users to pay for the ESP services from the cost savings achieved. However, the
aforementioned barriers to development mean there are few active ESPs in the Western Balkan
countries.
International experience shows that, if a sustainable ESP industry is to be established, potential
ESPs need to be convinced that (i) there is a large and stable demand for a range of energy and
EE services; (ii) there are clear regulations, rules, and procedures on how ESPs will be contracted
and paid; and (iii) adequate and affordable financing is available in the commercial financing
market for EE projects. The public sector market can provide a logical stimulus to the
establishment and growth of ESPs since it can provide a stable demand for services, set clear
rules in bidding documents, and access public financing more easily (World Bank 2010a). This
guidance note defines a strategy and roadmap for governments in the Western Balkans to help
develop ESPs/ESCOs in their countries by implementing appropriate legislative and regulatory
initiatives, removing regulatory and institutional barriers to the use of energy savings
performance contracts (ESPCs) in the public sector, developing clear procurement and financing
rules, and engaging ESPs for EE project implementation.


2. Scaling up EE in the Western Balkans
In the Western Balkans, improving EE has been identified as a key priority, because it can
contribute to efficient economic growth while providing one of the lowest-cost measures for
reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (World Bank 2013). The potential for EE is quite
large: a recent World Bank study (2010b) estimated energy cost savings of some US$3.4 billion
from implementing cost-effective EE measures in the region. In 2012, a regional market
assessment commissioned by the Energy Community Secretariat (ECS) estimated potential
annual energy savings at about €462 million or 7,940 GWh (ECS 2012). Buildings in the Western
Balkans consume about half of the total energy, and estimated energy savings in buildings range
between 20 and 40 percent, with the highest potential expected in the public sector (35–40
percent). Although energy savings in the entire public sector were not estimated, the ECS study
identified annual energy savings in schools and hospitals to be 515.4 GWh or €35.4 million.
International financial institutions (IFIs), the European Commission, and other donors have
organized many financing facilities and technical assistance (TA) programs for the Western
Balkans region. A recent report by the Western Balkans Investment Framework (WBIF 2013)
estimated that total funding of about €1.5 billion is available—mostly through credit lines offered
by local banks, with some TA and grant facilities. However, the vast majority of this funding
remains unutilized due to the lack of appropriate delivery mechanisms to link EE projects with
the available financing.


Guidance Note                               Page 6                                       May 2014
Global experience with financing of public sector EE projects demonstrates a number of potential
financing mechanisms, ranging from grant and budget financing, to EE revolving funds and
public ESCOs, to more advanced commercial or project financing by ESCOs (World Bank
2013a). The long-term goal of governments should be to move from public financing to
commercial financing as financial and energy services markets mature. Because there are few
operating ESPs, to accomplish this goal Western Balkan governments need to develop and
implement policies and programs to foster the establishment of ESPs focused on delivering EE.


3. What is an Energy Service Provider?
An ESP is an enterprise that provides services spanning the energy services value chain. This
includes energy auditing, design and engineering, equipment procurement, installation and
commissioning, financing, operation and maintenance, facility management, and sale of energy
services (Figure 1).
Figure 1 – The Energy Services Value Chain




Source: Limaye 2009.

Traditionally, companies that have provided energy services using ESPC models have been
referred to as energy service companies or ESCOs. Thus, many governments and donor programs
have focused on developing local ESCO industries to help tap their EE potentials. However,
many other companies that may not commonly be recognized as traditional ESCOs—such as
energy suppliers and utilities, equipment manufacturers, engineering/design and installation
contractors, construction management firms, and financial institutions—can also provide one or
more elements of the EE value chain. This guidance note thus refers to this broader range of
companies as ESPs.

Benefits of Energy Service Providers
ESPs offer a number of advantages to end users in many sectors—public, commercial, and
industrial. For example, ESPs can:
  •   Mobilize private sector innovation and entrepreneurship to identify and deliver EE
  •   Provide access to the latest energy efficient products, technologies, and equipment
  •   Help mobilize private financing
  •   Use a variety of business models for the range of services and products offered
  •   Provide high-quality installation, operation, and maintenance
  •   Implement projects more efficiently and generally at a higher benefit-cost ratio
  •   Provide training to facility engineers and managers on operations and maintenance, thereby
      improving staff skills
  •   Provide performance guarantees, thereby reducing the project risk to the energy users.
Table 1 shows how ESPs can address some of the barriers to EE implementation.




Guidance Note                                Page 7                                   May 2014
Table 1 – How ESPs can Address Barriers to Implementation
Implementation Barriers                                        How Addressed by ESPs
Inadequate information and           Provide technical skills and expertise from competent private sector firms to
technical know-how                   identify, assess, and implement EE projects
Small projects with high project     Utilize standard streamlined tools for auditing, EE option identification and
development/ transaction costs       assessment, energy services agreements, etc.; bundle smaller projects for
                                     similar types of facilities
Low interest and motivation          Demonstrate benefits of equipment renewal and facility modernization,
                                     facilitate hassle-free installation, and offer simplified turn-key arrangements
Lack of internal budgets for EE      Arrange project financing, usually with loan repayments from project cost
improvements                         savings allowing positive cash flow throughout
High risk perception of commercial   Offer performance-based contracts; clearly define the benefits/costs of EE
lenders                              projects upfront; demonstrate low risk of EE projects already implemented
Source: Prepared by Authors.



4. ESP Business Models
ESPs can use a wide range of business models to offer the services and products identified above.
Figure 2 illustrates four main business models.
Figure 2 – Energy Services Business Models




Source: Prepared by Authors.

A discussion of each model follows.

Engineering Services Business Model
The Engineering Services Business model focuses primarily on energy audits, identification of
EE options, project design and engineering, equipment procurement, and project installation. The
payments for these services include the basic fees for services plus success fees or a share of the
savings. The difference between the traditional engineering, procurement, and construction model
and this business model is that some of the payments (success fee and/or savings share) to the
ESP are performance based. But the ESP is not involved in financing the project.

Financial Services Business Model
In this model the ESP provides financing for the EE project. The financing may be in the form of
loans (debt), project equity, or equipment lease. The payments for the ESP services will be
derived from the energy cost savings, to service debt, provide a return on equity investments, or
make lease payments. Typical ESPs that may offer such services are banks and other financial
institutions, equipment suppliers and leasing companies, and distribution utilities. Utilities may


Guidance Note                                      Page 8                                                May 2014
recover the payments though the energy bills. Equipment suppliers typically provide such
financing through “supplier credit,” wherein the services include designing and implementing the
EE project with deferred payments from the host.

Energy Savings Performance Contracting Business Model
ESPCs have been introduced in many countries to help address some of the more difficult issues
associated with facilitating EE investments in the public sector (World Bank 2010c). The concept
of an ESPC involves an ESP offering an energy consumer (also called the host facility or project
host) a range of services related to the implementation of an EE project (such as products,
technologies, equipment, and systems). The ESP may also provide or arrange financing, so that
the host facility has to supply little or no capital. Also, at least part of the compensation from the
host facility is typically contingent upon demonstrated project performance, and is usually
structured in a manner such that the project costs (for the ESP services) can be paid from the
resulting energy cost savings.
The four major characteristics of ESPCs are as follows:
  •    The ESP provides a full range of energy services related to financing and implementation of
       EE projects designed to reduce energy use and costs;
  •    The payments for such services are made by the energy user (also referred to as project
       host) from the cost savings resulting from the projects;
  •    The payments are generally contingent upon satisfying certain performance guarantees
       provided under the ESPC; and
  •    The ESP assumes most of the technical, financial, and performance risks.
Figure 3 illustrates the basic ESPC model.
Figure 3 – ESPC Model
            Investment in Energy
               Saving Project


                             Savings
                          Customer Savings
                               Payments to          Customer
                            Financing
                          Energy Service Provider
      Baseline                Financing              Savings
                            Payments
                              Payments


      Energy                Reduced                 Reduced

        Bill                   Energy                Energy
                                   Bill                 Bill

        Before              During                  After
Source: Adapted from World Bank 2014b.

In this model, an ESPC is signed between the project host and the ESP. An investment is made in
the energy saving project to reduce the energy bill. The financing of the investment may be by the
ESP or the project host. During the term of the agreement a portion of the energy savings is used
to repay the financing, another portion pays for other services provided by the ESP, and a small
portion is retained by the project host. After the term of the agreement, the project host retains the
entire savings.
Two basic versions of the ESPC model are common in North America and other countries like
China, Japan, Korea, and Thailand: Shared Savings and Guaranteed Savings.
  •    Shared Savings. In the Shared Savings Model, the ESP generally provides or arranges for
       most or all of the financing needed for the implementation of the project. The ESPC

Guidance Note                                       Page 9                                  May 2014
     specifies the sharing of the cost savings (which are measured and verified using a pre-
     specified protocol) between the ESP and the host facility over a period of time. The host
     facility generally makes no investment in the project and gets a share of the savings during
     the contract period and 100 percent of the savings after the contract period, thus
     maintaining a positive cash flow throughout the life of the project.
 •   Guaranteed Savings. In the Guaranteed Savings Model, the host facility generally takes
     the loan on its own balance sheet. The ESP guarantees certain performance parameters in
     the ESPC, and specifies the methods for measurement and verification (M&V). Payments
     are made once the project performance parameters have been confirmed.
Although these two are the most commonly used ESPC models, neither has worked effectively in
developing countries due to the complexity of these models and the need for very strong ESP
balance sheets. Therefore, three simpler models have been developed (World Bank 2010a) and
are better suited for Western Balkan countries until the markets develop further:
 •   Public or Super ESCO. In this case, the ESCO is a public enterprise that can enter into
     ESPCs or simpler agreements, provide financing, and then subcontract implementation to
     private ESPs. This overcomes the critical financing hurdle and centralizes procurement of
     private ESPs as well as provides training and oversight (see under “Public or Super
     ESCOs” at the end of Section 5).
 •   Variable-Term Contract. This is similar to the common ESP models, except that the
     contract term can vary based on actual savings. If actual savings are less than expected, the
     contract can be extended to allow the ESP to recover its agreed payment. A variation is the
     “First Out” model (used in Canada), where the ESP takes all the energy savings benefits
     until it has received its agreed payment.
 •   One-Year Contract. The ESP gets payment of 60–70 percent in the first year, often with
     the bulk based on a commissioning test (comparing post-project with promised net present
     value, or NPV), with the remaining being paid 6–12 months later to ensure continued
     performance and persistence of savings.

Outsourced Energy Management Business Model
The Outsourced Energy Management model may also be referred to as an energy performance
management contract, or simply energy supply contracting. This model represents a form of
outsourcing in which the costs for all equipment upgrades, repairs, and so forth are borne by the
ESP and the ESP sells the energy output (such as steam, heating and cooling, or lighting) to the
end user at an agreed price. Ownership of equipment may remain with the ESP (Build-Own-
Operate model) or may be transferred to the customer (Build-Own-Operate-Transfer model). This
business model is common in EU countries, where contracts for this type of arrangement tend to
be substantially longer than the other contract types, ranging from 10 to 30 years.

Summary
Figure 4 summarizes the different energy services business models.




Guidance Note                             Page 10                                       May 2014
Figure 4 – Summary of Energy Services Business Models




Source: Adapted by authors from World Bank 2006.


Challenges to the Development of ESPs
While ESPs can provide many services using the range of business models mentioned above, the
establishment and growth of ESPs face a number of challenges. In most developing countries,
ESPs are small and have limited technical and financial capabilities. Their ability to obtain
commercial financing is constrained by (i) their limited assets and weak balance sheets; (ii) their
lack of or limited track record in the market; (iii) the perception of commercial lenders that EE
projects are highly risky; and (iv) lenders’ unfamiliarity with, and lack of technical due diligence
capabilities to properly appraise, EE projects. In the case of the performance contracting model
(with some exceptions, such as public/super ESCO models), since financial institutions usually
require the project “promoter” or developer to make an equity investment (often a minimum of 30
percent of total project cost), ESPs are limited in terms of how many projects they can undertake
at any particular time. Also, the costs of project development and financing transactions are
relatively high for EE projects and ESPs often lack the financial resources required to invest in
developing many projects.
Many of these challenges can be alleviated if the public sector offers opportunities for ESPs to
undertake projects in public buildings and facilities. Unfortunately, working with public agencies
in Western Balkan countries introduces a new set of issues that can constrain ESPs from
successfully undertaking public sector EE projects:
    •    Public agencies are often unable to enter into long-term contracts. Since energy services
         projects generally require payments from energy savings over time, removing this
         constraint is of critical importance.
    •    In some cases, public sector budgeting processes do not allow the agency to retain the
         cost savings from EE projects, thereby precluding the option of paying for energy
         services from cost savings. This issue tends to be less critical for municipal borrowers but
         more relevant for purely budget-funded entities, such as ministries.
    •    Most public procurement rules require the selection of the lowest bidder based on a fixed
         package of goods and services. In energy services, the EE measures may not be fixed and
         the lowest-cost supplier is not necessarily the “best” provider of energy services,
         particularly for projects involving varying levels of energy savings.

Guidance Note                                      Page 11                                 May 2014
      •    In some cases, payments owed under ESP contracts are treated in the public agency
           accounting system as debt. Such accounting treatment can limit the ability of public
           agencies with limited borrowing capacity to engage ESPs.
      •    Because some public buildings connected to district heating (DH) networks are billed on
           the basis of heated floor area rather than energy consumed, there may be no incentive for
           the public building administrators to reduce energy use and no generated cost savings
           from which to repay debt. However, this issue has already been resolved in many Western
           Balkan countries.
      •    Many public agencies lack the capacity to evaluate ESP proposals, negotiate ESP
           contracts, and manage and supervise the ESPs.
ESPs also face many challenges in raising the financing needed for EE projects in public
agencies. Most public agencies do not have sufficient internal funds (budgetary resources) to
make the capital investment needed for EE projects. Therefore the ESP needs either (i) to arrange
financing for the public agency from commercial financing sources or (ii) to obtain financing
directly from such sources. Both options face several barriers. Many public agencies are not
creditworthy from the perspective of commercial lenders, and even creditworthy agencies are
often already at their borrowing limits. Also, commercial banks and financial institutions are
generally reluctant to lend to public agencies because they cannot provide adequate collateral for
the debt financing. As described above, ESPs can also find it difficult to raise debt funds to
finance public EE projects due to their limited asset base, weak balance sheets, and limited track
records. Many of these challenges can be addressed by governments through legislative,
regulatory, and procurement initiatives.

5. How Governments Can Foster ESPs
Governments can assist the establishment and growth of ESP industries by undertaking a set of
legislative, regulatory, and policy initiatives targeted at:
      •    Creating a large and stable demand for energy services projects in the public sector;
      •    Removing barriers to public procurement of EE services and establish clear regulations,
           rules and procedures for public agencies to work with ESPs; and
      •    Facilitating adequate and affordable financing of ESP projects.
This section reviews each initiative in turn; they are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 – Government Actions to Foster ESPs
                                              Remove Barriers to Public                    Facilitate Financing
    Create Demand for EE Services            Procurement of EE Services                      of ESP Projects
•     Increase PA knowledge and          •   Allow PAs to sign multiple-year        •   Establish EE revolving fund
      awareness of ESPs                      contracts                                  with loan facility
•     Increase PA capacity to identify   •   Allow retention of energy cost         •   Establish EE revolving fund
      ESP opportunities                      savings to pay ESPs                        with energy services
•     Require EE targets and action      •   Change procurement rules to                agreements (ESAs)
      plans                                  select most value, not least cost      •   Provide budgetary grants
•     Develop standard, templates,       •   Exclude ESP payments from              •   Provide risk-sharing facility
      benchmarks, and M&V                    PA debt                                •   Facilitate forfeiting of ESP
      schemes                            •   Require consumption-based                  contracts
•     Organize Workshops with PAs            billing for DH                         •   Establish public or super
      and ESPs                           •   Allow PAs to engage in PPPs and            ESCO
•     Aggregate similar projects             EE equipment leasing
      across PAs                         •   Encourage PAs to use simple
•     Accredit or certify ESPs               ESP business models
Note: PA = public agency; PPP = public-private partnership; M&V = measurement and verification.
Source: Prepared by Authors.



Guidance Note                                        Page 12                                                 May 2014
Creating a Demand for Energy Services in the Public Sector
The public sector is a very large energy user in the Western Balkans. As discussed in Section 2,
buildings1 in the Western Balkans represent about half of total energy consumption. They are
generally very energy inefficient because of the use of old, outdated equipment; inadequate
maintenance; limited budgets for purchasing efficient equipment; and lack of knowledge of and
incentives for EE improvements. Public agencies generally lack the capacity to identify, finance,
and implement EE projects, and ESPs can offer useful and valuable services to them. But for
ESPs to enter the market, they need to be assured that there is a large and stable demand for their
services. Governments can take a wide range of actions to create such a demand:
    •   Increase public agency knowledge and awareness of the need for EE and the role that ESPs
        can play in implementing EE projects.
    •   Improve public agency capacity to identify and assess EE opportunities, including
        developing training programs, tools, and case studies.
    •   Establish binding targets for EE improvement in public agencies and provide incentives to
        agency staff for meeting or exceeding these targets.
    •   Require public agencies to develop EE action plans to meet the binding targets.
    •   Develop standardized documents such as audit templates, benefit-cost assessment tools,
        request-for-proposal (RFP) and bidding documents, and energy services contracts and
        agreements.
    •   Develop and disseminate data and benchmarks on energy consumption in different types of
        public buildings.
    •   Provide technical assistance to public agencies for identifying EE project opportunities,
        developing RFPs and bidding documents, procuring ESP services, and monitoring their
        performance.
    •   Develop simple but effective measurement and verification (M&V) protocols (See Box 1).
    •   Organize workshops involving public agencies and ESPs to publicize the ESP models,
        facilitate interaction between public agencies and ESPs, and give ESPs an indication of the
        forthcoming procurements from public agencies.
    •   Bundle similar projects across multiple public agencies, creating larger projects with
        relatively lower transaction costs that will be more attractive for ESPs.
    •   Accredit and/or certify ESPs, thereby giving public agencies greater confidence to enter
        into contracts with them.
    •   Harmonize procurements to help ensure a steady stream of RFPs each period to avoid
        bunching and large gaps.




1
  Buildings include federal and municipal buildings as well as universities and schools, hospitals, public
lighting, water utilities, and other public facilities.

Guidance Note                                     Page 13                                               May 2014
 Box 1 – Measurement and Verification (M&V)
 A key element of energy services, M&V involves defining the following:
     •    Baseline energy consumption of the existing systems (prior to introduction of EE measures)
     •    Formulas and procedures for determining baseline energy consumption
     •    Adjustment factors to be applied to the baseline energy consumption (these are factors that could
          reasonably be expected to increase or decrease energy usage and are outside the control of the
          ESP, such as changes in outdoor temperature for air-conditioning measures)
     •    Occupancy and equipment operations schedules
     •    Formulas and procedures for determining the post-EE project installation energy consumption
     •    Procedures for performing the statistical validation and level of anticipated accuracy of results
     •    Specification of equipment and procedures used to collect, measure, or obtain results
     •    Method and format of reporting results to the customer
     •    Schedule of reporting to the customer
 A number of internationally accepted methodologies and protocols for M&V exist, from simple
 “deemed savings” approaches to complex metering, modeling, and simulation. There is a trade-off
 between the accuracy and precision of M&V and the cost of M&V. It is important to develop
 standardized M&V approaches for public sector EE projects, but it is also important to keep such
 approaches simple and inexpensive. Deemed savings is a pre-determined, validated estimate of energy
 and peak demand savings attributable to an EE measure instead of energy and peak demand savings
 determined through M&V activities. Under the deemed savings approach, the public agency and the
 ESP agree to a simplified savings calculation procedure and the savings are then “deemed,” or
 calculated, using this procedure. For less developed markets, use of deemed savings can greatly reduce
 M&V costs, although it shifts some of the actual project performance risk back to the public client.
 Source: World Bank 2010a.


Removing Barriers to Public Procurement of EE Services
Legislation, Regulations, Procedures
Governments in the Western Balkans have a number of options for removing the barriers that
currently prevent ESPs from supplying EE services to public agencies. They include the
following:
 •       Revise legislation to allow public agencies to sign multiple-year contracts. Such contracts
         are usually needed if the agency is to pay for the energy services from the energy cost
         reductions achieved. In some countries, EE repayments can be categorized as utility
         payments, which are implicitly multi-year contracts.
 •       Change public budgeting regulations and procedures to allow public agency budgets to
         retain energy savings from EE projects. This is critical if public agencies are to make EE
         repayments from the savings.
 •       Change government procurement rules, which currently require that projects be predefined
         and that the lowest bidder be selected. Instead, the rules should allow bidders to propose a
         wider range of EE solutions, and the government should select ESPs based on the proposal
         offering the best value (such as highest NPV).
 •       Enact legislation or regulations to allow public agencies to participate in public-private
         partnerships (PPP) for implementing EE projects, which can help particularly with the
         outsourced energy management model.
 •       Amend procurement regulations or procedures to facilitate public agencies’ leasing of
         energy efficient equipment.




Guidance Note                                   Page 14                                           May 2014
    •   Change public accounting and budgeting regulations/procedures to exclude ESP
        investments from public agency debt.2 Given the limited public debt capacity in the
        Western Balkans region and numerous competing priorities, this change would help
        motivate public agencies to work with ESPs since they would be able to retain their debt
        capacity for their other investments.
    •   Require a transition of all public agencies on DH to consumption-based metering and
        billing.
Procuring ESP Services
ESPs can greatly assist EE implementation and help mobilize commercial financing to the public
sector. But procurements of ESP services can be complex, since they (i) are a blend of goods,
works, services, and sometimes financing; (ii) use an output-based rather than input-based
approach to defining the project scope; (iii) rely on a variety of cost factors and varying public
benefits for evaluation; and (iv) require payments based on performance, which requires credible
baseline and post-project energy use data (World Bank 2013a). While these issues are complex,
governments should build upon existing procurement precedents in other sectors that can serve as
reference points.
In some recent procurement laws dealing with PPPs, standard contract models have been
developed to deal with similar issues; these include management services contracts, output-based
and performance-based infrastructure contracts, and cost-plus contracts. Based on these
precedents, efforts should then be undertaken to develop tailored bidding documents for
simplified ESP contracts that seek to (i) use simplified design and construction contracts; (ii)
specify a minimum level of energy savings that must be achieved rather than prescribing the
specific EE measures to be installed; (iii) base selection on the highest NPV; (iv) link at least part
of the ESP payment (20–30 percent) to a commissioning test (comparing post-project with
promised NPV); and (v) include at least one deferred payment (e.g., 6–12 months after
commissioning). Figure 5 illustrates a range of approaches to allow and promote public
procurement of ESPs.
As discussed in Section 4, governments can also facilitate procurement of ESP services through
the use of simplified business models, such as:
    •   Supplier credit: an equipment vendor designs, implements, and commissions the project
        with a one -time deferred payment to the supplier;
    •   Equipment leasing: similar to supplier credit, except payments are generally made over an
        extended time period;
    •   ESPs with 1-year contracts design/implement project, receive 60–70 percent of payment; or
    •   ESPs with variable-term contracts act as full service ESCOs, but the contract term varies.
Such models can help create a basis which the ESPs can build upon and evolve over time.




2
 In Germany, for example, ESPCs are viewed as an alternative to credit financing and, thus, are not counted
against public debt as long as the cost savings are greater than repayment obligations.

Guidance Note                                    Page 15                                            May 2014
Figure 5 – Range of ESP Approaches




Source: World Bank 2010c.


Facilitating the Financing of ESP Projects
The World Bank’s experiences around the world show that there are a number of financing
options for ESP projects in public buildings that can help address some of the barriers to EE
implementation. These options can be represented as a “financing ladder” (see Figure 6) to help
guide policymakers in selecting one or more options that can then be designed to provide
accessible financing products. The following discussion focuses on the two options circled in
Figure 6: (i) EE revolving funds and (ii) public, or “super,” ESCOs.
Figure 6 – Public Energy Efficiency Financing Options Ladder




Source: World Bank 2013a.




Guidance Note                              Page 16                                    May 2014
EE Revolving Funds
EE revolving funds offer viable options for governments to stimulate ESP projects in the public
sector.3 Such funds have been successfully deployed by national or state governments, with
assistance from the World Bank and GEF, in Armenia (World Bank 2013c), Bulgaria (World
Bank 2010d), and Romania (World Bank 2009). They offer a range of long-term financing
options for public sector EE projects, such as:
    •   Loans to (i) public agencies that are creditworthy and have borrowing capacity or (ii) to
        ESPs that provide services to these public agencies, such as those offered by the Bulgarian
        Energy Efficiency Fund (BEEF).
    •   Energy services agreements (ESAs) with public agencies that have little or no borrowing
        capacity and/or do not have the capacity to contract with and manage ESPs. Under an
        ESA, the fund offers a full package of services to identify, finance, implement, and monitor
        EE projects. The public agency is usually required to pay to the fund all, or a portion, of its
        baseline energy bill to cover the investment cost and associated fees during the contract
        period. The fund can then engage ESPs to provide some or all of the implementation
        services using performance-based agreements. A good example of an ESA is provided by
        the Armenia R2E2 Fund (see the Armenia case study in Annex A).
    •   Risk sharing facilities, designed to address the perception held by lenders that EE projects
        are inherently riskier than their traditional investments. These provide partial coverage of
        the risk involved in extending loans for EE projects. This approach facilitates bank lending
        to ESPs and helps develop the energy services market. An example is the IFC/GEF partial
        risk guarantee program in Hungary (see the Hungary case study in Annex A).
    •   Forfeiting or sale of ESP receivables. Forfeiting is useful in situations where an ESP is
        providing its own equity for project financing. It is a form of transfer of future receivables
        from one party (the seller—an ESP) to another (the buyer—a financial institution).4 An
        example of forfeiting is provided by the Bulgarian ESCO Fund (BEF) established under the
        Law for Special Investment Companies by the Bulgarian company Enemona.
Public or Super ESCOs
Another option for financing ESP projects in the public sector is the creation of a public, or
“super,” ESCO.5 Examples of public ESCOs include the HEP ESCO in Croatia (HEP 2013), the
Krakow ESCO in Poland, and UkrESCO in Ukraine (World Bank 2010a).6 Recent super ESCOs
include Fedesco in Belgium (Madam 2013), Fakai Super ESCO in China (ECO-Asia 2009), and
EESL in India (EESL 2013). Public and super ESCOs facilitate contracting with other public
agencies, help reduce transaction costs associated with complex public sector procurements,
allow for financing of performance contracts from international donor agencies, and help develop
ESPs by engaging them as subcontractors in the implementation process. They can thus serve as
incubators for local ESPs, while allowing the concept of ESPCs to become accepted and
providing the local ESPs with experience and track records for their future marketing.




3
  A more detailed discussion is provided in a separate guidance note on EE revolving funds (World Bank
2014b).
4
  The original creditor (the ESP) cedes his claims to future revenues from the project and the new creditor (the
FI) gains the right to claim these future receivables from the debtor (the client). The ESP receives a discounted
one-time payment from the FI that then allows it to invest in new ESPC projects.
5
  Additional information on public and super ESCOs is provided in World Bank 2013a.
6
  http://www.esco.krakow.pl/about_us/about_us/english.

Guidance Note                                     Page 17                                               May 2014
6. International Examples of Government Initiatives to Foster the
Energy Services Market
Many governments have taken actions to foster the energy services market and help establish and
grow ESPs in their countries. Some examples are provided in Table 3.
Table 3 – Illustrative Government Actions to Foster ESPs
   Government
     Action             Country                                       Summary Description
   Procurement          Germany        The Berlin Energy Agency helps public agencies, on a fee-for-service basis,
      Agent                            to identify EE opportunities; it also provide standard templates for audits,
                                       RFPs, bid evaluation, contracts, etc. and as well as guidance throughout ESP
                                       procurement process
Facilitating public      Czech         The government reformed public procurement procedures to facilitate ESP
  procurement           Republic       contracts; uses multiple criteria in ESP bid evaluation; and certifies "energy
                                       experts"
 Project bundling       Hungary        The Ministry of Education issued single procurement for all schools and
                                       competitively selected an ESP consortium to provide EE services to all
                                       schools under a master contract
     Forfeiting         Bulgaria       The Bulgaria ESCO Fund used financing from EBRD to purchase the cash
                                       flows from an ESP project; this allowed the ESP to free up funding for
                                       additional projects.
EE revolving fund           U.K.       Salix Finance was established by U.K. DECC to provide loan financing
 with loan facility                    exclusively for public sector projects; it has worked with 138 public agencies
                                       and financed over 11,000 projects, many of which are implemented by ESPs
EE revolving fund       Armenia        The Armenia R2E2 Fund offers public agencies ESAs under which it designs
   with ESAs                           the project, hires ESPs, oversees construction, and monitors the project
                                       under a fixed-price, long-term agreement
   Public ESCO          Croatia        A public ESCO was established in the national utility, HEP, to (i) develop,
                                       finance, and implement EE projects using local businesses as key delivery
                                       agents and (ii) provide opportunities for ESPs to tap into new energy
                                       efficiency business opportunities
   Super ESCO            India         A public sector entity (EESL) was established to develop, finance, and
                                       implement EE projects in the public sector using private ESCOs as
                                       subcontractors or partners
Source: Prepared by Authors.

Table 4 shows the results with respect to public-sector ESP projects in developed countries.
Table 4 – Public Sector ESP Markets and Results from Selected Developed Countries
Country                            Market Size                          Results                      No. of Projects
Canada (Federal              C$320 million           •     20% reduction in energy intensity      85 ESP projects
Buildings Initiative)        (~US$ 300 million)      •     C$40 million energy savings            (7,500+ buildings)
                                                     •     285,000 tons of CO2e reduction
Germany                      €200 million            •     20–30% reduction in energy costs       ~2,000 ESP projects
                             (~US$260 million)       •     €30-45 million energy cost savings
Japan                        ¥10 billion             •     12% reduction in energy intensity      50 ESP projects in
                             (~US$115 million)       •     265,000 tons of CO2e reduction         2006

South Korea                  223 billion Won         •     N/A                                    ~1,400 public ESP
                             (~US$185 million)                                                    projects
USA (Federal Energy          US$3.8 billion          •     ~30 trillion btu/year                  500+ ESP projects
Management Program)                                  •     US$11.7 billion in energy cost
                                                           savings
Source: World Bank 2010c.


Guidance Note                                            Page 18                                             May 2014
7. Lessons Learned from International Experience
This section summarizes the key lessons learned from international experience with regard to (i)
policies and regulations and (ii) technical assistance.

Policies and Regulations
 •   The development of an ESP/ESCO market and the establishment and growth of ESPs
     require strong and sustained government commitment and actions and can take 5–10 years
     or more.
 •   One strategy governments have employed to develop their local ESP industries is to
     promote ESP projects in the public sector.
 •   Stakeholder consultations can be very effective in identifying potential solutions to market
     and regulatory (e.g., budget, procurement) barriers and gaining buy-in from all sides on
     market development activities and solutions.
 •   Pilot efforts are generally needed to test alternative procurement and financing schemes for
     ESPs.
 •   Formal accreditation and/or certification schemes for ESPs can help improve the credibility
     of ESPs with public agencies and facilitate EE project transactions between them, provided
     they are carried out transparently and do not create barriers to market entry.
 •   There is a wide range of ESP business models. Governments should encourage the adoption
     of simple business models suitable for local market conditions (such as leasing, supplier
     credits, and one-year ESP contracts) to initiate ESP projects in public agencies.
 •   To facilitate public agency procurement of ESP services, governments need to develop a
     simple and transparent procurement system with well-defined rules, regulations,
     procedures, and supporting documents.

Technical Assistance
 •   TA needs to be provided to both public agencies and ESPs to facilitate the agencies’
     procurement of ESP services. This might include organization of pre-bid workshops,
     development of procurement guidelines, and so on.
 •   A key element of developing a market for ESP services is to educate public agency
     decision-makers on the potential role and benefits of ESPs in implementing EE projects. To
     avoid unrealistic expectations, this should include discussion of exactly what ESPs can and
     cannot do.
 •   Upfront data collection, benchmarking, and market assessments in such areas as EE
     potential, ESP capabilities, and available financing are critical to identifying barriers and
     TA needs.
 •   Once the procurement and financing schemes are sufficiently evolved, the development of
     standardized documentation (such as audit templates, RFPs and contracts, and M&V
     protocols) can assist with scale-up. Governments may have many options for addressing the
     financing challenges of ESPs. The selection of the appropriate option(s) should be based on
     the local legislative and regulatory situation and energy services and financing market
     conditions.
 •   Simple financing models, such as establishment of EERFs (with the ESA option and/or
     forfeiting) and public ESCOs, can be effective in helping develop the ESP market.
 •   To serve the needs of all public agencies and provide opportunities for ESPs to participate
     in EE project implementation, the development of an ESA approach appears to be a suitable
     model for the region. (See under "EE Revolving Funds" in Section 5 and the Armenia case
     study in Annex A.)


Guidance Note                             Page 19                                       May 2014
  •      The establishment of public or “super” ESCOs can help the development of the energy
         services market and the financing of ESP projects, as long as such public entities have a
         clear mandate to engage ESPs in project implementation. Governments must ensure that
         such public organizations do not “crowd out” private sector ESPs from the market.

Conclusion
A major conclusion from these lessons is that governments need to adopt a three-pronged
approach—involving policy and regulatory initiatives, TA, and financing strategies—to build
ESP and public agency capacity, implement ESP projects in the public sector, and provide a
platform for moving to more complex implementation and financing models in the future. TA or
financing alone has not proven an effective strategy in overcoming the multidimensional
challenges of ESCO development; efforts in all three areas are needed.
Table 5 presents results of ESP markets in selected countries. It should be noted that in China the
focus of the ESP activities has primarily been in the industrial sector, whereas in India, South
Africa, and Thailand both buildings and industry have been targeted. In the Czech Republic (as in
the rest of the EU) the main focus has been on buildings.
Table 5 – Energy Services Markets in Selected Developing Countries
 Country               Initiation   No. of ESPs                Characteristics
 China                   1998          >500       •   World Bank support
                                                  •   Focus on industry
                                                  •   Mostly Guaranteed Savings
 Czech Republic          1994           15        •   Government and donor funds
                                                  •   Focus on public sector
                                                  •   Guaranteed Savings most common
 India                   1995          >120       •   Strong accreditation scheme
                                                  •   Focus on buildings and industry
                                                  •   High growth in recent years
 South Africa            2004          >100       •   Financing from Eskom
                                                  •   Focus on both industry and buildings
                                                  •   ESCO accreditation scheme
 Thailand                1999           45        •   Government funding support
                                                  •   Focus on both industry & buildings
                                                  •   Guaranteed and Shared Savings
Source: Limaye 2014.



8. Roadmap for Establishing an Energy Services Market
Private sector ESPs represent a useful option for scaling up implementation of EE projects.
However, in many countries—including all of the Western Balkan countries—few ESPs are
currently operating and the development of energy services markets faces a number of
challenges. Governments can foster the establishment and growth of ESPs by using the ESPC
approach to public sector procurement of energy services. Experience with public sector ESPCs
can build the capacity of ESPs and enable them to extend their services to the private sector.
As indicated in the case studies in Annex A, governments have implemented a wide range of
initiatives to encourage the establishment of energy services markets. Key conclusions of this
guidance note are that (i) there is no specific formula that can be prescribed to instruct
governments on how to develop energy services markets; and (ii) fostering the ESP market
requires governments to undertake a concerted set of legislative, regulatory, policy, financing,
and awareness/ information initiatives.

Guidance Note                                     Page 20                                    May 2014
The roadmap in Figure 7 provides some guidance to governments on the various initiatives that
may help them develop the energy services markets in their countries.
Figure 7 – A Roadmap for Developing the Energy Services Market
                                  Identify existing ESPs and assess their capacity, strengths and limitations;
 Identify and assess current      assess budgeting and procurement regulations; understand public agency credit
       market situation           and borrowing capacity, financial markets, and their willingness to finance public
                                  agencies

                                  Consult with public officials (budgeting, procurement, technical, legal), existing
     Conduct stakeholder
                                  and prospective ESPs, financiers, etc. to identify needs and challenges; identify
        consultations
                                  barriers to public procurement of ESPs

                                  Increase knowledge, awareness and capacity of public agencies to
    Create demand for EE          identify/assess projects, establish goals and action plans, provide
          services                recognition/awards, standardize documents, bundle projects, conduct
                                  workshops, and accredit and/or certify ESPs
               v

                                  Allow multi-year contracts, allow agencies to retain energy cost savings, use
  Remove barriers to public
                                  "most value" instead of least cost in public bid evaluation, facilitate PPPs, allow
 procurement of EE services
                                  leasing of EE equipment, and exclude ESP payments from public debt
               v
                                  Consider options such as establishing EE revolving funds, energy services
  Facilitate financing of ESP     agreements, funding energy audits of public agencies, providing grants or
            projects              guarantees, creating risk-sharing facilities, creating public ESCO or Super
                                  ESCO, or facilitating forfeiting
                v
                                  To facilitate public agency procurement of ESP services, develop a simple and
   Develop and test simple
                                  transparent procurement system with well-defined rules, regulations, and
    procurement models
                                  procedures and supporting documents
                v
                                  Learn from results of the simple models to develop scale-up strategies;
   Expand to more complex         disseminate results; introduce more complex models involving greater
           models                 engagement of ESPs and financiers; develop standardized documents/M&V
                                  protocols
Source: Prepared by Authors based on World Bank 2010c.




Guidance Note                                      Page 21                                                  May 2014
References
Berger, Susanne. 2011. “Energy Saving Partnership Berlin: Supporting ESCO markets on a
       regional basis.” Presentation at the “Financing Retrofit: Public Sector” conference,
       Dublin, Ireland.
Czech Republic. 2000. Act on Energy Management: 25 October 2000. Prague, Czech Republic.
ECS. 2012. Energy Community Secretariat. Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the
      Contracting Parties of the Energy Community. Prepared by ENSI. Vienna, Austria..
ECO-Asia. 2009. ECO-Asia Clean Development and Climate Program. Development of a Super
     ESCO to Implement a 600 MW Energy Efficiency Power Plant in Hebei, China.
     December 2009.
EESL. 2013. “Performance Review and Business Plan for 2013-14.” Presentation to the Ministry
      of Power, New Delhi, India.
HEP. 2013. Vlasta Zanki, HEP. “Experience Implementing ESCO Projects in Croatia.”
      Presentation at the KfW Energy Forum, Frankfurt.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2003. Energy Policies of IEA Countries: Hungary. Paris.
International Finance Corporation (IFC). 2008. Smart Lessons in Energy Efficiency, Washington
        D.C.
Joint Research Centre (JRC). 2010. Angelica Marino, Paolo Bertoldi, and Silvia Rezessy. Energy
        Service Companies Market in Europe - Status Report 2010. Prepared by the Institute for
        Energy. Ispra, Italy.
Limaye, Dilip R. 2009. Developing an Energy Services Business Training Module: Vietnam
      Energy Efficiency Program. Hanoi.
———. 2013a. Developing an Energy Services Business, e-Learning Module. Washington, DC:
   World Bank Institute.
———. 2013b. Scaling Up Energy Efficiency In Buildings in The Western Balkans: Case Study -
   Hungary - Schools Energy Efficiency Program. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014. “Business Models for Private Sector-led Energy Efficiency.” Presentation to the
   Executive Power Breakfast, USAID Energy sector Capacity Building Program, Amman,
   Jordan.
Limaye, Dilip R. and Emily S. Limaye. 2011. “Scaling Up Energy Efficiency: The Case for a
      Super ESCO.” Energy Efficiency Journal 4:133–144.
Madam, Christophe. 2013. “Engaging Energy Service Companies (ESCOs), Case Study: Fedesco
     Belgium.” Presentation at the KfW Energy Forum, Frankfurt, November.
Malek, Bohuslav. 2011. “Energy Efficiency in Public Buildings: Experiences from the Czech
       Republic.” Presentation at the World Bank Institute Training Seminar on Public
       Procurement of Energy Efficiency Services, Skopje, Macedonia.
Sochor, Vladimir. 2011. “Energy Efficiency in Public Buildings: Experiences from the Czech
       Republic.” Presentation by SEVEn, World Sustainable Energy Day, Prague, Czech
       Republic.
Ürge-Vorsatz, Diana, Pierre Langlois, and Silvia Rezessy. 2005. “Why Hungary? Lessons
      Learned from the Success of the Hungarian ESCO Industry.”
      http://www.eceee.org/library/conference_proceedings/ACEEE_buildings/2004/Panel_6/p
      6_30/paper.


Guidance Note                            Page 22                                     May 2014
Western Balkans Investment Framework (WBIF). 2013. Financing Energy Efficiency Investments
       in the Western Balkans. Vienna, Austria.
World Bank. 2006. World Bank/GEF. Energy Efficiency Portfolio Review and Practitioners’
      Handbook. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2009. Implementation Completion report, Global Environment Facility Trust Fund
      Grant in the Amount Of US$ 10 Million to Romania for an Energy Efficiency Project.
      Washington DC.
World Bank. 2009b. Project Appraisal Document for a Municipal Services Improvement Project
      in Macedonia. World Bank: Report No. 462 16-MK. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2010a. Jas Singh, Dilip Limaye, Brian Henderson, and Xiaoyu Shi. Public
      Procurement of Energy Efficiency Services. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2010b. Status of Energy Efficiency in the Western Balkans: A Stocktaking Report.
      Report no. AAA49-7B. Washington DC.
World Bank. 2010c. Guidance Note: Public Procurement of Energy Efficiency Services: Getting
      Started. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2010d. Implementation Completion and Results Report for the Bulgaria Energy
      Efficiency Project. Report No. ICR00001575. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2010e. Implementation Completion and Results Report for the Bulgaria Energy
      Efficiency Project. Report No. ICR00001557. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2012a. ESMAP. Modernization of the District Heating Systems in Ukraine: Heat
      Metering and Consumption-Based Billing. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2012b. Project Paper on a Proposed Additional Loan and Restructuring for the
      Municipal Services Improvement Project in Macedonia. Report no. 67713-MK.
      Washington, D.C.
World Bank. 2013a. Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans. Interim
      report. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2013b. Xiaodong Wang, Richard Stern, Dilip Limaye, Wolfgang Mostert, and
      Yabei Zhang. Leveraging Commercial Financing for Clean Energy in East Asia.
      Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2014a. Guidance Note: Financing Municipal Energy Efficiency Projects.
      Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2014b. Guidance Note: Energy Efficiency Revolving Funds. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2014c. Armenia, World Bank Energy Mission: January 27–31, 2014. Aide-
      mémoire. Washington, DC.




Guidance Note                           Page 23                                    May 2014
Annex A. International Examples of Government Initiatives to
Foster the Energy Services Market
This annex presents four case studies of countries where government initiatives have promoted
the development of energy services markets: Armenia, Croatia, Czech Republic, and Hungary.

1. Armenia
Introduction
The government of Armenia established the Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency (R2E2)
Fund in 2005, initially as a project implementation unit (PIU) for a World Bank–supported
EE/renewable energy (RE) project (World Bank 2012b). It was structured as an independent
NGO following the provisions of Armenia's “Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy”
and began operation in 2006. Its overall objective is to reduce energy consumption of social and
other public facilities; its global environmental objective is to decrease greenhouse gas emissions
by facilitating the implementation of EE investments in the public sector.
Energy Services Agreements
The Fund is currently implementing a World Bank/GEF–supported project that provides EE
services in public sector facilities—including EE investments in schools, hospitals, administration
buildings and street lighting—using a revolving fund scheme. The Fund offers two financing
products to eligible public entities:
 •   For municipalities and public entities with revenue streams independent of the state budget,
     loans are provided. These loans do count as municipal debt, with fixed repayment
     obligations to be made within their budget provisions in future years. The amounts of the
     repayments are designed to allow clients to repay the investment costs and service fees
     from the estimated energy cost savings. The client can pay additional fees for the Fund to
     implement the project on its behalf.
 •   For schools and other public entities that are not legally or budget independent, ESAs are
     used. Under the ESA, a public entity pays the Fund its baseline energy costs (with
     adjustments for energy prices, usage, and other factors) over the 7–10-year contract period.
     The Fund designs the project, hires subcontractors, oversees construction and
     commissioning, and monitors the subproject. In this case, the client incurs no debt; the
     Fund directly pays the energy bills to the utility on the client’s behalf, retaining the balance
     to cover its investment cost and service fee. The ESA is designed so that the duration can be
     adjusted if the Fund recovers its full investment earlier (or later).
In addition, R2E2 has a TA component that includes developing recommendations for
amendment of legal and regulatory framework, public outreach campaigns, direct advisory
assistance to public agencies, and training.
R2E2 uses simplified performance contracts to shift some performance risks to private
construction firms/contractors and to support the build-up of an ESCO industry in Armenia.
Under these contracts, firms are selected based on the net present value of the projects they
propose, and a portion of their final payment (around 30 percent) is based on a commissioning
test.
Projects
By January 2014, the Fund had commissioned 19 projects for public clients at a total estimated
cost of US$2.35 million (World Bank 2014c). The Fund has strengthened its implementation
capacity by hiring EE, institutional, and procurement consultants, and has initiated a marketing
campaign to increase the demand for investment funds from prospective public clients and build
the 2014 pipeline.


Guidance Note                               Page 24                                        May 2014
Assuming a 20-year useful life of the project investments, the estimated lifetime energy savings
are 32.3 GWh and GHG reductions are 7,930 tons of CO2e.
Lessons Learned
The experience of the Armenia R2E2 Fund indicates that:
 •   The ESA option can be quite attractive for public agencies.
 •   A marketing and public awareness campaign is important in creating the demand for energy
     services among public agencies.
 •   By engaging ESPs to provide some of the implementation services, the Fund is helping
     build ESP capacity in Armenia.

2. Croatia
Overview
The Croatian Energy Law (2001) and the Government’s Energy Strategy (2002) called for the
implementation of programs to increase EE and develop RE resources. According to the Law,
local authorities had to participate in national EE programs, integrate EE activities into their
development plans, establish local EE action plans, and report annually to the government on the
savings achieved (World Bank 2010e). However, by 2001, no private or public entity was either
developing or implementing EE projects in Croatia. The key barriers to EE investments were
identified as lack of financing; lack of capacity and know-how among key stakeholders, and lack of
consumer demand for EE services.
Public ESCO
The World Bank implemented a project to increase the demand for and supply of EE projects and
services by creating a public ESCO. The principal objectives were to:
 •   Create a core developer of EE projects within Hrvatska elektroprivreda d.d. (HEP—the
     national power utility). This new energy service company (HEP ESCO) would develop,
     finance and implement EE projects on a commercial, for-profit basis, using local businesses
     as key delivery agents; and
 •   Provide a framework for other emerging service providers to tap into new EE business
     opportunities.
The project consisted of four major components:
 •   Energy saving investments—implemented by HEP ESCO under ESPCs with public and
     private buildings, public lighting, water pumping systems, and small cogeneration/district
     heating systems.
 •   HEP ESCO project development and financing—to finance preliminary project
     development and provide bridge financing for project design services and initial energy
     saving investments.
 •   A credit-enhancement mechanism at the Croatian Development Bank (HBOR)—to enhance
     the creditworthiness of HEP ESCO as well as other ESPs and end users.
 •   Technical assistance related to training, information dissemination, outreach, and
     measurement and verification—provided to HEP ESCO staff and project partners, other EE
     businesses, HBOR, and appropriate nonprofit or consumer groups.
HEP ESCO began operations in 2004. By the end of the project implementation period (June
2010), the following results had been achieved:
 •   HEP ESCO implemented 31 EE projects on a commercial, for-profit basis, for a total
     cumulative value of US$29.5 million in EE investments in six market segments: public
     lighting, schools, hospitals, cogeneration, industry, and commercial buildings.

Guidance Note                              Page 25                                      May 2014
    •   HEP ESCO was able to gradually improve its operational and financial performance, thus
        demonstrating the commercially and financial viability of EE investments and the ESPC
        model.
    •   The project's credit enhancement facility helped engage commercial banks in the financing
        of EE projects. The TA activities improved the banks’ understanding of EE, which in turn
        helped them market EE loans to their customers. Five banks participated either in the risk-
        sharing facility or in direct loans for EE projects.
    •   The project successfully helped overcome key barriers to the development of an EE market.
        The activities funded under the project had a direct transformational effect in terms of
        increased availability of EE products and services in the Croatian market.
A very important result was that HEP ESCO helped create a framework for other service
providers to develop and participate in the energy services market. By establishing strong
business relationships with partners such as engineering firms, distributors, equipment
manufacturers and suppliers, and installers, HEP ESCO helped develop business opportunities for
private firms, build capacity, and transfer skills and know-how. By June 2010, about 22
engineering/consultancy firms and academic research institutions were offering energy services.
Lessons Learned
The establishment of a public ESCO with responsibilities to develop, finance and implement EE
projects on a commercial, for-profit basis, using local energy services businesses as key delivery
agents, can be an attractive option to kick-start an energy services industry.

3. Czech Republic
Overview
The Czech Republic provides a good example of government initiatives that have helped
establish what is now a well-developed energy services market. The first energy service company
in the Czech republic was established in 1993, and there are about 10 active ESCOs in the Czech
market today (Sochor 2011). By 2011, a total of 200 energy services projects had been
completed, with a total investment of €200 million and total energy savings of 800 terajoules.
Most of these projects have been implemented at the local government level (municipalities).
As a part of the country's accession to the EU, the Czech Parliament enacted the Energy
Management Act (Czech Republic 2000).7 This Act has a number of provisions consistent with
the requirements of EU directives on EE, including requirements for EE master plans, energy
performance of buildings, building certification, appliance labeling, and minimum energy
performance standards, as well as general principles of energy supply contracting and energy
savings performance contracting.
Legislative and Regulatory Initiatives
There is no special legislation covering ESPC; however, ESPC in the public sector is facilitated
by (Malek 2011):
    •   The Act on Public Contracts (1995)
    •   A handbook on energy services as a working tool for the public sector (1999)
    •   Regulations defining how public contracts can be negotiated (2005)
These regulations have resulted in a special procedure for tendering for ESPC projects that has
been in use for about 10 years. This procedure is accepted by the Czech Anti-Monopoly Office
and recognized by the ESPs bidding on public sector contracts, and provides clarity for the public


7
    This Act was amended several times, most recently in 2013; see
http://www.twobirds.com/en/news/articles/2012/energycertificates-buildings-amendement-energy-management-act1212


Guidance Note                                      Page 26                                              May 2014
agencies. It differs from the usual tenders for the supply of equipment or services in that its
objective is to reduce energy and utility costs and the following procedure is used:
  •   The scope of the project is not defined. Instead, baseline data from the existing energy and
      utility systems (typically heat and electricity, including lighting, and sometimes also
      including maintenance and personnel costs) are included in the RFP.
  •   Bidders suggest the actual measures to be installed.
  •   The bid document contains the basic terms and conditions of the proposed contract between
      client and the ESP.
  •   A two-stage procedure is used, the first stage being pre-qualification.
  •   In the second stage, shortlisted bidders receive detailed tender information including
      baseline data, may undertake on-site visits, develop their technical solutions, and propose
      the savings.
  •   The bid evaluation is typically based on multiple criteria, such as guaranteed savings,
      sharing of additional savings beyond the guaranteed amounts, investment costs, and
      technical quality of the bid.
  •   A contract is then negotiated with the best-evaluated bidder.
The procurement procedure allows for multi-year contracts and retention of savings.
Another important initiative in the Czech Republic is the certification of energy experts in four
categories: (i) energy auditing, (ii) inspection of air conditioning, (iii) inspection of boilers, and
(iv) certification of buildings. Applicants must meet specified education and experience
requirements and pass written and verbal tests to be certified. Such certification has led to
increased credibility of ESPs with energy users.
Lessons Learned
The Czech experience points out that, with appropriate legislative and regulatory initiatives, a
number of barriers to ESPCs in the public sector can be overcome and increased use of ESPCs
can be facilitated. In addition, a formal certification scheme for energy service professionals can
improve the acceptance by energy users of the ESPs.

4. Hungary
Overview
Hungary has been reported as one of the most successful cases for the energy services business in
Europe. For instance, the International Energy Agency considers Hungary to be “one of the
leading countries to develop the scope of ESCOs in the 90s” (IEA 2003). In addition to ESCOs,
utilities in Hungary have also championed offering performance-contracting type services. Many
key electric suppliers claim that EE services will play a more significant role in their product
offerings as they face competitive markets (JRC 2010). As of 2010, there were 20 to 30 active
ESCOs operating in Hungary, mainly in the public sector, with some activity in residential sector
(blockhouses) and in combined heat and power plants/renewables.
Hungary has seen a significant growth in its EE business, ESCO activity, and market acceptance
and has been considered as the most “ESCO-friendly” country in Central and Eastern Europe
(Ürge-Vorsatz, et al 2005). The main factors contributing to the growth of the energy services
industry in Hungary are as follows:
  •   Due to rapid and aggressive economic reforms, enterprises came under pressure to reduce
      costs and started to outsource EE upgrades.
  •   Banks in Hungary typically had high liquidity and were willing to provide long-term
      financing. In addition, loans were available in local currency, thereby eliminating perceived
      currency risks.

Guidance Note                                Page 27                                        May 2014
    •   Leasing was permitted and encouraged early in Hungary through institutional reforms,
        enabling this concept to be used for many types of projects, including EE equipment.
    •   Most subsidies and cross-subsidies were eliminated in the economic reforms.
    •   Utilities have been active in entering energy service agreements and performance contracts
        to capture/retain customers in anticipation of competitive markets.
Project Bundling
Hungary provides an excellent example of project bundling in the public sector. In 2006,
although the energy services market had developed significantly, there were no EE projects in
schools. The Ministry of Education (MOE) initiated a large-scale program covering all schools,
employing an innovative “pooled” public tender process to offer municipalities the opportunity
to better access private sector financing to implement much-needed school renovations. The
program, called Szemünk Fénye (“the light of our eyes”; see IFC 2008), was designed as a
national program for improving lighting and heating systems in schools under which one
contractor was selected by MOE and any municipality in the country could work with this
contractor to implement EE measures using the performance contracting approach. The
advantage to the municipalities was that they would not have to go through a competitive bidding
process for each individual project.
The winner of the tender was a consortium led by the Országos Takarékpénztár (OTP) Bank.8
The Consortium signed a 20-year framework agreement with MOE that specified the
implementation terms and conditions. Individual municipalities and other school operators could
engage this consortium without going through additional tender process for each individual project.
They were not obligated to use the consortium, but if they did not, they would have to follow the
public procurement (tendering) procedures. The overall program was able to take advantage of an
EU capital subsidy program for public buildings in Hungary that provided a grant of 20 percent
of the capital cost. Also the Hungarian National Development Bank provided some low-interest
funds to OTP to help finance the projects, and OTP also availed itself of a partial credit guarantee
facility (50 percent risk sharing) available from IFC and GEF. The financial structure for the
projects was roughly 20 percent EU grant, 70 percent OTP financing, and 10 percent equity from
the Caminus Group (Limaye 2013b).
As of the end of the program in December 2012, a total of 354 projects had been completed with
a total investment of Ft 13.0 billion (about US$65 million). Almost 85 percent of the measures
installed by the OTP consortium were efficient lighting in schools and municipal office buildings.
There were a few projects involving gas-based heating systems improvement. The estimated
energy savings were 456,000 gigajoules per year, and the estimated annual cost savings were Ft
1.67 billion or about US$8.9 million.
Lessons Learned
The Hungarian experience shows that the growth of the energy services industry can be
facilitated by cost pressures on energy users, the existence of mature financial markets, cost-
based tariffs, and regulatory initiatives such as permitting leasing of EE equipment. Also, utilities
can be players in the energy services markets as they face competitive pressures. Finally,
bundling of projects can be a very good approach to facilitating public sector EE projects.




8
 Other members of the consortium included Caminus, one of the most accomplished ESCOs in Hungary; Sza-
Co and Ratherm, energy engineering services and implementation companies; and GE Hungary and
Viessmann, major equipment suppliers.

Guidance Note                                Page 28                                        May 2014
