                                                         89324




Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans



Financing Energy Efficiency Measures for
Residential Building Stock
Guidance Note
May 2014




Prepared by Bernd Kalkum
Contents

Abbreviations and Acronyms ....................................................................................................... 3
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... 4
1. Introduction: Why Residential Energy Efficiency is Important to the Western Balkans .. 6
   Energy-Saving Potential............................................................................................................... 8
2. Barriers to Energy Efficiency ................................................................................................... 9
3. Approaches Countries Have Taken to Remove These Barriers .......................................... 11
4. Case Studies .............................................................................................................................. 14
   Financial Mechanisms ................................................................................................................ 14
   Fiscal Instruments ...................................................................................................................... 16
   Delivery Mechanisms ................................................................................................................. 16
5. Lessons Learned ....................................................................................................................... 19
6. Roadmap ................................................................................................................................... 21
References ..................................................................................................................................... 25
Annex A. Mechanisms for Promoting EE.................................................................................. 27




Guidance Note                                                    Page 2                                                              May 2014
Abbreviations and Acronyms
General
CHP         combined heat and power
DH          district heating
DHW         domestic hot water (sanitary water)
EBRD        European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EE          energy efficiency
ESCO        energy service company
EU          European Union
EUA         European Union Allowances
EU-MS       EU member states
GEF         Global Environment Facility
GWh         gigawatt-hour
GWht        thermal GWh
HOA         homeowner association
IEA         International Energy Agency
IFI         international financial institution
NEEAP       National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
RE          renewable energy
RES         renewable energy sources
toe         tonnes of oil equivalent
Y           year

Regional
The Western Balkan region comprises Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia:
AB          Albania
BiH         Bosnia and Herzegovina
KOS         Kosovo
MK          FYR Macedonia
MNE         Montenegro
SER         Serbia




Guidance Note                           Page 3                                May 2014
Executive Summary
Within the Western Balkans region, a secure energy supply is critical to sustaining economic
growth. Currently, the region relies heavily on imported hydrocarbons and maintains high energy
intensity relative to GDP. This places a huge burden on companies, which require affordable and
reliable infrastructure services to be competitive; the public sector, which spends significant
budgetary resources on energy; and households, which have to pay a high portion of their income
for energy services. As energy pricing is further rationalized, a higher burden will be placed on
all sectors, especially poorer households.
The residential sector is a significant energy consumer. Its share of total final energy consumption
ranges from 28 percent to 32 percent (compared with the EU average of 27 percent). Fairly
simple renovations such as insulation, heating system upgrades, and improvements to windows
and lighting could reduce consumption in this sector by some 9 percent, with payback periods
generally under 8 years. Such improvements could help ease the impact of future tariff increases
while helping reduce the region’s projected energy supply/demand gap.
Unfortunately, there are a number of barriers preventing energy efficiency (EE) measures from
being implemented in Western Balkans countries. Key ones have included:
      Pricing barriers: energy subsidies, absence of consumption-based billing, affordability,
       high cost of commercial financing;
      Technical barriers: lack of access to district heating (DH) or centralized heating in
       apartment buildings, lack of metering where DH/centralized systems exist, poor building
       maintenance, underheating, and lack of controls to adjust temperature levels;
      Legal and regulatory barriers: insufficient building code enforcement, apartment
       privatization and building ownership, and homeowner association (HOA) legislation; and
      Information: lack of awareness of EE and potential benefits, lack of information about
       how to implement EE measures, and limited information on quality/standards for EE
       materials/appliances
Governments have introduced a variety of policies, incentives, and financing/implementation
programs to help remove these barriers. These include:
      Financial mechanisms: EE measures stimulated by subsidies, loans, or price fluctuations;
      Fiscal mechanisms: EE activities financed and/or stimulated by the use of taxes;
      Delivery mechanisms: EE activities stimulated by the availability of specific assistance or
       imposition of certain legal obligations; and
      Institutions: EE activities developed/managed by public institutions.
Lessons learned can be summarized as follows:
      The implementing agency and delivery channels should be structured to maximize the
       chances for widespread deployment of funds.
      The administrative burden placed on fund recipients should be tailored to the segment
       targeted.
      Standardization of supporting tools for smaller projects is a success factor.
      Although the level of incentive must be tailored to local market conditions, it should be
       clearly linked with supporting long-term growth on a commercial basis.
      The types of incentives should be consistent with the goal of supporting integrated
       projects that provide substantial savings.
A roadmap for improving EE is presented below. Taking into account the current situation in the
Western Balkans, experiences from other countries (particularly of the new EU member or EU11
states (EU-MS), and lessons learned from the many EE programs launched in the EU, the
following steps are recommended for improving EE and for supporting achievement of National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) targets:


Guidance Note                               Page 4                                        May 2014
      Step 1: Implement financing incentive schemes for single-family houses including stoves
       (no DH and no building-level meters)
      Step 2: Increase awareness and establish centers
      Step 3: Issue new building codes
      Step 4: Implement building-level DH metering
      Step 5: Improve HOA legislation to allow majority investment decisions financed through
       borrowing
      Step 6: Rehabilitate DH systems to reduce losses including reasonable expansion
      Step 7: Initiate transition to building-level, consumption-based billing
      Step 8: Request building certificates and appliance standards and labeling
      Step 9: Implement financing incentives for apartment buildings
      Step 10: Implement EE incentives to regularize illegal housing
      Step 11: Implement apartment-level heating-cost allocators as well as thermostatic
       radiator valves (TRVs) and consumption-based billing




Guidance Note                            Page 5                                      May 2014
1. Introduction: Why Residential Energy Efficiency is Important to
the Western Balkans
Within the Western Balkans region, a secure energy supply is critical to sustaining economic
growth. Currently, the region relies heavily on imported hydrocarbons and maintains high energy
intensity relative to GDP. This places a huge burden on companies, which require affordable and
reliable infrastructure services to be competitive; the public sector, which spends significant
budgetary resources on energy; and households, which have to pay a high portion of their income
for energy services. As energy pricing is further rationalized, a higher burden will be placed on
all sectors, especially poorer households.
The residential sector is a significant energy consumer. Its share of the region’s overall energy
consumption (total final energy use) ranges from 28 percent to 32 percent, compared with the EU
average of 27 percent. The share relative to total electricity consumption is generally more than
50 percent, with the exception of Montenegro (Figures 1.A. and 1.B.).
Because the share of residential energy use is high, this sector has an enormous impact on the
overall energy efficiency (EE) programs and progress within the region. Key reasons for
achieving strong impacts in the sector include:
        Support for achieving National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) targets:
         According to the countries’ NEEAPs, envisaged savings in the residential sector are in the
         range of 4 to 10 percent (Figure 2).
        Energy security: Energy imports in the region are substantial, ranging from 31 to 43
         percent of the total energy used in 2011. EE is the most economical way to enhance
         energy security.
        Economic activity and job opportunities: Investing in EE measures supports local
         businesses and can create job opportunities in the industrial and agricultural sectors.
         Construction companies, which have been hit particularly hard by the financial crisis,
         would benefit from increased demand for building renovations. In the agricultural sector,
         the need for collecting and processing biomass could create new jobs. Demand for related
         products, from insulation to efficient windows to biomass boilers, can help stimulate local
         manufacturing.
        Increased availability of electricity service: Electric heating—either as a primary or
         secondary heat source—is widespread in the region, is very economically inefficient, and
         presents a burden to the national electricity systems, many of which are already
         constrained. Reducing the electricity consumption for space and water heating by
         insulating buildings/windows and by installing alternative heating systems (e.g., wood-
         fired boilers, connecting to district heating (DH), natural gas boilers) will help to
         eliminate the need for large, increasingly expensive investments in new power systems.
        Reducing subsidies: All countries in the region provide some subsidies for utility energy
         service in the residential sector, i.e., electricity and DH1 (Figure 3). Despite price
         increases in recent years, electricity is still cheap when compared with fossil fuels, and
         this is an important reason for the widespread use of electricity as a primary or secondary
         heating source until now.




1
 The share of residential buildings connected to DH varies: 2.5 percent in Albania, 12 percent in BiH, 5 percent in Kosovo,
0 percent in Montenegro, 27 percent in Serbia, and 48 percent in Macedonia (World Bank, “Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in
Buildings in the Western Balkans,”Interim Report).


Guidance Note                                          Page 6                                                  May 2014
Figure 1.A. Western Balkans Residential Sector: Share of Energy Consumption

      Serbia                                                               31%

 Montenegro                                                  30%

    FYR
                                                                                       32%
  Macedonia
 Bosnia &
                                     28%
Herzegovina

     Albania                                                               31%

           26%           27%       28%         29%         30%         31%        32%        33%

Figure 2.B. Western Balkans Residential Sector: Share of Electricity Consumption

      Serbia                                                                             55%

 Montenegro                                                  35%

    FYR
                                                                                       52%
  Macedonia

     Kosovo                                                                            52%

  Bosnia &
                                                                                 48%
 Herzegovina

     Albania                                                                           52%

               0%            10%     20%             30%           40%           50%         60%


Note: BiH = Bosnia and Herzegovina. No data available for Kosovo energy consumption (Fig. 1.A.).
Sources: IEA 2008; Statistical Office of Serbia 2012; Statistical Office of Montenegro 2013.

Figure 3. NEEAP targets for the residential sector

         Serbia                     3.7%

    Montenegro                                                   9.3%

 FYR Macedonia                                              8.4%

        Kosovo                                                      9.9%

        Albania                                              8.6%

                    0%        2%   4%          6%      8%        10%       12%
Note: The NEEAP of Bosnia and Herzegovina is not included since it has not yet been adopted. Serbia expects much higher
savings in the public building sector.
Source: NEEAPs of the countries.

Figure 4. Energy Subsidies per GDP

                    Serbia          9%

         Montenegro                      11%

       FYR Macedonia                9%

                Kosovo                                                   36%

 Bosnia & Herzegovina                10%

                Albania             8%

                             0%    10%          20%         30%            40%

Note: The number for Kosovo would be smaller if the grey market were included in the GDP.
Source: The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) estimates that fossil fuel subsidies in World Bank countries
amounted to 7–11 percent of GDP in 2005-09.


Guidance Note                                                       Page 7                                   May 2014
EE also has important local benefits. These include:
       Improvement of the existing building stock: Building refurbishment improves the
        appearance of buildings and makes the local environment more attractive. EE measures
        such as wall and roof insulation and replacement of windows support the maintenance of
        the building stock. Panel buildings (buildings made using pre-fabricated concrete parts for
        cheap and fast construction), in particular, suffer from premature aging and applied low
        insulation standards. Refurbishment of these buildings, combined with EE measures, has
        been a priority of the new EU member states (EU-MS).
       Increase in building value: Refurbishment can increase the value of both buildings and
        apartments. In Serbia, it was observed that the apartment prices increased significantly
        after the replacement of electric heating with DH.
       Local air quality: Air pollution caused by harmful emissions from indoor stoves and
        local boilers can be reduced. Moreover, modern efficient stoves and boilers utilize fuel
        much more effectively and thus reduce emissions substantially.
EE also has positive social and environmental impacts, such as:
       Reduction of heating costs: Viable EE measures reduce heating costs, which can be a
        significant share of household incomes. This helps cushion necessary tariff increases on
        the supply side and makes heating more affordable for final consumers.
       Ability to adjust heat supply to individual needs: Modernizing the heating system
        allows users to adjust heat consumption levels to their personal needs. Overheating or
        underheating can affect one’s quality of life and health.
       Reduction of harmful emissions: Improving supply systems and reducing final demand
        will reduce production of CO2 and harmful emissions from the burning of fossil fuels.

Energy-Saving Potential
As a recent Energy Community (2012) report revealed, the region’s residential building stock
offers enormous energy-saving potential (Figures 4 and 5). The report determined the energy
savings of a mix of EE measures, including efficient lighting, modern boilers, heat recovery,
hydraulic balancing, and insulation. From a purely technical point of view, much higher savings
could easily be achieved; however, payback times must be reasonable, so the measures selected
should result in payback times ranging from 5.4 to 7.6 years and savings that would amount to
about 9 percent of the corresponding residential energy consumption.
Figure 5. Savings Potential of Single-Family Houses and Apartment Buildings
                      Single- family houses                                       Apartment buildings


         Serbia

    Montenegro

 FYR Macedonia

        Kosovo

     Bosnia &
    Herzegovina

        Albania

                  -            500,000        1,000,000   1,500,000   2,000,000      2,500,000    3,000,000

                                                          MWh/y
Source: Energy Community 2012.




Guidance Note                                                    Page 8                                       May 2014
Figure 6. Single-Family Houses and Apartment Buildings in the Western Balkans

                                         Share of family houses          Share of apartment buildings

                Serbia 190 million m²                       64%                         36%


         Montenegro 17.4 million m²                       57%                         43%


       FYR Macedonia 46.5 million m²                      54%                       46%


              Kosovo 41.7 million m²                              74%                        26%


 Bosnia & Herzegovina 97.8 million m²                           70%                         30%


                Albania 63 million m²                       65%                         35%

                                        0%          20%            40%   60%           80%          100%       120%
Source: Energy Community 2012.

It is interesting to note that the proportion of energy savings potential in apartment buildings (as a
share of the total residential building stock) is significantly smaller than that for single-family
houses. There are two possible reasons for this. First, the specific heat consumption (measured in
kWh per square meter) of single-family houses is higher and consequently the saving potential is
also higher. Secondly, investment costs per unit of energy saved are higher for apartment
buildings.
Three important factors affect this potential:
    1. The savings potential has been estimated by calculating the normative heat losses,
       assuming an indoor temperature of 20oC. In cases of underheating, EE measures could
       facilitate improvement in heating comfort rather than energy savings.
    2. The cost of EE investments can be reduced if combined with building refurbishment.
    3. Higher energy prices will increase the potential for economic savings.
It should also be taken into account that the saving potential has been calculated for a typical set
of buildings. In individual cases, the savings can be much higher. A recent report by the
Intelligent Energy Europe Agency (IEEA 2011) evaluated the results from a number of best-case
projects implemented in various EU countries to find the most successful case. Savings of the
country-specific cases varied between 45 and 90 percent.
There is a striking difference between the energy saving potentials presented above and those
given in the NEEAPs. An important reason for this is the different time horizons. Whereas the
NEEAPs estimate how many savings can be achieved within a certain period of time, the figures
given above reflect the total savings potential of the existing building stock.


2. Barriers to Energy Efficiency
Although typical EE measures in residential buildings are economically viable and have
reasonable payback periods, a number of barriers are preventing EE measures from being
implemented. Financing is not listed as a separate barrier, because most commercial banks in the
region have sufficient liquidity and are generally interested in lending for household
refurbishment. There is also a prevalence of donor credit lines directed at clean energy. The larger
barriers tend to be related to energy pricing, technical issues, legal and regulatory issues, and
access to information. Table 1 briefly describes the most relevant barriers.


Guidance Note                                         Page 9                                            May 2014
Table 1. Barriers to Residential EE in the Western Balkans
Barrier                                                            Description
Pricing barriers
Energy subsidies              Direct energy subsidies and cross-subsidies constitute price distortions and
                              undermine incentives for implementing EE measures (increasing payback periods).
Absence of consumption-       Lump-sum billing (based on heated area) for DH is still widespread, which fosters a
based billing                 waste of energy, as payments are not linked to actual consumption.
Unaffordable heating          With increasing tariffs, heating threatens to become unaffordable for lower income
                              groups, which makes self-financing of EE measures increasingly difficult.
High costs of financing       Due to low household incomes, limited collateral, and poor legislation on HOAs,
                              access to commercial bank financing is impeded or very expensive.
Technical barriers
Lack of metering in central Identifying EE opportunities requires knowledge of actual energy use, which
heating and DH systems      requires metering. Most apartment building boilers and DH systems do not have
                            meters installed at the building level to measure heat production, heat losses, and
                            final consumption.
Building maintenance        The poor technical condition of a large part of the building stock, along with poor
                            maintenance practices, make implementation of EE measures difficult and
                            expensive.
Underheating                Underheating does not of itself constitute a barrier for EE, but low energy use
                            reduces potential for actual energy cost savings, as savings are offset by
                            increasing comfort levels.
Lack of central heating in  Many apartment buildings without DH connections also lack central heating,
apartment buildings         causing high use of electric heaters or wood stoves, making replacement with
                            efficient heating systems expensive.
Lack of centralized DH      Hot water typically requires electricity, wood, coal, or natural gas heaters. A lack of
water supply systems        centralized DH water systems constitutes a barrier to installation of more efficient
                            systems such as CHP and solar water heating systems.
Legal and regulatory barriers
Insufficient building codes Lax regulations and enforcement of buildings codes, and slow implementation of
                            building certificates, reduce implementation of EE measures by construction
                            companies and apartment owners.
Dispersed apartment         Decentralized ownership of apartments makes decision-making in apartment
privatization and building  buildings difficult and can hamper the financing and implementation of EE
ownership                   measures.
Poor HOA legislation        Poorly functioning or even a lack of HOAs (or other cooperative models) makes
                            decision-making, borrowing, and contracting for EE improvements difficult in
                            apartment buildings. Several new EU member states have solved this problem by
                            enforcing the establishment of HOAs with clearly defined legal structures,
                            governance rules, and obligations.
Information
Lack of awareness about     Many consumers are not aware of the scope and benefits of EE measures. It is
EE opportunities            difficult to acquire information about EE measures applicable to the specific
                            environment. Energy agencies are understaffed and local governments or utilities
                            are usually not prepared to offer such information.
Lack of knowledge about     Comprehensive know-how of energy flows, consumption, losses, etc. is typically
energy use                  absent. Even some DH companies do not know the extent of actual losses and
                            final consumption. Official statistics are incomplete (e.g., details of the building
                            stocks, local energy balance, renewable energy utilization).
Lack of standards and       Homeowners also lack information about the quality of various building materials
quality certification       (windows, insulation) and appliances; this can create misperceptions about EE
                            benefits and even result in some EE investments not resulting in expected savings
                            due to use of low-quality products.




Guidance Note                                      Page 10                                               May 2014
3. Approaches Countries Have Taken to Remove These Barriers
According to a recent study commissioned by the Western Balkans Investment Framework
(WBIF 2013b), various mechanisms for supporting EE implementation can be categorized as
follows:
       Financial mechanisms: EE measures stimulated by subsidies, loans, or price changes;
       Fiscal mechanisms: EE activities financed and/or stimulated by the use of taxes;
       Delivery mechanisms: EE activities stimulated by the availability of specific assistance or
        imposition of certain legal obligations; and
       Institutional mechanisms: EE activities developed/managed by public institutions.
Each of these groups comprises a number of tools (see Figure 6).
Figure 7. Range of EE Mechanisms



                                               Delivery mechanisms
                                                   Technical assistance
                                                   Audits
        Financial mechanisms                       ESCOs, TPF, Performance
              Subsidies                            contracting
              Grants                              On-bill financing
              Preferential loans                  Bulk purchase
              Credit lines                        Utility obligations
              Loan guarantee schemes              Levies
              Price reform                        Minimum requirement
                                                   EE fund (including.
                                                    Revolving fund)
                                                   Voluntary agreements
                                                   Other non-financial
                                                    incentives




          Fiscal mechanisms                   Institutional mechanisms
            Carbon, energy,                    Energy efficiency agency
             environmental tax
                                                Energy regulator
            Tax rebate




Source: Adapted from WBIF 2013b.

Annex A describes the most relevant tools used by the four mechanisms, including example
programs or measures from various countries. In many countries, residential EE programs usually
comprise more than one mechanism: financial and fiscal mechanisms need an appropriate
delivery mechanism to address the beneficiaries, and often this will be also supported by
institutional mechanisms. Similarly, few programs use one modality or instrument —building
retrofit programs may include concessional loans, partial grants, and bank guarantees, and could
also include technical assistance and audit support. Table 2 summarizes the most relevant tools,
or measures, for addressing the barriers.


Guidance Note                               Page 11                                       May 2014
Table 2. Measures Taken to Address Barriers
Barrier                                                           Measures
Pricing barriers
Energy subsidies           Many new EU member states (EU-MS) have phased out direct subsidies for energy
                           utilities and replaced them with target subsidies for low-income households (e.g., limit
                           of 15–25% of their disposable income for energy).
Absence of                 Many new EU-MS have implemented mandatory consumption-based metering using
consumption-based          building-wise heat metering. Within the buildings, heating costs are distributed either
billing                    by heating-cost allocators or by area. The new EE Directive requires individual heat-
                           metering or application of cost allocators for individual apartments.
Affordability              Affordability can be addressed through targeted subsidies (see “Energy subsidies”
                           above).
High costs of financing    Access to financing is typically addressed by special programs listed above as
                           “financial mechanisms.” Most EU countries, including new member states, have
                           launched financing programs with incentives (see case studies in Section 4).
Technical barriers
Lack of metering in      Metering is required for understanding energy use and implementing consumption-
central heating and DH   based billing. Many energy laws or similar legislation call for mandatory metering and
systems                  consumption-based billing (although this is only partially implemented in the region).
Building maintenance     Apartment owners are obliged to maintain their buildings under typical legislation, but
                         many do not and enforcement is weak. Low incomes, high cost of financing, and poor
                         HOAs exacerbate the situation. In new member states, programs often (co-)finance
                         comprehensive building refurbishment, provided that a certain level of energy savings
                         will be achieved (see case studies in Section 4).
Underheating             Underheating is typically not explicitly addressed by EE programs, but it can often be
                         eliminated with building refurbishment and DH rehabilitation. Experience from new
                         member states has shown that overcoming underheating is a key incentive for many
                         apartment owners to undertake EE improvements.
Lack of central heating  EE programs often involve installing new centralized heating systems. EU DH
in apartment buildings   companies typically support the connection of existing buildings on favorable
                         connection terms, which allows greater use of the DH systems.
Lack of centralized DH   High investment costs inhibit building owners and DH companies from investing in
water supply systems     new centralized DH water systems. The city of Krakow’s (Poland) DH utility
                         successfully supported the installation of DH water systems in connected buildings
                         using CHP plants.
Legal and regulatory barriers
Insufficient building    New EU-MS have adjusted their building codes to comply with EU standards and
codes                    adopted the energy performance building certificates.
Dispersed building       New EU-MS had a similarly high share of private apartments and poor HOAs, if any.
ownership                Improvements in HOA legislation, combined with regulatory obligations and
                         supporting financial programs, have helped address these barriers.
Poor HOA legislation     Promoting HOAs or similar structures, modifying decision-making rules, and
                         facilitating HOA borrowing/contracting have helped increase EE.
Information
Lack of awareness        In other countries, EE agencies and/or utilities provide information via many channels
about EE opportunities   (brochures, seminars, TV/radio) and EE information centers.
Knowledge about          DH utilities elsewhere regularly collect and process metering data in their full-
energy use               service territory, which can help municipal and utility planners. Building
                         typologies, such as the EU-sponsored TABULA program, defines typical
                         buildings and their energy use patterns.
Lack of standards and    Most EU-MS have established national standards for appliances and building
quality certifications   materials. Although some countries in the Western Balkans have done this, the
                         standards are only partially implemented and not yet enforced.

International experience suggests that building and apartment owners need incentives to invest in
EE. While some may be sufficiently motivated by lowering energy bills or improving the comfort
and value of their apartments, many countries have still introduced some types of financial
incentives—either financial or fiscal mechanisms. Financial incentives are affordable and
appropriate for countries with sufficient resources, which most Western Balkans countries
unfortunately do not have. New EU member states were able to finance their EE programs with
EU structural funding. For the time being, countries in the Western Balkans will have to rely on


Guidance Note                                     Page 12                                               May 2014
financial support from international financial institution (IFIs), bilateral sources (including the
EU Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance, or IPA), or local budgets.
However, not all residential EE programs require state budget contributions, such as energy
supplier obligations and on-the-bill financing. In these cases, utilities arrange for financing of EE
improvements. In the Western Balkans, though, the poor financial positions of utilities
(particularly DH and electricity companies) make such approaches unviable in the near term.
Moreover, most of the utilities in the region most likely do not have substantial experience in, or
the expertise needed, to develop and implement EE projects in the residential sector.
As long as funding of incentives is a problem, the region’s governments may have to rely more
on market and regulatory approaches, such as:
       Fostering the commitment of the private sector through credit lines and other financing
        schemes, possibly using loan guarantees, interest rate subsidies, or partial grants.
        However, the poor creditworthiness of dwelling owners and underdeveloped HOAs limits
        market penetration rates for such schemes. Therefore, strengthening the position of
        HOAs, enforcing their establishment, and clearly defining powers and decision-making
        procedures and obligations would be an essential step forward. This would improve the
        conditions for applying third-party financing including energy equipment and service
        companies (including ESCOs), bulk purchasing, and other delivery mechanisms.
       Implementing price reforms, removing direct energy subsidies and cross-subsidies.
       Implementing consumption-based billing for central heating, along with the promotion of
        apartment-level controls and devices (heat allocators, thermostatic radiator valves, etc.).
For the reasons mentioned above, approaches to single-family houses and apartment buildings
could be different. Figure 8 shows a scheme for single-family houses. More-affluent households
could be motivated by price rises supplemented by information available to the public. If only
this market segment is targeted, a VAT reduction for individual appliances (such as stoves and
boilers) or windows may be sufficient to promote EE. Larger, more complex refurbishment,
however, may require financial incentives, such as grants or favorable credit lines.
Figure 8. Approach to Single-Family Houses




Source: WBIF 2013b.

Figure 8 shows a scheme for multi-family apartment buildings. For measures that can be
implemented by individual apartment owners, such as window replacement, similar approaches


Guidance Note                                Page 13                                       May 2014
for single-family homes could be used. Insulation of walls and roofs, improvement of internal
heat distribution, etc., however, require investment in common areas and property, which would
require some collective organization or HOA. The creditworthiness of the HOA will then become
a key parameter for access to financing.
Figure 9. Approach to Apartment Buildings




Source: WBIF 2013b.



4. Case Studies
This section presents case studies that illustrate the mechanisms described in Section 3.

Financial Mechanisms

Case Study 1: Grants and Subsidy Programs—the Polish THERMO Modernization Fund
The THERMO Modernization Fund, established by the Polish government in 1999, aims at
refurbishing the existing building stock in both public and residential buildings. The program was
sponsored by the state-owned Bank of National Economy (BGK) and the Ministries of Finance
and Infrastructure.
Eligible investments had to meet certain technical and financial criteria, which had to be verified
by an energy audit and financial analysis. The energy savings had to amount to at least 25 percent
for a comprehensive building refurbishment. In the case of a modernization of indoor heating or
local heating systems as well as DH systems, this figure had to be at least 10 percent, and in the
case of refurbishment of buildings constructed before 1961, the threshold was 10 percent.
Individual projects were usually financed by a loan amount of up to 80 percent of the total project
costs. Provided that the loan (plus interest) could be repaid within 10 years (the maximum term of
the loan), the BGK could offer a grant bonus of up to 25 percent.
Until mid-2002 the THERMO Modernization Fund was not very successful. This was mainly due
to complicated application procedures (for housing cooperatives, for example) and high interest


Guidance Note                               Page 14                                         May 2014
rates (up to 30 percent). From 2003 on, after the conditions had been relaxed and promotional
activities were implemented, the number of applications increased significantly (see Figure 9).
Unfortunately, the fund’s resources were not sufficient to meet this growing demand. In terms of
applications, 40 percent came from HOAs, 40 percent from housing cooperatives, 7 percent from
single-family homeowners, and 13 percent from others. By 2013, the program was operating well
with a budget of about €37 million. While the program remains under implementation, no budget
for incentives was allocated for 2014.
Figure 10. Budgets and Applications for the THERMO Program, 1999–2013




Source: Rajkiewicz 2013. TPLZ = Polish zloty (PLN).

Case Study 2: Grants and Subsidy Programs—The Czech Green Savings Program
The Green Savings Program was initiated by the Czech Ministry of Environment and was under
implementation from 2009 to 2012. The program provided support for heating installations
utilizing renewable energy (RE) sources as well as investments in energy savings in renovated
and new buildings. Both single-family houses and multi-family apartment buildings were
eligible; EE and RE measures included insulation, biomass boilers, heat pumps, and solar thermal
collectors, as well as new passive energy houses.
Funds for the program were generated from the sale of emission credits under the Kyoto Protocol,
and these funds were used towards the purchase of some of the EE/RE equipment. Support was
given for select combination of measures. The amount of subsidies paid under this program
amounted to €710 million. The average subsidy amounted on average to 67 percent. About two-
thirds of the energy savings came from apartment buildings, while the rest came from single-
family buildings.2
An important feature of the program was that product and service providers had to be certified,
which was critical in ensuring the quality of measures implemented. While this restriction did
result in a slow rollout early on, the program was able to substantially increase its pace and be
successful.
Estimated benefits of the program included the following:3
         Reduction of CO2: 1,100,000 t/yr (2008-2013)
         Reduction of local dust pollution: 2,200 t/yr (2008-2013)
         Energy savings in heating: 6.3 PJ
         Increase in heat generation from RE sources: + 3.7 PJ


2
 M. Valentinovy, “The Green Investment Scheme in the Czech Republic – Green Savings Programme.”
3
 Pavel Zámyslický, “Contribution of the GIS to low carbon development in the Czech Republic” (Ministry of Environment
of the Czech Republic, n.d.).


Guidance Note                                         Page 15                                              May 2014
      Creation or retention of 30,000 jobs
      Reduced dependence on energy imports, emissions of other local pollutants (SO2, NOx)
The program was revised in 2013. The subsidy was reduced to 25 percent and a minimum energy
savings of 40 percent was required. If the reduction was at least 60 percent, the subsidy was
increased to 50 percent. Because these subsidies are being financed by the sale of European
Union Allowances (EUA), the total funding of the program is not fixed.

Case Study 3: Credit Lines—The CO2 Building Retrofitting Program of KfW
Germany’s CO2 Building Retrofitting Program was started by KfW in 2001. It supports
comprehensive retrofitting of buildings built before 1979, replacement of old heating
installations, and construction of energy-saving houses. To be eligible, participants must either
implement one of the prescribed measure packages or prove a CO 2 reduction of at least 40 kg/m2
per year. In the first case, renovation of the heating installations and the minimum insulation
measures that exceed the national standards have to be implemented. In the case of the CO 2
reduction scheme, the legal minimum requirements related to the heat insulation are obligatory.
The scope of eligible applicants covers a wide range, starting with private persons and continuing
on to housing companies and to commercial and regional authorities and their enterprises.
The financial instrument used to be a loan provided by KfW to the building owner, with
subsidized interest rates, based on the following principle: the higher the energy savings, the
lower the interest rate. Later, the possibility of obtaining subsidies instead of concessional loans
was added to the program.
In 2009, under this program approximately 53,000 dwellings were refurbished, eliminating some
211,000 t/yr of CO2 and energy saving 589 GWh/yr. Together with the program for the “Energy
Efficient Refurbishment of Buildings,” subsidy payments amounted to €87 million and the total
investment volume amounted to €6.96 million. These investments helped to create some 60,000
direct and 51,100 indirect jobs.

Fiscal Instruments

Case Study 4: Reduced VAT for EE in France
There are several regulations in force in France that allow reduced VAT for EE measures
(GreenMax Capital Advisors 2009). The first, introduced in 1999, reduced the tax from 20.6
percent to 5.5 percent for building refurbishment in dwellings older than two years. Results from
a 2002 study revealed that 61 percent of households that have invested in EE have benefited from
this VAT reduction. In total, 7 percent of France’s 25 million households have invested in home
restorations, with an average investment of €2,640 per household. Estimated CO2 reductions
amounted to 0.6 t/household, or 1 MT of CO2 in total for 2002.
Another regulation, the “Tax Credit for EE Materials and RES,” came into force in 2005. The tax
credits (15–40 percent) applied to the purchase price of efficient boilers, insulation, heating
regulators, and the use of RE systems. Provisional results for 2005 showed substantial increases
in single unit sales compared to 2004, in particular for solar water heating, combined solar
systems, wood-fired boilers, and condensation boilers. Tax credits were seen to have revitalized
the market for energy-saving equipment. The market size in 2006 was estimated at €3–4 billion.

Delivery Mechanisms

Case Study 5: Funds—Energy Efficiency Funds (Bulgaria)
In Bulgaria there are currently two grant/loan schemes available for retrofitting housing. Grants
and loans are provided by two entities:



Guidance Note                               Page 16                                       May 2014
    1. The Bulgaria Energy Efficiency Fund (BEEF), which provides investment support for EE
       projects. BEEF, which is managed as a public-private partnership, offers (i) loan
       guarantees; and (ii) loans with interest rates lower than market rates. Examples of projects
       that BEEF finances include retrofitting of residential and public buildings, improvements
       of DH systems, and municipal street lighting. The Fund acts both as a financial institution
       and a consultancy center. The initial capitalization of BGN 22 million was made up of
       grants (as equity contributions) from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) through the
       World Bank and the Austrian and Bulgarian governments. In 2010, the Fund supported
       90 projects (with a total investment volume of €37.6 million) and financed €25.8 million.4
    2. The Residential Energy Efficiency Credit Line (REECL), established by the European
       Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). The REECL facility is aimed at
       giving households across Bulgaria an opportunity to realize the benefits of energy-
       efficient home improvements by providing them with loans and incentive grants through
       local participating banks. Eligible sub-projects include EE improvements such as thermal
       insulation, energy efficient windows, efficient (gas/biomass) boilers and solar water
       heaters. Incentive grant support is available from the REECL Program in conjunction
       with loan financing from the participating banks. The conditions are as follows 5:
             Building-level projects: Subject to the REECL terms and conditions, borrowers are
              entitled to receive payment of incentive grants equal to 30 percent of the total amount
              of REECL loans for any building-level projects and 35 percent for building-level
              projects undertaken by HOAs and encompassing measures on both building envelope
              and building service systems.
             Dwelling-level projects: Subject to the REECL terms and conditions, borrowers are
              entitled to receive payment up to 20 percent of the total amount disbursed by a
              participating bank for dwelling-level projects, provided that the incentive grants
              payable in respect of each eligible EE measure do not exceed a certain maximum
              amount and the total incentive grant per borrowing householder does not exceed the
              cap of €9,000.
So far, the REECL Programme has committed to 48,171 EE loans totaling BGN 144,347,146 and
incentive grants amounting to BGN 27,212,176. To date, the REECL-financed projects have
saved a total estimated electricity equivalent of 221,228 MWh per year. The REECL-supported
projects have brought reductions in CO2 emissions of 322,345 tonnes per year.6

Case Study 6: Utility Obligations in France and UK
Several countries in the EU—including Denmark, France, Italy, and the UK—use Energy
Efficiency Obligations (EEOs) in the form of White Certificates and Energy Efficiency
Certificates. Under both approaches, energy suppliers have an obligation to achieve a certain
level of energy savings from their customer bases. In the UK, this program is confined to the
residential sector. In both countries, energy suppliers have to pay penalties in case they do not
achieve this level. The amount of the penalty varies: in France, it amounts to €20 per MWh;7 in
the UK, it is £35 per MWh. The UK applies the principle that the penalty should exceed the cost
of delivery.8 In both countries, standardized EE measures have been defined that are eligible for
this program.9



4
   Dimitar Dukov, The Bulgarian Energy Efficiency Fund – Development of the Local Energy-Efficiency Market.
5
   http://www.reecl.org/grants.php.
6
  http://www.reecl.org/statistics.php.
7
  République française, Note from the French Authorities; Subject: Energy efficiency action plan for France, 2008.
8
  European Commission, Energy Saving Obligations and Tradable White Certificates (report prepared by the Joint Research
Centre of the European Commission, 2009).
9
  At least in the UK, these figures are rechecked from time to time.


Guidance Note                                        Page 17                                                May 2014
Under the White Certificate approach, energy suppliers have to provide subsidies to final
consumers (i.e., the investors in EE measures). The amount of the subsidies has not been
determined by the program, but the energy suppliers can design it case by case and can also take
into account the actual energy prices.
The programs also differ as to how measures are selected:
    In the United Kingdom, the energy suppliers manage implementation of the energy-saving
     measures. Under this approach, lower equipment prices can be achieved by means of
     centralized procurement and program costs can be reduced. Costs of the measures are
     shared between consumers and energy suppliers. In the UK, the list of eligible EE measures
     comprises insulation measures, electrical appliances, and radiators, condensing boilers,
     radiator valves, heat pumps, energy-saving bulbs/lamps, and so on. For non-priority group
     households, the average level of subsidies was assumed to be around 50 percent for most
     measures. For the priority group, subsidies amounted to up to 100 percent.
    In France, final consumers arrange and manage the investment measures individually. The
     consumers will be refunded after submitting the invoices of the installation companies.
     Principally, the investment is first financed by the apartment or building owners who have
     been motivated by the advice given by the respective utility and by the envisaged subsidy.
     The program defined a larger number of eligible measures. In addition, alternative
     measures can be implemented provided that they have been approved. In the residential
     sector the focus of the program is on insulation, flue-gas condensing boilers, and energy-
     efficient devices such as lamps.
There is an important difference between supplier obligations and soft loan/grant/subsidy
programs. In the latter case, achievement of the targets depends on the (voluntary) willingness of
final consumers to approve such measures. The approach obviously requires well-educated
consumers who are aware of the energy and climate-change issues. In the case of supplier
obligations, the energy suppliers are responsible for achieving the targets, but their programs are
still voluntary for their clients.

Case Study 7: ESCO-type Model in Lithuania
The “Multi-apartment Buildings Renovation Program” was launched in 2009 with the support of
JESSICA Holding Fund. A new model based on the “EnerVizija” (or “Energy Vision”) initiative ,
it is an ESCO-type approach supported with up to a 15 percent subsidy (and later with an
additional 25 percent subsidy from the Climate Change Fund) and soft loans with a 3 percent-
fixed interest rate from the JESSICA financing mechanism. The new financing model involved
renovations loans provided not only to the apartment owners, but also to municipal program
administrators. These changes have accelerated the modernization process in Lithuania. Subsidy
procedures for low-income persons have also been revised to facilitate the renovation decision-
making process among apartment owners.
This program implements the Lithuanian housing strategy, whose objective is to ensure effective
use, maintenance, and modernization of housing and rational consumption of energy. During
2013, after approval of alternative ESCO-type model, the achievements were as follows:
      1332 projects were approved by the Housing Energy Saving Agency (HESA)
      917 project apartment owners made decisions to rehabilitate their homes
      490 projects were approved by urban development funds
      322 projects started procurements
      194 projects started renovation works
The program’s objectives until the end of 2020 are to reduce heat (fuel) consumption in renovated
buildings by no less than 20 percent, to achieve annual heat savings of no less than 1,000 GWh,
and to reduce CO2 annual emissions by no less than 230,000 tons.



Guidance Note                              Page 18                                       May 2014
The total budget amounts to €227 million. The sources of funding loans are:
       €127 million in EU Structural Funds from the European Regional Development Fund
        (ERDF), one of the EU Structural Funds under the Cohesion policy allocated to fund local
        infrastructure projects; and
       €100 million from state budget resources.

Other Innovative Approaches
There are a number of new innovative approaches to financing, such as:
           Bulk purchasing: The British organization Transition Linlithgow10 is a community
            pioneering this approach. In 2011 it had 120 homes with solar water heating installed
            with a further 80 projected for the remainder of the year. Cooperatives benefit from bulk-
            purchase agreements as well. Many countries have used bulk purchases of compact
            fluorescent bulbs (CFLs) to reduce peak loads and promote efficient lighting.
           On-bill financing: On-bill utility programs have been piloted as early as 1993 (New
            London Resource Project, Wisconsin), but have recently seen a surge in popularity in the
            United States. Utilities pre-finance EE investments and after implementation customers
            have to pay back the costs through their utility bills. The main advantage is a reduction or
            elimination of first costs for customers, generating immediate positive cash flow; monthly
            energy savings are equal to or greater than the repayment charge.


5. Lessons Learned
International experience shows that countries have chosen different approaches to promote EE in
the residential sector and used a variety of different financial instruments. Several countries have
seen significant outcomes using various mechanisms, so there is no preferred or optimal program
model. On the other hand, many other countries have not conducted ex-post evaluations to
determine the overall impacts or cost-effectiveness of various schemes. This is because such
evaluations are complex and can be costly, with methodological challenges in accounting for
proper baselines, changes in comfort levels and behavior, changes in energy-use patterns as
consumers’ incomes rise, and so on. In addition, countries have different views about the role of
government in improving EE in private households.
Still, the review of global experience indicates a number of common elements from programs that
have reported substantial impacts. Successful residential EE programs have had to overcome or at
least mitigate most of the major barriers to EE, including the higher upfront costs. Financial
incentives reduce either the upfront costs through grants or tax reductions or the running costs
through loans with subsidized interest rates. Grants, subsidies, preferential loans, and credit lines
are typically used to support larger building insulation and refurbishment measures. In the new
EU-MS and the countries of the Western Balkans, investment costs relative to average household
incomes are much higher than in the old EU-MS, and most homeowners cannot afford to finance
the full investment costs of such measures. Therefore, the high level of financial support used in
the new EU-MS must be high in the Western Balkans as well, if buildings are to be refurbished to
a tangible extent.
By contrast, VAT tax reductions are typically applied for individual devices or materials rather
than for complex measures, such as building refurbishment. Reduced VAT rates for energy-
efficient wood stoves and boilers or gas-fired condensing boilers could stimulate the replacement
of outdated devices. By employing relatively simple application procedures, such programs can
be more easily administered without engaging a large staff.


10
     http://transitionlinlithgow.org.uk.

Guidance Note                                   Page 19                                       May 2014
Removing price distortions is another important challenge. Efficient DH systems can hardly
survive in the longer run if retail gas prices for tariff customers are lower than for DH companies.
Similarly, inefficient electric heating will be perpetuated if electricity prices continue to be
subsidized. Therefore, in order for such programs to provide an attractive financial benefit to
households, they must pay back within a reasonable timeframe—which may require rationalizing
energy costs, as many of the case study countries have had to do (see Section 4).
Delivery mechanisms can directly address certain barriers, such as a lack of HOAs. In Estonia,
for example, the state-owned Credit and Export Guarantee Fund KredEx used to provide
guarantees for loans made to apartment buildings for renovation purposes without a legal
representative body. ESCOs and on-bill programs can address the problem of access to
commercial bank financing by pre-financing the upfront costs. EE Funds can help to overcome
the problem of lacking or insufficient knowledge on EE by providing technical advice.
Institutional mechanisms will usually address very specific problems:
       A regulation requiring (at least) building-level heat metering would not directly achieve
        energy savings, but would help to forecast energy savings more precisely and to choose the
        optimum EE measures. It is also a necessary precondition to actually reducing energy bills
        from EE measures, without which EER financing would not be viable.
       Issuing regulations requiring mandatory consumption-based billing would not directly
        improve EE but would also be a prerequisite for achieving EE and cost savings in
        apartment buildings. For example, as long as heating is charged by lump-sum billing,
        consumers will have no incentive to save energy even if the radiators are equipped with the
        right control devices (e.g., thermostatic valves).
       Another important prerequisite for achieving EE are strong HOAs, which can take
        decisions on building maintenance and refurbishment based on majority decisions.
       A properly endowed Energy Efficiency Agency will help to overcome information lacking
        on EE measures and motivate households to invest. These agencies can also help organize
        technical assistance programs—from training of HOA energy managers to standardizing
        EE measures to helping to certify and organize potential service companies and banks.
A study11 that analyzed EE programs in 11 European countries summarized the lessons learned as
follows:
      1. “Market enablers”—i.e., implementation of supporting measures such as regulations,
         standards, and legislation—are of the utmost importance. If these market enablers are not in
         place, program implementation will slow down. An example is ESCO services that a
         municipality can only utilize if the corresponding procurement rules are in place. Another
         example is the absence of consumption-based billing. Most heat consumers will only be
         interested in EE measures if such measures can decrease their heating bills. It is also
         necessary to have agencies that can disseminate the corresponding information.
      2. The implementing agency and delivery channels should be structured to maximize the
         chances for widespread deployment of funds. New programs should be built on existing
         programs and organizations if available, rather than copying new ones from other countries.
         In this context it will also be important to describe explicitly the existence of competing or
         complementary goals between a planned program and other ongoing programs. For each
         segment, a clearly responsible authority, transparent funding mechanisms, and a long-term
         commitment to the program are required to achieve a successful program.
      3. The administrative burden placed on fund recipients should be tailored to the segment
         targeted. For most of the programs assessed, the report found that the level of savings
         measurements was not particularly high, which is likely due to a cost-benefit trade-off
         among program designers (or in some due to political considerations). Especially when


11
     GreenMax Capital Advisors 2009.


Guidance Note                                  Page 20                                       May 2014
       assessing the household sector, the costs of measuring energy savings very accurately
       would not offset the benefits of more detailed assessments or administrative procedures.
       Typically this is addressed by defining lists of eligible product types or smaller projects,
       while only requiring more costly upfront analyses in cases of larger commercial premises or
       blocks of flats.
       Standardization of supporting tools for smaller projects is a success factor. Tools benefiting
       from standardization could include building modeling, energy auditing, product guidelines,
       and definition of EE measure packages.
  4. Although the level of incentives must be tailored to local market conditions, it should also
     be clearly linked with supporting long-term growth on a commercial basis. Subsidy needs
     should be constantly updated, aiming to prevent the market from becoming distorted.
     Market stability is essential so that equipment suppliers and other stakeholders can adapt.
     This requires transparency so that the average level of subsidies can be assessed.
     Guarantee funds in emerging markets should successively be reduced and eventually be
     phased out after a clearly defined period of time as lending becomes a mainstream activity.
     Similarly, tax credits should have a clearly defined life, presumably after a specified target
     has been achieved.
  5. The type of incentive should be consistent with the goal of supporting integrated projects
     that provide substantial savings. There is no one single “right” financial support
     mechanism. Each country has to develop its own approach based on experience, economic
     and financial resources as well as culture. Bank guarantees and grants are useful, if
     financing for funding is available. Fiscal instruments may be less suitable if tax payments
     are small or are even avoided. EE and savings targets will only be achieved if the
     appropriate financial tools ultimately support integrated and comprehensive measures. It is
     reasonable and useful to use differential subsidy levels depending on the project scope.
     Complex EE packages of measures will usually achieve high savings and predictable results
     are more likely to be certain.
Regarding the technical barriers, some lessons should be taken into account:
       In the longer run there is no way to get around metering. All new EU-MS have installed
        meters in DH-supplied buildings and, according to the new EU Directive, it must be
        extended to all central heating systems supplying apartment buildings.
       The existing building stock needs refurbishment to prevent total deterioration. Experience
        has shown that this can and should be combined with EE measures. Financial support
        should be linked to achieving a certain level of energy savings.
       The problem of under-heating is usually resolved within the framework of DH
        rehabilitation and building refurbishment measures. There is no need to develop a special
        program to solve this problem.
       A lack of central heating is mostly a problem in the Western Balkans rather than in the
        new EU-MS. Central heating systems have to be installed to replace electric heating and
        individual (wood- or coal-fired) stoves in apartment buildings. This could be combined
        with a building refurbishment program, but could also be addressed by utility obligations.


6. Roadmap
The development of EE in the building stock in the Western Balkans is lagging significantly
behind the expectations fuelled by the respective government NEEAPs. To scale up EE in the
residential sector, where most of the potential in the building sector lies, a mix of legal-
institutional, financial, and technical measures must be developed and implemented.
Achieving 9 percent of the energy-savings potential in this sector would require mobilizing some
€2.7 billion, saving €343 million and 6162 GWh per year (Energy Community 2012). EE

Guidance Note                                Page 21                                       May 2014
improvements can also yield significant side-benefits, including enhanced comfort levels,
improved building aesthetics (and home values), improved health, and reduced vulnerability to
future tariff increases as well as additional employment (see, for example, the case study on the
KfW CO2 Program in Section 4). Although the presumed EE measures are viable with reasonable
payback periods, there are a number a barriers slowing down or even preventing implementation.
The lack of financing is the most obvious barrier, but it is also hampered by a number of other
gaps. Market enablers such as supporting regulations and legislation have not been developed
adequately. These gaps have been described previously.
Lessons learned show that implementing EE programs in the residential sector is very resource-
intensive and requires both a long-term commitment and sector reforms that help to create an
enabling environment and proper incentives. Marketing of EE to households should highlight the
substantial savings in energy costs and side-benefits (such as improved comfort) in order to
stimulate demand. Supporting regulations to address HOA governance and borrowing, metering
and billing reforms, heating controls, appliance labeling, and building codes/certificates are
critical to helping drive the market. Moreover, development of accompanying programs to
provide accessible and affordable financing, targeted incentives, information and training, etc.
can assist homeowners in implementing the EE measures.
Scaling up EE in residential buildings is complex and requires a multi-pronged, phased approach
that combines six key elements—metering, customer controls, pricing and billing reforms,
incentives, and financing, as well as information and education.
Figure 11. A Roadmap for Scaling Up EE in Residential Buildings in the Western Balkans




Source: World Bank 2013.

The following activities should be undertaken in the short term:
        Recommendation 1 – Implement financing and incentive schemes for single-family
         homes: Single-family houses use more heating energy than apartment buildings, EE
         measures are less expensive, and there is usually only one single owner. Accordingly, EE
         measures are easier to implement and no additional market enablers are needed. For


Guidance Note                              Page 22                                       May 2014
       individual measures, such as window or stove/boiler replacement, VAT reductions could
       be applied.
      Recommendation 2 – Conduct information outreach: Insufficient information about
       costs and benefits of EE measures is a serious barrier. The group of residential consumers
       and dwelling owners is heterogeneous in terms of knowledge, interests, demands,
       aspirations, and financial capabilities. Awareness campaigns and public education can
       help to overcome or at least help to mitigate this problem.
      Recommendation 3 – Enact new building codes: This will not only help to construct
       more energy-efficient buildings, but could also set new, more demanding standards for
       the refurbishment of buildings.
      Recommendation 4 – Take a balanced approach to consumption-based billing: The
       significance of consumption-based billing has been emphasized previously. This should
       be implemented in two steps. In the first step, meters will be installed at the building entry
       or staircase (in larger buildings), and the connected apartments will be charged according
       to the meter readings. In the second step, apartments will be equipped with control
       devices (thermostatic valves) and heating-cost allocators (or with sub-heat meters). The
       scheme should be extended to all central heating systems (not only DH).
      Recommendation 5 – Revise HOA legislation: To scale up the refurbishment of
       apartment buildings, it will be necessary to enforce the establishment of HOAs, to
       strengthen their powers, to allow majority decisions on measures necessary for building
       maintenance, and to allow easier bank borrowing and entering into contracts.
      Recommendation 6 – Rehabilitate DH systems: Rehabilitation of DH systems has
       started, but is far from being finished. Most existing DH systems have to be rehabilitated
       and modernized, as the equipment is outdated and has been badly maintained in the past
       two decades. In additional to technical equipment, rehabilitation should include
       institutional measures, starting with new tariff and billing systems and continuing to the
       commercialization of the sector. Several DH systems have had to be closed down due to a
       lack of financing; a close examination should be made to determine whether such DH
       systems should be rehabilitated or reconstructed, with promotion of cogeneration as an
       additional heating source.
      Recommendation 7 – Transition to building-wise, consumption-based billing: This is a
       first step towards flat-wise, consumption-based billing. Once meters are in place,
       consumption-based billing should implemented one heating season after meters have been
       installed to allow the DH utility to collect reliable baseline consumption data.
      Recommendation 8 – Implement building certificates and appliances standards/labels:
       A certificate is aimed at influencing building developers and real estate owners to build
       with greater EE and implement energy-savings measures in renovation projects as a
       consequence of the EU Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (2002/91/EC). EU
       member states must implement Energy Performance Certificates (EPCs). The recast of
       the EPBD (Directive 2010/31/EU) in 2010 has even further focused attention on
       developing the right policies and on the importance of the EPCs. Similar to the Building
       Certificate, appliance labeling provides an idea about the energy consumption. In
       principle, the labeling approach could also be applied for material that is eligible for EE
       financial support programs (as mentioned in Section 4).
      Recommendation 9 - Implement financial incentives for multi-family (apartment)
       buildings: As illustrated by the experience of the new EU-MS, tangible financial
       incentives are often required to increase participant rates and investment for EE
       investments in this sector. Where payback periods are excessive—due to low energy
       pricing, low comfort levels, or high material costs—some incentives may be necessary to
       bring the payback periods within the investment threshold of many household owners.



Guidance Note                               Page 23                                        May 2014
      Recommendation 10 – Establish EE incentives to regularize illegal housing. Within the
       Western Balkans there are many illegally constructed houses whose efficiency levels are
       often poorer than average. By providing homeowners with favorable loans or grants for
       EE measures, efforts can be made to both upgrade their homes to meet national
       requirements while saving energy and regularizing them. Providing a legal status and
       property rights could serve as a big incentive for them to participate in such programs.
      Recommendation 11 – Require heat cost allocators and individual consumption-based
       billing: Heating-cost allocators are a proven instrument to measure the individual
       (radiator-level) heat consumption. New buildings could be equipped with heat meters, but
       need horizontal piping. Heat meters measure precisely the heat supplied by the piping, but
       not the heat transfer from neighboring flats. Moreover, as they do not register in-house
       heat losses, they should only serve as sub-meters, i.e., to distribute the heating costs
       measured at the building meter. Once individual consumption-based billing becomes
       mandatory within the EU in a few years, the Western Balkans will have to do this
       anyway. Heating-cost allocators are usually paid by the dwelling owners in the EU-MS.
       There is some anecdotal experience showing that consumers start to look for heating-cost
       allocators once they have gained some experience with building-level metering.




Guidance Note                             Page 24                                      May 2014
References
Buildings Performance Institute Europe (BPIE). 2011. Europe’s Buildings Under the Microscope.
        Brussels.
———. 2012. Energy Efficiency Policies in Buildings: The Use of Financial Instruments at
        Member Levels.
Energy Community. 2012. Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Contracting Parties of the
        Energy Community. Vienna.
        http://www.energy-community.org/pls/portal/docs/2514181.PDF
EPTISA. 2013. “National Building Energy Efficiency Study for Kosovo.” Draft Report.
Feist, Johannes. “Leveraging EU Funds with the Market – Financing Instruments for Energy
        Efficiency at EU / National Level.”
Fiala, Martin. 2013. “Czech Case Study: Public Support for Energy Efficiency Investments.”
Global Partnership for Output Based Aid (GPOBA). N.d. “Capital Grants to the Poor.”
        http://www.gpoba.org/sites/gpoba/files/OperationsManual/OM%20-
        %20Armenia%20Heat%20Gas.pdf.
GreenMax Capital Advisors. 2009. Lessons Learned from Energy Efficiency Finance Programs
        in the Building Sector. New York.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2008. Energy in the Western Balkans: The Path to Reform
        and Reconstruction. Paris.
        http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/Balkans2008.pdf.
Intelligent Energy Europe Agency (IEEA). 2007. EI-Education guidebook on energy intelligent
         retrofitting. Brussels.
         http://www.vmsw.be/Portals/0/objects/VMSW/DuurzaamWonen/Toolkit/R28_EI_Educat
         ion_Guidebook.pdf.
Statistical Office Kosovo. 2001. Living Standards and Inequalities in Albania: Census 2001.
Rajkiewicz, Andrzej. N.d. “The financial models for energy efficiency retrofitting of residential
         buildings in 10 selected European countries.” Guidance note. Warsaw.
———. 2013. “Good practices in financing the renovation of residential and public buildings.”
         Presentation at Workshop on “Policies to enforce the transition towards nZEBs in
         Romania.” N.p.
         http://www.entranze.eu/files/downloads/presentations/Romania_workshop/The_financial
         _model_Poland_AndrzejRajkiewicz_NAPE2013.pdf
Serbenta, Valius. 2008. “Modernization of Apartment Buildings in Lithuania.” Vienna.
———. 2006. “Financial and Social Assessment.”
Stojlovska, Ana, and Sonja Zuber. 2013. “Energy Poverty in Macedonia.”
Statistical Office of Kosovo. 2011. Results of Household Budgets Survey 2011.
Statistical Office of Montenegro. 2013. Statistical Energy Balances 2011–12.
         http://www.monstat.org/userfiles/file/ENERGETIKA/PUBLICATION%202011-
         2012.pdf.
Statistical Office of Serbia. 2012. Statistical Yearbook Serbia.
Western Balkans Investment Framework (WBIF). 2003. Housing in Southern Eastern Europe –
         solving a puzzle of challenges.
———. 2011. Financial Support Facilities Available for Energy Efficiency and Renewable
         Energy in the Western Balkans.
———. 2013a. Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Contracting Parties of the Energy
         Community.

Guidance Note                             Page 25                                       May 2014
———. 2013b. Public Financing Options for NEEAPs.
World Bank. 2004. Solving a Puzzle of Challenges Housing in South Eastern Europe.
      Washingon, DC.
———. 2013. Scaling Up Energy Efficiency in Buildings in the Western Balkans: Interim Report.
      Washington, DC.
World Bank and Council of Europe. 2004. Housing in South Eastern Europe. Paris.
Zámeník, Miroslav, and Jan Hlavác. “Home is where the heat is: Thermal insulation programs for
       buildings in the Czech Republic and its positive effect on job creation.”
Zámyslický, Pavel. N.d. “Contribution of the GIS to low carbon development in the Czech
       Republic.” Presentation. Ministry of Environment of the Czech Republic.
       http://www.fiia.fi/assets/Zamyslicky.pdf.




Guidance Note                            Page 26                                     May 2014
Annex A. Mechanisms for Promoting EE
Table A1. Mechanisms for Promoting EE
Mechanism         Description                                             Example
Financing mechanisms
Subsidies    Subsidies on                The Chinese government launched a nationwide program in 2008 to
             efficient products          subsidize the use of 150 million energy-efficient lighting products, in a bid
                                         to reduce electricity consumption by 29 billion kWh by 2010.
Grants          Grants aimed at          The Green Savings Program, initiated by the Czech Min. of Environment,
                covering a part or all   was in force in 2009–12. It focused on support for heating installations
                of the costs of          utilizing RE sources and investment in EE in reconstructions and new
                implementing EE          buildings. In the first phase, the grant was 67%; in 2013, the grant was
                measures                 reduced to 25% and a minimum energy saving of 40% was required. If
                                         the reduction was at least 60%, the grant was increased to 50%.
Preferential    Government- or IFI-      The “THERMO Modernization Fund” was established by the Polish
loans           sponsored loans on       Government in 1999, aimed at refurbishing the existing building stock.
                favorable terms for      The energy savings had to amount to at least 25% for a comprehensive
                EE investments           building refurbishment. Up to 25% of the loan amount could be converted
                                         to grant if it met certain conditions.
Credit lines    Bank lending             The CO2 Building Retrofitting Program of the German KfW was launched
                windows for              in 2001 to provide loans to building owners at subsidized interest rates:
                residential sector EE    the higher the energy savings, the lower the interest rate. The program
                                         finances up to 100% of the investment costs, but not more than €250 per
                                            2
                                         m.
Loan          Partial risk coverage      BEEF (Bulgaria), a PPP, provides investment support for EE projects,
guarantees    for commercial bank        including bank guarantees for private household loans.
              loans to households
Price reform  Conversion from            Price reforms have been implemented in all new EU-MS including
              lump-sum to                establishment of a Regulatory Agencies. Obligations are typically stated
              consumption-based          in the Energy Law and/or special Heat Law.
              billing
Fiscal mechanisms
Carbon,       Special tax on the         Most countries have taxes on certain fuels, which encourages reduced
energy,       production of GHGs,        consumption. EE measures support the reduction of CO2 production and
environment   consumption of fuel,       harmful emissions.
al tax        or harmful emissions
Tax rebate    Reduced VAT or tax         In France, ADEME developed a program for efficient wood stoves, using
              credit for purchase        two mechanisms: the French General Tax Code allowed energy-saving
              of certain efficient       equipment and RE production equipment to benefit from exceptional
              appliances                 depreciation or accelerated digressive depreciation.
Delivery mechanisms
Technical       TA to help HOAs          IFI- or government-financed programs usually include a TA component
assistance      understand, be           for EE awareness and information, project identification, development,
                motivated, and           and implementation. EE agencies can also offer some technical support.
                implement EE
                measures
Audits          Energy audits            Many programs require an ex-ante energy audit. The Polish THERMO
                identify potential EE    modernization Program used to demand a building audit to verify the
                measures and             minimum energy savings of 20%.
                assess savings
                potential
ESCOs,          Third-party              There are very few ESCO examples in the residential sector in the
third-party     financing/ESCO           region. In Croatia, ESCOs are being fostered through a governmental
financing       allows users to          agency. The program addresses particularly construction companies,
                repay investment         which have to contribute at least 10% to the investment costs, while the
                costs from energy        rest is covered by preferential loans.
                savings




Guidance Note                                      Page 27                                                 May 2014
 Mechanism            Description                                           Example
On-bill         Utilities finance EE    On-bill programs have been piloted as early as 1993 (New London
financing       measures, which are     Resource Project, Wisconsin), but have recently seen a surge in
                paid back through       popularity in the US. Utilities pre-finance EE investment and after
                the customers utility   implementation customers have to pay back the costs through the utility
                bills                   bill from the reduced energy costs. The main advantage is a reduction or
                                        elimination of first cost barrier, while generating immediate positive cash
                                        flows for consumers.
Bulk            Purchasing efficient    The US organization Transition Linlithgow is a community pioneering this
purchase        products in bulk to     approach. In 2011 it installed solar water heaters in 120 homes, with a
                achieve lower prices    further 80 projected for the remainder of the year. Cooperatives benefit
                                        from bulk purchase agreements too; in Denmark, many DH companies
                                        are owned by cooperatives.
Utility         Energy suppliers        France and the UK have used White Certificates and Energy Efficiency
obligations     obliged to save         Certificates, respectively. Under both approaches, energy suppliers have
                energy among            an obligation to achieve a certain level of energy savings, with
                customer base           standardized eligible EE measures. In the UK this program is confined to
                through EE and RE       the residential sector. In both countries, energy suppliers have to pay
                measures                penalties in case they do not achieve this level. A recent Polish variant of
                                        the supplier obligation scheme includes DH companies.
Levies          Levies on               In many countries, special surcharges are added to the electricity tariff to
                consumption or          finance feed-in tariffs for electricity production with RE or support EE
                production to create    funds. In Germany, this surcharge amounts currently to 6.14 € ct/kWh.
                a fund for incentive
                schemes
Minimum         Minimum appliance       Building codes stipulate minimum requirements for heat losses in
standards       standards remove        buildings. EE labeling and minimum standards for household appliances
                low performance         help shift the market to higher efficiency products.
                products from
                market
EE funds        Funds that can          BEEF (Bulgaria), the ECO Fund (Slovenia), and the R2E2 Fund
(incl.          provide incentives,     (Armenia) all provide loans, TA and other support for EE investments in
revolving       loans or both for EE    the public and residential sectors. Montenegro also has an environmental
funds)          projects                fund that can support EE projects.
Voluntary       Companies               Voluntary financial contributions were made by energy suppliers to
agreements      (including utilities)   enable the extension of projects delivering EE gains for low-income
                commit themselves       housing in Ireland in 2009. A significant proportion of these funds aimed
                to nonbinding EE        to be spent through SEI’s (National Energy Agency) Warmer Homes
                targets                 Scheme, delivering a range of efficient technologies to improve the
                                        energy performance of low-income households. Benefits from this
                                        scheme included reductions in energy bills (in some cases up to 50%).
Non-financial   Noncash or fiscal       The city of Prague launched a program for retrofitting of the housing
incentives      incentives to invest    stock. The city created the Housing Economy Company, whose objective
                in EE.                  was to retrofit all the residential multifamily buildings belonging previously
                                        to the city. The Company has developed the standardized procedure for
                                        adding one or two floors. The company pre-finances the investment costs
                                        and received the return from investment from the sale of the new
                                        dwellings or additional rents created by new tenants. Other cities have
                                        adopted faster permitting for Green Buildings (Chicago) and allowances
                                        for higher buildings (Seattle).
Institutional mechanisms
EE agency       Government entity       Although EE agencies exist in all EU-MS and some exist in the Western
                focal point for EE      Balkans, the impact of the latter is often small due to poor financial
                programs and TA         endowment and staffing.
Energy          Independent entity      Energy regulators in the new EU-MS are in charge of power and DH. In
regulator       determines rules for    Serbia and BiH, responsibility has been given to municipalities without
                setting cost-covering   having national rules for tariff-setting in the sector.
                tariffs and
                consumption-based
                billing




Guidance Note                                      Page 28                                                May 2014
