                                                   89331
  SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
Results-Based National Urban Development Program
         in the Northern Mountains Region




 Fiduciary System Assessment
            (FSA)


                 April 28, 2014




                 PREPARED BY
               THE WORLD BANK
                                                                     Contents


List of Acronyms and Abbreviations Used ........................................................................................2
Executive Summary ..........................................................................................................................3
A. Program Description ....................................................................................................................7
B. Institutional Framework and Fiduciary Arrangements under the Program .............................. 11
     Planning and Budgeting ...................................................................................................................... 12
     Procurement ........................................................................................................................................ 14
     Control, Reporting, and Auditing........................................................................................................ 17
     Governance and Accountability .......................................................................................................... 21
     Experience under Past Bank Projects .................................................................................................. 26
C. The Program Expenditure Framework ...................................................................................... 27
D. Program Fiduciary Performance and Significant Fiduciary Risks ............................................. 28
     Program budgeting and costing ........................................................................................................... 28
     Procurement Arrangements and Implementation ................................................................................ 29
     Contract Management Performance .................................................................................................... 31
     Record Keeping and Reporting ........................................................................................................... 32
     Staffing ................................................................................................................................................ 33
     Controls, Oversight and Accountability .............................................................................................. 33
     Complaints Handling Systems ............................................................................................................ 34
     Sanctions and Debarment .................................................................................................................... 34
E. Fiduciary Risks .......................................................................................................................... 35
     Program Planning and Budgeting ....................................................................................................... 35
     Bidding and Contracting ..................................................................................................................... 35
     Program Execution .............................................................................................................................. 36
     Program Accounting and Reporting.................................................................................................... 36
     Internal Controls and Internal Audit ................................................................................................... 37
     Governance and Anti-corruption ......................................................................................................... 38
F. Monitoring Fiduciary Performance over Program Period ......................................................... 39
G. Fiduciary Elements of the Implementation Support Plan........................................................... 41
     Main Focus of Implementation Support.............................................................................................. 41
     Proposed Financial Management action plan ...................................................................................... 41
     Proposed Procurement action plan ...................................................................................................... 42
     Application of the Anti-Corruption Guidelines (ACGs) ..................................................................... 43




                                                                         Page 1
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations Used
AC             Anti-Corruption
ACG            Anti-Corruption Guidelines
CPC            City People’s Committee
DLI            Disbursement-Linked Indicator
DOF            Department of Finance (provincial)
FSA            Fiduciary Systems Assessment
GI             Government Inspectorate
GoV            Government of Vietnam
IDA            International Development Association
IDF            Institutional Development Fund
INT            Integrity Vice Presidency (World Bank)
INTOSAI        International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
IPSAS          International Public Sector Accounting Standards
ISSAI          International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions
IVA            Independent Verification Agent
LIA            Low Income Area
MOC            Ministry of Construction
MOF            Ministry of Finance
MPI            Ministry of Planning and Investment
NA             National Assembly
NUDP           National Urban Development Program
OP             Operational Policy
OPRC           Operational Procurement Review Committee
PDO            Project Detailed Outline
PEM            Public Expenditure Management
PFM            Public Financial Management
PforR          Program for Results
PMU            Project Management Unit
POM            Program Operational Manual
PPC            Provincial People’s Committee
PPTAF          Project Preparation and Technical Advisory Facility
RBNUDP-NM      Results-Based National Urban Development Program in the Northern Mountains
               Region
RWSS NTP       Rural Water Supply and Sanitation under the National Target Program
SAI            Supreme Audit Institution
SAV            State Audit of Vietnam
SOE            State Owned Enterprise
TABMIS         Treasury and Budget Management Information System
UDA            Urban Development Agency
US$            United States Dollar
VND            Vietnamese Dong




                                      Page 2
Executive Summary
1. The proposed Results-Based National Urban Development Program in the Northern Mountains
   Region (RBNUDP-NM or the “Program”) will assist the Government of Vietnam (GoV) in
   developing the implementation framework for its national urban program. It will do this by piloting a
   performance-based transfer system that will provide participating cities with a combination of much
   needed resources along with a clarification of implementation responsibilities, a results-based
   orientation, improved planning and a strengthening of oversight and accountability through audits and
   verification activities. The Program Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of
   participating Northern Mountains cities to plan, implement and sustain urban infrastructure. The
   World Bank’s Program-for-Results (PforR) lending instrument is to be used for this operation. The
   Program targets seven cities (Dien Bien Phu, Bac Kan, Cao Bang, Thai Nguyen, Hoa Binh, Tuyen
   Quang and Yen Bai) with a total budget of US$300 million ($250 million IDA; $50 million
   counterpart funding).

Purpose of Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA)

2. This assessment follows the principles governing fiduciary assessment for Program-for-Results as set
   out in Operational Policy (OP) 9.00. This notes that the Program fiduciary systems should provide
   “reasonable assurances that the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes, with due
   attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability.”
   The FSA of the Program integrates findings in three areas:
     a) procurement systems, which were assessed to determine the degree to which the planning,
         bidding, evaluation, contract award and contract administration arrangements and practices
         provide a reasonable assurance that the Program will achieve the intended results through its
         procurement processes and procedures;
     b) financial management systems, which were assessed to determine the degree to which the
         relevant planning, budgeting, accounting, internal controls, funds flow, financial reporting and
         auditing arrangements provide a reasonable assurance on the appropriate use of Program funds
         and safeguarding of its assets; and
     c) governance systems, which were assessed to determine the extent to which they address risks of
         fraud and corruption, including the use of complaint mechanisms, and how such risks are
         managed and mitigated in light of the government’s commitments under the Guidelines on
         Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing (Anti-
         Corruption Guidelines or ACGs).

3. The FSA has been prepared based on interviews and analysis of procurement, financial and
   governance reports and other relevant documents at the national level -- the Ministry of Construction
   (MOC), the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) -- and the
   provincial and city levels. All seven participating cities1 were visited in the course of the assessment.

Procurement

4. Procurement under the proposed Program mostly includes civil works of small and medium size
   (upgrading of low income areas or LIAs, bridges, roads) and consulting services (capacity building,

1
 In the case of the financial management assessment, the analysis was primarily conducted at the city level, focused
on the City People’s Committee (CPC) Division of Finance and Planning and Infrastructure Project Management
Unit.



                                                     Page 3
    detailed designs, construction supervision, etc.) for such works. There are no large contracts valued at
    or above Operational Procurement Review Committee (OPRC) thresholds under the Program.
    Program procurement will be carried out in accordance with Vietnam’s procurement laws and
    regulations.2 Specific procurement methods that may be applicable to the Program include open
    competitive bidding, direct contracting and shopping. It is envisaged that more than 90 percent of the
    Program’s expenditures will be subject to mandatory open competitive bidding. The procurement
    rules and procedures applicable to the Program are found to promote transparency, economy and
    efficiency for the Program.

5. Program procurement will be mainly implemented by the seven participating cities, using established
   government procedures and arrangements. All participating cities have existing project implementing
   agencies (Project Management Units (PMUs)) with a certain level of procurement experience and
   capacity, which are expected to be partly mobilized for the implementation of the Program. However,
   at the time of the assessment, not all Program cities had yet established or appointed a specific
   executing agency for their sub-projects. As the Program represents that first phase of implementation
   of the National Urban Development Program (NUDP), which is unimplemented to date, no specific
   prior Program procurement performance experiences exist. Reviews of similar procurement and
   contract management practices being followed in the Program cities were thus used as a proxy for the
   purposes of this assessment.

6. Overall, the Program’s procurement capacity is assessed to be weak and require s measures in the
   Program Action Plan and Program Operational Manual (POM) to improve fiduciary performance.
   The Program cities’ existing capacity and practices have resulted in timely contract awards and
   satisfactory management of small-sized contracts. However, some of the practices being followed
   may substantially affect the timeliness, cost-effectiveness, competitiveness and compliance with
   applicable rules of the Program procurement. These include: (a) prevalent rejection of bids due to bid
   prices exceeding pre-bid cost estimates and minor, non-substantive deviations; (b) excessive use of
   direct contracting and single source selection; (c) award of contracts to dependent State-Owned
   Enterprises (SOEs); and (d) non-application of Bank debarment/suspension lists which may result in
   unacceptable contract awards to Bank debarred/suspended firms or individuals. Corresponding
   actions to address those issues are proposed to be agreed with the Government prior to Credit
   negotiations. To strengthen the Program’s procurement implementation capacity, several cruc ial
   measures should be adopted including additional staffing, intensive training and hiring of qualified
   procurement/contract management support consultants.

7. In addition to the above, there are a number of other issues that are assessed to possibly impact the
   timeliness, cost-effectiveness and competitiveness of Program procurement. These include: (a) a
   segregated and fragmented approach to procurement planning; (b) low cost estimates for consulting
   services; (c) subjective application of technical scoring criteria in bid evaluation; and (d) delayed
   construction due to shortage of funds or delayed allocation of budget or delayed payments. These
   issues are addressed through capacity support to participating cities in procurement activities; the
   development of a detailed, clear and practical POM by MOC; close support, monitoring and
   supervision by MOC and Program provinces; and strict inspection and audit by provincial

2
 Except for a number of major consulting services for preparation of feasibility studies, detailed designs, bidding
documents, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or Environmental Protection Commitment (EPC) and small
goods contracts financed by Project Preparation and Technical Advisory Facility (PPTAF; approximately US$6
million). Those contracts are procured following the World Bank’s Guidelines: Selection and Employment of
Consultants under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers dated January 2011 (the
Consultant Guidelines) and Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD
Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers dated January 2011 (the Procurement Guidelines).



                                                    Page 4
    inspectorates and State Audit of Vietnam (SAV). The Bank will provide assistance and support to the
    Program procurement performance, and will also closely monitor defined indicators of Program
    procurement performance. The overall procurement risk is assessed as Substantial.

Financial Management

8. Government systems for financial management in the Program require strengthening, particularly to:
   (a) enable cities to effectively absorb the significant additional funding for infrastructure injected by
   the Program; and (b) introduce the performance-based transfer system, which demands enhanced
   planning and management performance by participating cities.

9. These issues are addressed through measures to strengthen government systems to enable the
   implementing agencies to record, control, and manage all Program resources and produce timely,
   understandable, relevant and reliable financial information. These measures include: (a) specific
   guidance on the performance-based transfer system and fund flow arrangements for the Program,
   issued by the Ministry of Finance; (b) the establishment and operation of an effective internal audit
   function for the Program; and (c) the submission of an annual Program Report to the Bank, including
   an audit report, audited financial statements and verified results. The overall Financial Management
   risk after mitigation measures is assessed as Substantial.

Governance

10. The 2005 Anti-Corruption Law and the 2011 Laws on Complaints and on Denunciation entitle
    citizens to submit complaints on fraud and corruption (among other concerns) to the government
    People’s Committee at the appropriate level. A complaints handling system will receive, record, and
    provide necessary investigative actions where it is deemed legitimate. The assessment also identified
    a parallel complaints “system” in the Government Inspectorate (GI) offices under line ministries and
    departments at the central and provincial level. The GI’s main functions are to investigate allegations
    of fraud and corruption in their respective sectors.

11. Under the Program, complaints of all kinds, which could include allegations of fraud or corruption,
    should be submitted in writing to the City People's Committee as the owner of investment sub-
    projects. Where crimes are alleged, allegations will be passed to the local police and prosecutors for
    handling. In addition to the written complaints channel, any citizen may also attend Meeting Sessions
    with CPC leaders, held at least monthly, to raise issues of fraud and corruption. Although government
    offices are not required to handle anonymous complaints, all participating CPCs maintain the practice
    of accepting, recording, and giving these complaints some consideration when they contain credible
    evidence of fraud and corruption.

12. In addition to this system for handling complaints, citizens can also submit fraud and corruption
    allegations to the Inspectorate Office of National Ministry or Provincial Department of Construction
    under the RBNUDP-NM. The inspectors reserve the right to stop construction for investigation if they
    find evidence of fraud and corruption. Similar to the CPC's system, the Inspectorate will pass
    allegations on to the police and prosecutor once crimes are alleged. Both of these parallel complaints
    handling systems contain a reporting mechanism that can capture information on the number, type
    and handling of fraud and corruption allegations. Information on sanctions and debarment is reported
    through the Provincial People’s Committee (PPC), to the Provincial Department of Planning and
    Investment and up to the Ministry of Planning and Investment to prepare the National Debarment
    List.




                                                Page 5
13. While this multiple-entry complaints system provides a number of options for citizens, it can also be
    confusing and result in complaints being passed around agencies or lost in the transfer process
    making it difficult for citizens to follow up on their complaints. No recent significant fraud and
    corruption cases were reported during the assessment. In recent years, participating cities have mostly
    received and recorded complaints regarding the slow and inefficient process of land compensation
    and resettlement.

14. The Government will improve reporting systems and establish a database in order to strengthen the
    framework for complaints handling and combat fraud and corruption under the Program. The
    Government has confirmed its commitment to the implementation of the Guidelines on Preventing
    and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing and will require the
    application of World Bank suspension and debarment lists that will be made readily available to
    participating cities. These actions will be reviewed during Program supervision. In addition, the
    Government will oblige all Program participants to cooperate with Bank investigations through
    issuing an executive order to participating cities on the Bank’s investigative rights and the Anti-
    Corruption Guidelines.

15. The Bank’s Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) has recently conducted two investigations into fraud and
    corruption in the same sector as the RBNUDP-NM based on disclosures to the World Bank by two
    international firms working on a number of Bank-funded projects in Vietnam. In both investigations,
    INT has evidence that the international firms used a local Vietnamese agent to make payments to
    project and government officials in order to influence the award of contracts and to be paid for their
    works in Vietnam. The firms failed to disclose the nature of their relationship with the Vietnamese
    agent as required under their contracts. They also fraudulently covered up payments to the agent
    through false claims for purported “ghost” services. In the one completed investigation the
    international consulting firm disclosed and admitted its misconduct in Bank-financed contracts in a
    number of Vietnam projects and reached a negotiated settlement with the Bank, agreeing to a sanction
    of conditional non-debarment for two and a half years. The firm dismissed employees/staff involved
    in the payments to project and government officials and has taken steps to implement a more robust
    integrity compliance program to prevent future misconduct. More generally, INT investigations in the
    sector have identified instances of misrepresentation of key staff and their qualifications by consulting
    firms and the use of payments to project officials in order to obtain tender and evaluation information
    and documents.

16. The use of local agents to funnel payments to project and government officials has been identified in
    a number of INT investigations. To address this risk, clients and Bank teams will need to focus
    greater attention on ensuring that bidders and contractors more fully disclose any relationships they
    have with local agents. Use of false claims for “ghost” services by local sub-consultants highlights the
    need for stronger and more consistent due diligence of subcontractors and greater scrutiny of
    subcontractors’ invoices. This will be supported by the increased regularity and coverage of audit
    activities in participating cities.

Key Performance Indicators

17. Key indicators of fiduciary performance have been identified and compiled to form a reference
    framework to be monitored over the life of the Program. These specific indicators, for both financial
    management and procurement, will be measured periodically and compared to an initial baseline to
    assess the extent of improvement in the Program's fiduciary performance.




                                                 Page 6
A.         Program Description
National urban program

18. Government has been responding to rapid urban growth with both institutional reforms and financing.
    Since 1986, a program of decentralization has gradually devolved authority for urban governance and
    service delivery to City People's Committees. This has been accompanied by fiscal transfers to cities,
    which have been routed via the provinces, typically via discrete project-based transfers and a growth
    in local level spending in response to demand.3 This approach has resulted in significant progress in
    access to basic urban infrastructure services. An estimated 75 percent of urban households have
    access to water services (from 35 percent in 1997); 67 percent have access to toilets (from 17
    percent); and eight larger cities now have wastewater treatment plants (from a baseline of zero). At
    the national level, 96 percent of households have access to electricity services, and over 90,000
    kilometers (km) of roads have been paved in the last decade.4

19. However, massive challenges remain as urban populations continue to expand and their spending
    power increases. Residual shortfalls in access to services need to be addressed, while networks
    require expansion to accommodate growth in households and their demands. The number of vehicles
    on urban roads has more than doubled in the last decade, while still only 8 percent of wastewater is
    currently treated. It is estimated that an additional 50 million square meters (m2) of housing stock will
    be required each year to 2020. The above gaps will drive demand for associated bulk, connector and
    internal infrastructure services. Network congestion and service rationing will rise if this demand
    remains unmet, which will constrain economic growth and impact the poor most severely.

20. Government has established ambitious national targets for addressing these urban investment needs
    by 2020 (see Decision No. 1659/QĐ-TTg), including expanding access to:
     water supply to 90 percent of households, and 120 liters / person / day, and reducing non-revenue
        water to between 10 and 25 percent, depending on the class of town;
     sewerage and drainage systems to over 80 percent of urban catchment areas, with at least
        secondary treatment of 60 percent of wastewater (rising to 100 percent and 70 percent,
        respectively, by 2025);
     solid waste collection and disposal services to 90 percent of households and firms (with 100
        percent coverage for hazardous waste);
     street lighting to over 85 percent of urban roads outside of the largest urban centers (and 100
        percent within them);
     housing to 75 percent of the urban population, with an average floor area per person of 29 m2;
     road space to between 20 and 30 percent of urban land (depending on the class of town), and
        expanding access to public transport services; and
     urban green spaces per person to between 4 and 15 m2, depending on the class of town.


21. These targets will require large, but as yet poorly quantified, amounts of investment. Initial estimates
    suggest that US$1.5 billion is required annually for water supply, wastewater and low-income

3
  Disaggregated financial data on urban investment is not available by sector, national transfers are not fully
disclosed by target area, and provincial and city level reporting is not aggregated nationally nor does it fully account
for sources of revenues. Budgeting practices and functional overlaps also significantly complicate financial analysis.
4
    World Bank, 2013(a), Assessment of Financing Framework for Municipal Infrastructure.



                                                      Page 7
    housing investments. Other estimates suggest that at least US$1 billion is required annually just for
    wastewater investments.5 Disaggregated estimates for energy and transport investment needs are not
    available.

22. The Infrastructure Finance Review notes that despite these uncertainties, there is a significant
    shortfall between investment needs and available resources (estimated at between 50 and 60 percent
    for all infrastructure sectors nationally), and significant policy, regulatory and local capacity
    weaknesses that will need to be addressed. Capacity-building programs, for example, have typically
    provided only generic training on technical topics, rather than also focusing on improved results
    through strengthening the public expenditure management cycle.

The National Urban Development Program

23. Government adopted the NUDP (Decision No. 1659/QĐ-TTg of the Prime Minister) in 2012 to
    address the lack of coherence in the management of urbanization, and to provide a programmatic
    focus to achieving the 2020 targets for urban service delivery. The objective of the NUDP is to
    promote an efficient, sustainable and equitable process of urban development by improving levels of
    access to basic urban services (water supply, sewerage and drainage, solid waste management, public
    lighting, roads and public transport, environmental services and public space), expanding the
    provision of serviced land for high-density housing and economic activities, and through integrated
    urban upgrading of low-income urban areas. The NUDP recognizes the importance of developing
    effective planning, financing, implementation and monitoring systems, particularly at the local level,
    to ensure the efficient execution and sustainability of required investments in urban infrastructure. It
    specifically notes the importance of strengthening urban management through improving mechanisms
    for investment planning and works management, increasing public awareness of local government
    roles and responsibilities, building the capacity of local officials, and encouraging new mechanisms to
    finance infrastructure.

24. The NUDP is an "umbrella" program through which the Government aims to coordinate and focus
    current efforts by all levels of government in addressing the urbanization challenge. The Prime
    Minister thus assigned responsibility for program coordination and implementation to the MOC, and
    established a multi-departmental Steering Committee (headed by the Minister of Construction) to
    supervise the execution of the program. It thus complements existing government programs (such as
    the Urban Upgrading Program).6 Until now, the NUDP has not had designated resources, as its
    operating expenses have been covered by budgets of implementing agencies and resources for
    infrastructure investment have been channeled through existing transfer mechanisms or own-source
    revenue. It is not possible to estimate past or current annual urban development expenditures in
    Vietnam. The NUDP has sought to leverage these expenditures without specific program
    expenditures assigned to it, operating through existing government agencies and budgets. This
    fundamental weakness in the government program of expenditures will be addressed through the
    Program, which establishes a dedicated resource envelope and implementation modalities for the
    NUDP.

25. Progress with the implementation of the NUDP has been slow in the first year of its implementation.
    This has been due to the limited attention paid to the design of detailed implementation modalities.
    MOC has recognized this, and initiated a stocktaking exercise in May 2013 across all provinces on
    NUDP implementation. A concluding workshop in December 2013 found that, overall, provinces

5
 Vietnam Urban Wastewater Review. World Bank, 2013.
6
 The absence of financial data in existing government programs makes it impossible to evaluate the size of actual
expenditures that are within the framework of the NUDP (i.e., transfers supporting urban development)



                                                   Page 8
    across the country have started to align their implementation of urban development activities with the
    NUDP’s core principles and that a revision to implementation modalities and timelines is necessary,
    specifically to align financing mechanisms, capacity support and national oversight systems with
    NUDP objectives and to account for variations in progress between classes of cities. Government is
    now proposing to implement the NUDP incrementally through a series of regional sub-programs that
    will provide a comprehensive package of performance-based fiscal support, capacity support and
    enhanced oversight. The Results Based National Urban Development Program in the Northern
    Mountains Region (RBNUDP-NM, the proposed Bank-supported operation) would be the first
    regional implementation of the NUDP.

The Results-Based National Urban Development Program in the Northern Mountains
Region

26. Through the RBNUDP-NM, the Government will introduce a regionally focused, performance-based
    transfer program with capacity building support for participating cities and improved national
    oversight systems. The Program operates at two levels: (a) in selected cities within the target region,
    through performance transfers and capacity support activities; and (b) at national level by
    strengthening program management systems, urban policy development, and oversight. These
    activities will influence both the continuing implementation of the NUDP and the framework for all
    government expenditures on urban development (including, as a first step, assisting the Government
    to quantify existing financing arrangements and investment needs).

27. Program expenditures are estimated to total US$300 million and the implementation period is
    anticipated to be six years, from 2015 to 2020. US$280 million will constitute the performance-based
    transfer system, financing infrastructure investments and project management activities by CPCs as
    specified in the investment menu. This includes US$50 million in counterpart contributions from the
    participating cities. US$20 million will support MOC activities, including the provision of capacity
    support (training and technical assistance) to participating cities, the development of national urban
    policy and implementation frameworks, and the strengthening of oversight systems (see Table 1).
    Note that city-level expenditures include direct recurrent costs associated with the implementation of
    sub-projects under the Program. Program Expenditures will consist of:
    a) construction costs of priority infrastructure investments through budgets of participating Cities;
    b) associated costs of services for social and environmental related studies pertaining to the
        infrastructure investments;
    c) compensation costs associated with the infrastructure investments;
    d) operating costs of the City administrations associated with management of the infrastructure
        investments;
    e) costs of program administration and capacity development activities implemented by MOC; and
    f) costs of verification audits undertaken by the SAV.

                       Table 1: Program Expenditure Framework (US$ millions)

                              2015      2016         2017        2018       2019        2020     Total
                     Estimated expenditures by cities including IDA and counterpart funds*
    Thai Nguyen City          13.50      31.00      19.50        8.00        6.00         1.00    79.00
    Cao Bang City              8.50      43.50      12.00        5.00        3.00       - 0.50    32.50
    Bac Kan City               6.00       8.50       5.50        5.00        3.00       - 0.50    28.50
    Dien Bien City             4.00      10.00      10.00        5.50        2.50         0.50    32.50



                                                 Page 9
                                    2015        2016        2017          2018          2019          2020       Total
    Yen Bai City                     5.50        2.50         14.50          9.00          2.50           0.50    34.50
    Tuyen Quang City                 4.00        3.00         12.00         15.00          6.00         - 0.50    40.50
    Hoa Binh City                    3.00        1.50         10.50          8.00          8.50       - 1.00      32.50
    Sub-Total for cities**          44.50       60.00         84.00         55.50         31.50           4.50   280.00
                      Estimated national level Ministry of Construction Expenditures by Type
    National Policy              1.00       1.00         1.00        1.00        1.00        2.00                  7.00
    Development
    MOC Staffing and             2.00       2.00         2.00        2.00        1.00        1.00                 10.00
    Capacity Development
    Annual Audits (SAV)              0.50        0.50          0.50          0.50          0.50          0.50      3.00
    Subtotal for MOC                 3.50        3.50          3.50          3.50          2.50          3.50     20.00
    Total for Program               48.00       63.50         87.50         59.00         34.00          8.00    300.00
 * Expenditures by cities include recurrent expenditures associated with sub-project management. Vietnamese public sector
 accounting practices require these costs to be included in sub-project cost estimates and budget provisions.
 ** Including US$50 million in counterpart contributions and US$230 million from the World Bank credit.

Program expenditures in the context of participating CPCs

28. City People’s Committees will plan and implement sub-projects in the Program. As these cities are
    the project owners for individual sub-project investments, the funding under DLI 2, above, will be
    reflected in the revenues and expenditures of the CPC annual budgets. Sub-project implementation
    will be undertaken by Project Management Units (PMUs) reporting to the CPCs. Existing asset
    management arrangements will continue. Provinces will continue to play their role in the approval of
    city plans and budgets.

29. As a level of government, CPCs have a range of functions that are not directly related to urban
    development. The total expenditures of CPCs amounted to US$ 154.8 million in 2012 (or US$189 per
    capita), and have grown by an average of 25 percent per year since 2010. Expenditures on urban
    infrastructure investments (capital investments including direct project management costs) accounted
    for 24 percent of this expenditure (US$38 million, or US$46 per capita) and have grown at an average
    of only 15 percent since 2010. Personnel expenditures (in four cities for which data is available)
    accounted for an average of 52.1 percent of recurrent spending since 2010. City expenditures are
    financed through a mixture of local taxes and fees (34 percent) which are subject to revenue-sharing
    arrangements with provincial governments, transfers from provinces (30 percent), land sales and
    leases (21 percent) and accumulated savings (15 percent).

30. These existing CPC expenditures are expected to continue. On average, the Program will add an
    additional US$5.5 million to the annual expenditures of each city, or US$47 per capita. This
    constitutes about 24.8 percent of total CPC expenditures in 2012, and 101 percent of their capital
    spending baseline. However, this is anticipated to decline sharply due to ongoing growth in existing
    revenues and expenditures outside of the Program. If the current rate of growth and expenditure
    composition is sustained over the Program period (to 2020), CPC expenditures are projected to
    increase more than seven fold by FY2020, with capital expenditures more than doubling. They will
    then far outstrip annual Program expenditures. This provides a critical window for the Program to
    enhance the effectiveness of these future CPC expenditures, in line with NUDP objectives.




                                                         Page 10
B.      Institutional Framework and Fiduciary Arrangements under the
        Program
31. The system of multi-level governance in Vietnam is described and evaluated in the Technical
    Assessment. Vietnam has three subordinated layers of sub-national governance: at provincial, city or
    district, and commune levels. Technical agencies at each level have dual reporting lines to the
    territorial administration and to their parent ministry. At each level there is an executive People’s
    Committee, which is accountable to the legislative People’s Council. The City People’s Committees
    comprise the executive and administrative agencies of city government. CPCs are principally
    responsible for planning, implementation, operation and maintenance of public infrastructure
    including roads and bridges, water supply and drainage, urban lighting and environmental sanitation.
    The CPC oversees construction activities and manages land and the housing fund in its jurisdiction.
    Plans, budgets and investment decisions of the CPC are subject to approval of the PPC, which assigns
    Provincial technical departments to conduct appropriate reviews and recommend decisions.

32. City People’s Committees are the main implementing agents for the Program, with jurisdiction over
    the participating urban areas and urban infrastructures funded in the Program. Provinces and the
    National Government have important complementary roles in supporting cities to perform their roles
    in the Program. The institutional arrangements for Program implementation are reviewed in the
    Technical Assessment Report. The assignment of roles has important implications for fiduciary
    arrangements under the Program, particularly in relation to cross-cutting issues of financial
    management, procurement and governance. Major interfaces between levels of government occur in
    procurement, where national government establishes rules and procedures, provinces set cost norms
    and approve CPC procurement plans, and the State Audit of Vietnam oversees compliance with
    regulations and procedures. A similar unit of powers is apparent in financial management, where
    provinces establish budget norms and guidelines, approve CPC budgets, allocate and disburse
    transfers to cities (based on disbursement requests), set parameters for revenue sharing, and approve
    fees and tax rates for local revenues. Oversight of financial management of the CPC is also largely
    the responsibility of the provincial branch of the State Treasury. National government makes transfers
    to cities via provincial budgets and accounts, while SAV conducts direct oversight of city compliance
    with financial management regulations. An additional, and often overlapping, system of government
    inspections works alongside a multi-tiered complaints handling system that also involves multiple
    levels of government, as described in more detail below.

33. The interface between levels of government occurs through and within the annual (and repeated)
    Public Expenditure Management (PEM) cycle. This cycle is summarized diagrammatically below in
    Figure 1.




                                               Page 11
                           Figure 1: Public Expenditure Management Cycle

                                              Fund transfer

                           Procurement                              Execution




                     Budgeting                                              Reporting




                            Consultative
                                                                    Oversight
                             Planning
                                                Grievance
                                                 Redress

Planning and Budgeting

34. All cities prepare and periodically update Master Plans to identify their long-term investment needs.
    These plans are predominately spatial in nature, and seldom demonstrate a strong linkage to resource
    availability. Investments identified in the Master Plan are included in five-year development plans;
    however, it is only at the annual budgeting stage that resources from the state budget are committed to
    investment projects.

35. The financial year for all levels of government starts on 1 January of each year. The principal law
    governing the budget management is the revised organic State Budget Law approved by the National
    Assembly (NA) in 2002 and which came into force from the 2004 financial year. This revised Law
    has strengthened the legal platform for budget management as it clarified the powers and
    responsibilities of stakeholders participating in the budget process. It has also strengthened
    decentralization through providing greater budgetary powers to Provincial People’s Councils.

36. The NA has the constitutional power to approve the unitary “State Budget,” which comprises the
    central government budget plus the consolidated provincial-district-commune budgets. The PPCs
    have the power to determine the allocation of the budget between the three tiers of government at the
    sub-national level (i.e., province, district and commune). PPCs also decide on revenue and
    expenditure, including the types of fees and contributions that can be collected at the local level and
    on the financial cost norms to be followed by the various levels of sub-national government. The
    PPCs have enacted resolutions, decisions and guidelines for their sub-national levels of government,
    sectors and spending units regarding: (a) the decentralization of budget management among local
    levels of government; (b) the time schedules for the development of budget estimates and final
    accounts; and (c) budget allocation norms (the norms provided in advance by PPCs to budget
    spending units to develop their budget proposals, based on the estimated availability of financial
    resources).


                                               Page 12
37. There is a well-defined budget preparation calendar that sets out the schedule for budget preparation
    by line ministries and provinces as well as the schedule for presentation of the State budget by
    government for its consideration and approval by the National Assembly. This is shown in Figure 2,
    below, for provincially-funded and city-funded expenditures, respectively. This process is somewhat
    cumbersome and lengthy as it requires multiple approvals by higher levels of government (commune
    budgets are approved by the districts; district budgets are approved by provinces; and provincial
    budgets are approved by the NA).

                         Figure 2: Budget Cycle for City People’s Committees




38. The national budget system notionally aggregates public spending upwards from commune to
    district/city, to provincial and then national level. National government budget allocations to
    provinces are made once initial spending projections and revenue sharing arrangements have been
    finalized. They thus typically “fill the gap” between assigned revenues and expenditures, with
    supplementary allocations for specific national priorities (National Target Programs). Funding to
    CPCs is routed through provinces.

39. The system of intergovernmental fiscal relations, including revenue assignments and the role of
    transfers, is reviewed in the Technical Assessment. Transfers in Vietnam take the form of retained
    revenues (revenue sharing arrangements) and conditional, specific purpose transfers originating
    largely from central government and transferred via the provinces. In practice this system often
    creates perverse incentives for local revenue collection and reporting, and has led to funding gaps for
    certain CPC functions. It has also reduced the expenditure discretion of CPCs. Fund flow
    predictability for CPCs is also weakened by routing transfers through provinces, which may divert
    resources to meet immediate cash-flow needs. Government, however, recognizes the importance of
    aligning functional and fiscal decentralization and improving resource predictability. The RBNUDP-
    NM is designed to assist government to introduce a performance-based fiscal transfer instrument to



                                               Page 13
    complement decentralization reforms through expanding CPC expenditure discretion while
    strengthening the incentives that they are provided for effective expenditure management and own
    source revenue enhancement.

Procurement

40. It is expected that the seven Program cities would be delegated procurement responsibility for most of
    the workload under the Program. The remaining portion of procurement (mainly consulting and non-
    consulting services for policy development, capacity building, technical assistance, program
    management, results verification and program oversight) will be carried out by Ministry of
    Construction and State Audit of Vietnam. Thus, in most cases, and except for procurement plans
    (which require Provincial People’s Committee’s approval), all procurement documents are approved
    by the City People’s Committees. At present, the average time taken for procurement in participating
    cities was reported to be between 1.5 and 2 months.

41. The Program will finance mainly contracts for: (a) civil works, typically including upgrading of low
    income areas (LIAs), rehabilitation and upgrading of urban roads, construction of bridges and other
    local infrastructure services; and (b) consulting services required for such works, mainly including
    construction supervision.7 In addition, the Program will also finance contracts for small-value goods
    and equipment, consulting services, training and workshops for capacity building, and project
    management. It is estimated that there would be about 90 contracts for civil works (with values
    ranging from US$0.04 to 20 million and representing more than 90 percent of the Program’s total
    investment costs); nearly 200 contracts for consulting services (valued from several thousands to
    several hundreds of thousands of US dollars) and a small number of goods contracts to be procured
    over the life of the Program.8 These contracts will be implemented in two phases (Phase I: 2015-2017
    and Phase 2: 2018-2020). There are no large contracts that are valued at or above OPRC thresholds
    under the Program. It is expected that 90 percent of Program procurement, in terms of values, will be
    done under open competitive bidding procedures. The rest may be procured through other methods --
    mainly direct contracting and shopping.

42. The procurement rules and procedures to be followed under the Program will be those stipulated in
    Vietnam’s revised Public Procurement Law No. 43/2013/QH13, which was ratified by the National
    Assembly on November 26, 2013.9 The new Law shall be effective on July 1, 2014. The Decrees
    guiding the implementation of the Law are being prepared by the Government and are expected to be
    issued by that date. In addition, the Government will also issue various Circulars, mainly on model
    bidding documents, to further guide and support the implementation of the Law.

43. A review of the revised Public Procurement Laws and draft regulations implementing Decrees found
    that they: (a) require procurement planning to be prepared and approved in a timely manner with
7
  Sub-project detailed design is being financed through the PPTAF and will not be eligible for Program financing.
8
  Except for a number of major consulting services for the preparation of feasibility studies, detailed designs,
bidding documents, EIA/EPC) and small goods contracts to be financed by the PPTAF (approx. US$6 million). Note
that these procurements are procured following the World Bank’s Guidelines: Selection and Employment of
Consultants under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers dated January 2011 (the
Consultant Guidelines) and Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD
Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers dated January 2011 (the Procurement Guidelines).
9
   The existing legal and regulatory framework on public procurement includes the Procurement Law
No. 61/2005/QH11 dated November 29, 2005, Law No. 38/2009/QH12 on Amendments to the Procurement Law
dated June 19, 2009 and subsequent implementing Decrees (including Decree No. 111/2006/ND-CP, dated
September 29, 2006; Decree No. 58/2008/ND-CP dated May 5, 2008; and Decree No.85/2008/ND-CP dated
October 15, 2009). These shall be replaced by the revised Public Procurement Law since July 1, 2014.



                                                  Page 14
     proper linkage to budget availability; (b) mandate open competitive bidding as the default
     procurement method and provide detailed procedures for open competitive bidding; (c) provide a
     reasonably clear allocation of responsibilities and accountabilities to the procuring entities, employers
     and project owners; and (d) provide sanctions against unacceptable practices including fraud and
     corruption. In addition, the Government will issue various Model Bidding Documents (including
     forms and templates of contract) and bid evaluation templates for use by procurement practitioners.
     The Decree on Selection of Contractors, which is being drafted and scheduled to officially issue in
     June 2014, however does still propose to allow an automatic use of direct contracting and single
     sourcing for small contracts below certain monetary thresholds.10

44. The open competitive bidding procedures described in the procurement laws and regulations
    generally adequately accommodate transparency, economy and efficiency of the procurement
    process. An open competitive bidding for civil works typically includes the following steps and
    requirements:
    a) Preparation of bidding documents. Bidding documents should be prepared using the templates
        issued by the Ministry of Planning. Bidding documents should clearly state bid evaluation and
        qualification criteria and contain no restrictions. Bidding documents must be approved by a
        competent agency before issuance;
    b) Advertising of bidding opportunity. Invitation for bids must be advertised in the Public
        Procurement Newspaper, which is nationally available, for three consecutive issues and published
        in the MPI’s public procurement website (muasamcong.mpi.gov.vn). Bidding documents can be
        sold (at maximum VND1 million or US$45 for one set) or released free of charge to interested
        bidders three days after the advertising date. The laws prohibit any practices to restrict bidders
        from access to bidding documents;
    c) Preparation, submission and receipt of bids. Bidders shall be given at least 20 days for
        preparation of their bids counting from the date of bidding document issuance. Upon the deadline
        for bid submission, the procuring entity shall immediately open all bids received in the presence
        of bidders’ representatives. The procuring entity shall read aloud bidders’ names, bid prices and
        discount offers and other important information; prepare the minutes of bid opening and send a
        copy to each participating bidder;
    d) Evaluation of bids. The laws require that bid evaluation must be completed within 45 days after
        the date of bid opening. Extension of bid validity is permissible but not exceeding 20 days.
        Evaluation of bids includes three main steps: (i) preliminary examination, which includes the
        checking on eligibility, bid security, bidder’s experience and qualifications; (ii) detailed
        evaluation, which includes evaluation of technical responsiveness and calculation of evaluated
        bid prices through error corrections, adjustments, and discount application; and (iii) ranking of
        responsive bids to determine the top ranked bid for contract award consideration. The laws permit
        the use of a merit point (scoring) system for technical evaluation of bids in addition to a pass and
        fail methodology. This technical scoring methodology is subjective and may be abused;
    e) Contract award, negotiations and signing. The laws require that to be selected for contract award,
        the bidder must: (i) have submitted an eligible, qualified, and technically responsive bid; (ii) have
        the lowest corrected price or lowest evaluated bid price; and (iii) have the proposed contract price
        not exceeding the approved pre-bid cost estimate. The procuring entity will negotiate and sign the


10
   The draft Decree on Selection of Contractors proposes a threshold of VND 0.5 billion (US$24,000) under which
goods, works, non-consulting and consulting services may be procured through direct contracting. Compared to the
thresholds in the existing laws and regulations, this threshold is substantially lower meaning more mandatory use of
competitive bidding for the Program. However, this threshold is not yet confirmed and may change when the Decree
is officially issued.



                                                   Page 15
         contract with the selected bidder based on the contract form included in the bidding documents
         and the selected bidder’s bid; and
      f) Publication of contract award. After the contract is awarded, the procuring entity shall publish
         the contract award information in the Public Procurement Newspaper. Information to be
         published includes name and descriptions of the contract, name of the successful bidder, and
         contract price.

45. In case of open competitive bidding for consulting services, the procuring entity shall advertise in the
    Public Procurement Newspaper to seek consultants’ interests; establish a shortlist of at least three
    qualified firms, prepare bidding documents using the MPI’s templates, issue the bidding documents
    to shortlisted consultants and give them at least 10 days for preparation of proposals; receive
    proposals and immediately open the technical proposals; score technical proposals against prescribed
    evaluation criteria; publicly open the financial proposals of those consultants who secure the
    minimum technical score and conduct financial and final evaluation to determine the highest ranked
    consultant; negotiate and sign the contract with the selected firm and publish the contract award in the
    Public Procurement Newspaper.

46. The procurement law requires that procurement plans shall be approved by competent agencies after
    the approval of investment decisions or they can be approved at the same time as the approval of
    investment decisions where conditions allow. The Law also requires that procurement plans shall be
    prepared for the entire projects except where conditions do not suffice. Procurement plans must be
    prepared based on the availability of project funding sources. The Law further stipulates that
    procurement packaging shall be done based on technical nature and implementation sequence to
    ensure no restriction of prospective bidders’ participation, and to ensure the consistency of contract
    implementation with overall project implementation. It also prohibits any practices to wilfully divide
    procurements into small contracts in order to enable the use of direct contracting methods.
    Procurement and contract management documents are required by law to be maintained for 10 years
    (from the date of work completion).

47. The Government has detailed regulations and a complex cost norm system for cost estimation. For
    works under the Program, detailed cost estimates will be prepared based on cost norms that are
    established by respective provincial departments (normally departments of construction) based on the
    Ministry of Construction’s norms on construction inputs (standardized consumption of material,
    labor, and construction machinery for a unit of a work item) and local prices of such inputs. These
    cost norms are required to be regularly updated (normally on a quarterly basis). Cost norms for works
    may be comparable to the market prices if they are updated in a timely manner. Costs for detailed
    designs and construction supervision are estimated based on a fixed percentage of the total
    construction costs. This fixed percentage is regulated by Ministry of Construction and varies by types
    and total costs of construction works. For example, the “percentage norm” for detailed design of a
    regular urban road with a cost estimate of VND 100 billion is 1.12 percent while the percentage norm
    for construction supervision for those works is 1.405 percent.11

48. For the purpose of procurement planning, several rounds of cost estimation will be conducted with
    different level of accuracy. Currently, as the Program is under preparation, values of contracts as
    being proposed by Program cities are estimates calculated based on investment (order of magnitude)
    unit rates. Review of these estimates shows that some appear to be rather high compared to
    descriptions of proposed works. At the later stage, when feasibility studies are completed, cities
    would also prepare preliminary estimates based on the basic designs of works. Preliminary estimates
    are used for preparation of initial procurement plans, budget allocation, etc. Before a particular
11
     Based on MOC’s Decision 957/QD-BXD dated September 9, 2009.



                                                Page 16
     contract is invited for bids, cities will prepare the contract’s detailed cost estimate based on det ailed
     designs of the works. This detailed cost estimate is considered the contract’s ceiling and is used for
     the purpose of bid evaluation and contract award, and is subject to appraisal and approval by relevant
     government agencies. Under direct contracting arrangements, this ceiling is used to negotiate price
     and bidders are normally asked to voluntarily offer a discount of a few percent below the established
     ceiling. Under open competitive bidding, bids offering prices above the approved cost estimate are
     rejected.

49. The RBNUDP-NM constitutes the first regional implementation of the NUDP. As such, historical
    Program performance data is not available, and this assessment uses the experience and performance
    of the city PMUs as a proxy for expected performance under the Program. The PMUs each have
    between 10 and 20 staff. The majority of PMU technical staff holds a certificate of competence in
    procurement from MPI. However, the requirement for this certificate is only attendance at a three-day
    training course, for which qualified engineers with at least three years’ experience are eligible. The
    City may assign additional staff to the PMU to strengthen it for implementation of the Program, but it
    seems unlikely that there will be staff with greater procurement expertise available from within other
    units of the City administration.

50. To assist the city’s People’s Committee’s decision making, a department under the city (normally the
    Finance and Planning Unit) appraises procurement documents and makes recommendations to the
    City People’s Committee. The city’s overall project implementation (including its procurement
    performance) is annually inspected by the provincial inspectors and further audited by SAV. This
    focusses on procedural compliance issues. There are no separate procurement post reviews or audits.

Control, Reporting, and Auditing

Treasury management and funds flow

51. The State Treasury is responsible for management of the State Treasury funds. The provincial
    branches of the State Treasury play important roles in the disbursement and payment control
    processes. All payments are made through the treasury system. The sharing of information and data
    and the cooperation in payment control and budget between the treasury and financial bodies are
    conducted through the Treasury and Budget Management Information System (TABMIS).12

52. For construction works and projects that are to be funded from provincial budget, funds are allocated
    in accordance with the approved budget estimates. The provincial Department of Finance (DOF) sets
    the fund allocation limits in line with the plans in TABMIS, and the provincial State Treasury makes
    payments accordingly. If construction works are funded from the CPC budget, the CPC Finance and
    Planning Unit will set the fund allocation limits in TABMIS, and the CPC State Treasury Unit will
    make payments accordingly. Payments can also be made from advances against budgeted funds.
    However, in some cases the spending units may not complete payment procedures to liquidate these
    advances by the end of the financial year, even given that the financial year is already extended by
    one month to permit the recognition of expenditures and payments made in January to the previous
    financial year. This leads to construction advances being very high at year end, which are then
    transferred to the following financial years and recorded as a type of “revenue” for the new financial
    year. This practice causes misleading financial information and confusing budget control.


12
  TABMIS is an integrated computerized financial management system built by the World Bank-financed Public
Financial Management Reform Project. Since its rolling out in 2008, TABMIS has provided the capability to record
and control commitments, improve cash flow management, and strengthen expenditure management and controls.



                                                  Page 17
53. Recurrent expenditure items are reviewed and funds are allocated based on expenditure norms or
    activities. All expenditure items that are included in the budget estimates developed by spending units
    and supported by quarterly plans and registered payment schedules are fully met from the allocated
    budgets. New expenditure items that arise outside the budget estimates and plans (due to new policy,
    merging of Units, staff increases, newly established units, etc.) are funded in line with their spending
    requests. Procurements and repairs are usually conducted in the third and fourth quarters of the year.

54. It was observed that, due to the lack of funds in the State Treasury at the central and provincial level
    at certain times during the year, mainly due to several instances of unmatched incoming cash flow
    and outgoing cash flow, some funds that are not allocated at the beginning of the year are instead
    allocated mid-year or even at year end. In that case, although the construction project is approved and
    included in the annual budget, when the investment owners request the State Treasury to make
    payment to a contractor or a supplier, they still face a delay by State Treasuries in releasing funds.
    Discussion with a number of provincial State Treasuries also revealed that the State Treasury can
    sometimes be “flexible” in rotating the sources of funds (i.e., funds allocated to one project can be
    temporary utilized for another project to solve urgent cash-flow needs, and then be reimbursed later).
    This practice may cause delays to the Program if its allocated funding is temporarily utilized for
    another urgent need of the province.

55. Although delays in allocating funds, transferring funds, and therefore paying contractors are
    “common practice” in most government-funded construction projects, this issue is considered
    unacceptable in a result-based program such as the RBNUDP-NM as it may cause severe harm to the
    timely achievement of results and reporting of Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs), which trigger
    the Bank disbursements. The MOC has noted this issue and has proposed to MOF a specific
    mechanism for this newly established Program, to enable the formulation of result based financing
    into the Government annual budget cycle (which is traditionally an input based grant from MOF to
    provinces and from provinces to cities).

56. Program funds will be transferred by MOF to special accounts of CPCs opened at the respective
    Provincial State Treasuries. The basis for this transfer will be the City Annual Plans, in which the
    Program’s activities are included, as approved by the PPC in the normal budget cycle. Depending on
    the time of the signing and effectiveness of this Program, the first advance may be in time to fall
    within the Government normal annual budget cycle, or may need to be treated separately as a special
    budget revision during the year. The MOF will need to issue official guidance on the financing
    mechanism and disbursement arrangements of the Program before negotiation, including the
    establishment of special accounts for each CPC at the State Treasuries, to enable a results-based
    disbursement from the central budget to cities, and to enable pre-finance opportunities for cities to
    cover any gaps in funding while the achievement of the results is in progress and not yet completed,
    verified and reimbursed. The guidance will also clearly provide procedures for the transfer of funds
    from MOF to Cities through the special account mechanism.

57. It has been agreed with Government that the reconciliation of advances will be done annually as the
    basis of disbursements to individual cities, with actual expenditures offset against advances as the
    basis for a subsequent advance. A full reconciliation and re-allocation of city allocations will be done
    at the Program midterm. The reconciliation at Program closing will thus be the final rather than the
    first reconciliation of advances.




                                                Page 18
Accounting and financial reporting

58. The Accounting Law, which was approved by the NA in 2003 and became effective as of January 1,
    2004, governs the accounting and reporting for government and its entities at all levels. The Law:
    (a) defines applicable principles and requirements and the scope of accounting; (b) prescribes the
    types of accounts, chart of accounts, financial statements, their disclosure and publication, their audit
    and inspection; and (c) assigns to the MOF the responsibility for formulating accounting standards in
    conformity with international financial reporting standards. An important provision of this law is the
    requirement for all spending units to publish their annual financial statements within 30 days of the
    date of approval by relevant authorities.

59. The Ministry of Finance, however, is still in the process of formulating accounting standards for the
    public sector. To date, only Decision 19 has been issued for government administrative agencies
    (governing mainly recurring expenditures) and Decision 214 for investment owners (capital
    expenditures). These accounting policies utilize modified cash-based accounting methods and are not
    yet compliant with international accounting standards for the public sector.

60. The Finance and Planning Unit is responsible for the consolidated financial statements of the whole
    CPC, including Units and communes, as described in the Technical Assessment.13 By March of each
    year the Finance and Planning Unit completes the City financial statements of the previous financial
    year for the CPC Chairman to submit it to the Provincial Department of Finance for reviewing and
    recording. The CPC financial statements are comprehensive, based on information systematically
    generated from TABMIS, include both recurring and capital expenditures (funded by City’s budget),
    and clearly present all sources of a City’s income.

61. The State Treasury of every province also records all provincial expenditures on a cash basis, using
    TABMIS. A separate code is given by TABMIS to each program, project and sub-project. This
    enables the financial reports generated by the State Treasury to be both detailed and comprehensive.
    The State Treasury can generate consolidated financial reports on a monthly, quarterly and yearly
    basis with breakdowns of revenues and expenditures, but with the same limitation of being cash-
    based. Additionally, in some cases, delays to the financial year end result in expenditures in January
    or even later being recorded in the financial statements of the previous year.

62. Since late 2012, TABMIS has been successfully launched in all 63 provinces, with full technical
    functionality and capacity given to the State Treasury and Finance functions (provincial Department
    of Finance and CPC Finance and Planning Unit). The Ministry of Finance, under the Bank Public
    Financial Management (PFM) technical assistance project, provides continuous training to State
    Treasury and Finance staff at provincial and lower levels to make full use of TABMIS. The system
    functions well in all the provinces and the cities of this Program. Both Treasury and Finance agencies
    are equipped with adequate qualified personnel.

Internal control

63. In accordance with the law, expenditures from the State budget must be controlled before, during and
    after payment. In order to be paid, expenditures must be listed in the approved budget estimates, be in
    line with the standards and norms of the State, be approved by the authorized officer of the spending

13
   The CPC is divided into different divisions: CPC Office, Education, Health, Social, Environment, Culture,
Forestry, Land, Natural Resources, Tax, Statistics, Finance and Planning. Most of those divisions are independent
budget spending units, having separate State Treasury accounts, accounting records and financial reports. Some
other divisions are dependent, sharing accounts with the CPC Office.



                                                  Page 19
    unit, have adequate supporting files and documents, and be approved by the State Treasury of the
    relevant level of government.

64. The Treasury system is the main source of control over expenditure. Budget spending units are
    required to open an “account” at the State Treasury and are under the control of the financial agencies
    and the State Treasury in relation to compliance with and settlement of the budget. The State Treasury
    has the power and responsibility to determine which expenditure payments can be legitimately made
    from the State budget.

65. The participating Program cities follow the same principles. Expenditures funded from the CPC
    budget will be approved by the CPC State Treasury Unit (and reported to the Provincial State
    Treasury). Expenditures funded by the provincial budget will be approved by the PPC State Treasury.
    Under the city, there are communes and Units that have their own accounts at the CPC State Treasury
    Unit and are responsible for their own expenditures (including capital expenditures and payrolls). The
    CPC’s Finance and Planning Unit only plays the role of consolidating budget and financial reports.

66. According to the Budget Law, budget expenditures should be paid directly by the State Treasury to
    suppliers and beneficiaries. However, due to the popularity of cash payments in Vietnam, this
    principle has not been completely applied. For some administrative expenditures with a value less
    than VND 5 million and other special expenditures, advances of funds are made to the spending units
    which then make payments to the relevant suppliers or beneficiaries and subsequently submit the
    supporting documentation to the State Treasury. The State Treasury then verifies and records the
    actual expenditures against the relevant advances.

67. The 2005 State Audit Law requires internal auditing to be implemented in every organization using
    the State budget, funds and assets. The law empowers the SAV “to direct and instruct on the internal
    audit profession and operation, and on the use of internal audit results of agencies and institutions.”
    Government has already decided to separate the modalities of the internal audit function for the
    existing system of inspectorates. The implementation of the law in the context of this Program is
    captured in the PAP. However, there are as yet no implementation guidelines to clearly define internal
    auditing functions, roles and responsibilities, and currently no active leadership on the
    implementation of internal auditing within the public sector.

Program financial statements audit

68. The State Audit of Vietnam is the Vietnamese Supreme Audit Institution (SAI). The SAV operates
    from a relatively clear statutory base. Although the Vietnamese constitution does not make reference
    to the state public audit, the State Audit Law passed by the NA on June 14, 2005 which came into
    effect on January 1, 2006, created the legislative basis for the legal position, functions and working
    modalities of the SAV. The State Audit Law sets out principles on which the SAV should operate free
    of influence of the executive. The current legislation protects SAV’s independence on two levels: (a)
    institutionally as the Auditor General is elected by the NA; and (b) operationally, as the SAV decides
    upon its annual audit plan and needs neither Government nor the NA to agree to the plan or report.

69. The State Audit Law does not specify the relations between the State Auditor, the MOF Inspectorate
    and the State Inspectorate. As a result, overlaps in execution of the roles and responsibilities of the
    three bodies exist. The SAV self-assessment in 2013 revealed that the SAV does not yet comply with
    International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) in terms of auditing standards
    and operational manuals. The consultant work funded by the Bank Institutional Development Fund
    (IDF) in 2013 confirmed this statement. The 21 auditing standards issued by SAV in 2010 and
    currently in use are actually principles rather than auditing standards. They are also not supported by



                                               Page 20
    implementation guidance or audit manuals. Instead, SAV has several policies and guidance
    documents that have been issued in various forms at different times, to govern its audit work. With
    the Bank IDF and support from other donors, the SAV has committed itself to issuing auditing
    standards equivalent to the International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) by the end
    of 2014.

70. The SAV normally only visits the cities every two to three years, primarily due to resource
    limitations. Selection of the agencies to be audited for the year is based on the risks and issues that
    SAV has identified as well as the requirements of the National Assembly and Government. The
    annual audit plan is submitted to the National Assembly for approval before commencement of the
    audit year. The audit reports issued are comprehensive, covering all types of expenditures and sources
    of funds. The reports do not however provide an audit opinion on the accuracy and fairness of the
    City financial statements and compliance with laws and regulations. Instead, they provide a list of
    findings and recommendations from the audit work.

71. SAV will prioritize annual auditing for this Program, similar to other donor-funded projects where a
    commitment is made to provide an opinion on annual project financial statements, and introduce
    annual auditing of the financial statements of participating CPCs. The audit TOR will be agreed
    between MOC and SAV and reviewed by the Bank. It will cover all cities with necessary audit scope
    to ensure the issuance of an audit opinion. The audit of the Program will also be included in SAV ’s
    annual audit plan to be approved by National Assembly.

72. The cities will prepare the financial statements for their own components then submit them to MOC
    for consolidation. MOC will consolidate the sub-program financial statements prepared by cities with
    its own sub-program financial statements to create a consolidated Program financial statement for
    SAV to audit. The quality of SAV’s audit on other donor funded projects is considered to be
    acceptable. Technical assistance will be provided for the Program to assist SAV in undertaking the
    audits and physical verification required at the city and national level.

Governance and Accountability

73. The system of government in Vietnam is well established. Despite the recent decentralization of
    authority, Vietnam’s government structure remains strongly hierarchical, though with a number of
    parallel systems that may duplicate functions. This system contains the basic elements of good
    governance, including a separation of policy-making, execution and oversight functions, both
    between and within levels of government, and a system of regular reporting to high levels of
    government. As elsewhere in the world, the form of local governance in Vietnam is evolving within
    ongoing state wide reforms, and this process is being assisted by the RBNUDP-NM.

Legal framework

74. All civil servants are required to conform to the Law on Cadres and Civil Servants (2008). This
    Law provides certain ethics and code of conduct standards including requirements for civil servants to
    perform their duties with integrity and in an impartial manner, and prohibits fraud and corruption.

75. Bidding documents, required by the Procurement Law, must include a provision clearly stating
    various prohibited acts in procurement process including fraud and corruption. After bids are received
    and opened, they shall be required to be preserved at a safe place; information on such bids and bid
    evaluation processes shall be treated as confidential. Procurement decisions by PMUs are reviewed
    by a city’s department (Finance and Planning Bureau) and approved by the CPC.




                                               Page 21
76. Activities to prevent and combat fraud and corruption in Vietnam are governed by the 2005 Anti-
    Corruption (AC) Law, which introduced new approaches to anticorruption such as asset declarations
    for civil servants, job rotation, and a stronger focus on transparency. The law includes ambitious and
    all-embracing provisions on the prevention, detection, and handling of corruption, as well as the
    organization and mechanisms for concerned agencies (including media, international organizations,
    etc.). The guideline for implementing the 2005 AC-Law was issued through the Prime Minister’s
    Decision 30/2006/QD-TTg (6 February, 2006) and Resolution No. 4-NQ/TW (21 August, 2006) of
    the Party’s Central Committee (Session X). The AC Law was most recently amended in 2012, which
    introduced stricter transparency guidelines for public sector governance. Most notably, the amended
    AC Law is enhanced by Decrees No. 78 and 90 which clarify the implementation of provisions under
    the AC Law with regards to the assets and accountability of public officials.

77. The 2005 Anti-Corruption Law is also complemented and strengthened by the 2011 Laws on
    Complaints and Denunciations (Decrees 75/ND-CP and 76/ND-CP) which regulate the process and
    procedures for the handling and settlement of complaints. While the process is described and
    analyzed in more detail below, it is important to note the clarification of roles of different government
    bodies in charge of handling fraud and corruption complaints, as specified in Section 2 of this Law.

78. This is also in line with the 2004 Law on Inspection which governs the extensive Government
    Inspectorate system of Vietnam. The key roles of the GIs are to: (a) carry out socio-economic
    inspections; (b) examine and inspect the settlement of citizen’s complaints and denunciations; and (c)
    detect corruption cases and recommend how to handle them. This effectively establishes a multi-
    tiered system of non-financial oversight, with inspectorate bodies existing at the central, province and
    district administrative levels of government, together with specialist sector inspectorates at the central
    level (illustrated in the Figure 3). This operates in parallel to the internal audit system being
    established under the 205 State Audit Law (discussed above). Due to the establishment of numerous
    Inspectorates, their authority to process and settle complaints and denunciations are tightly defined
    vis-à-vis each other. If the denunciation does not fall under their jurisdiction, they must refer it to
    another authority.




                                                 Page 22
                               Figure 3: Government inspection systems




79. The cities in this Program are under direct line of inspection of: (a) MOC; (b) Provincial Inspectorate;
    (c) provincial departments: of Planning and Investment (DPI), Finance (DOF) and Construction
    (DOC); and (d) the Provincial Anti-corruption Committee. Some Cities receive at least one delegation
    per year but some others seem not to receive adequate oversight from central or provincial bodies.
    Thai Nguyen and Bac Kan CPCs were not subject to any inspections over the last three years.

Complaints handling system

80. According to the Law on Complaints and Denunciations and the Anti-Corruption Law, citizens can
    provide fraud and corruption complaints to various offices, but they can be summarized into two main
    channels: (a) the People’s Committee at the appropriate level of government; and (b) the GI agencies
    (see Figure 4). In the RBNUDP-NM, complaints related to sub-projects, which could include
    allegations of fraud or corruption, will most likely be submitted to the CPC as the owner of
    investment sub-projects, or to the GI under the MOC or that under the provincial Department of
    Construction.

    a) Through the City People’s Committee. A complaint is often submitted in written format with full
       details of the complainant to the Front Office of the CPC or through the Citizen Receiving Unit
       (Phòng tiếp dân) which will also transfer to the Front Office to log and forward the complaint to a
       standing member of the CPC leadership (Chairman or Vice Chairmen). In addition to the written
       complaints channel, a complainant may also attend Meeting Sessions chaired by CPC leaders,
       held at least once or twice a month, to raise the issue. The complainant may follow the same
       procedure to submit a complaint at different levels of government (district, province and state
       levels) but they will most likely forward the complaint to the CPC as the most appropriate level to
       handle it.



                                                Page 23
     Upon receiving the complaint, the CPC leader will review and request an explanation and/or
     clarification from the respective unit or individual (for the RBNUDP-NM this will most likely
     be the Project Management Unit or the Urban Management Unit under the CPC). During our
     interviews, CPC leaders noted that they receive “numerous” complaints, but most of them relate
     to the delays in land resettlement. None recalled any credible complaint relating to fraud and
     corruption in their city. Upon receiving the explanation from the concerned unit or individual, if
     the city leadership considers the allegation credible, the CPC Inspectorate will be asked to take
     the lead in the inspection. Under the CPC, the GI Unit is relatively small with only six to seven
     staff, including two to three Chief/Vice-Chief Inspectors, most with university degrees. If the
     initial inspection reveals that crimes are alleged, the case file will be turned over to the police. If
     warranted, corruption charges can be brought by local prosecutors in Vietnam’s court system.
     Once the case is concluded, a formal response will be sent to the complainant to inform them of
     the key results and decisions taken. The formal response is required to be shared with the
     complainant within 45 days from the date of receipt. If not satisfied with the decision, the
     complainant reserves the right to appeal through a similar process to the higher authority (in this
     case, the Provincial People’s Committee).

                            Figure 4: Complaints handling procedure




b) Through the Government Inspectorates. In addition to the CPC system for handling complaints,
   citizens can also submit fraud and corruption allegation to the MOC GI and DOC GI, to be
   handled and inspected by some 130 inspectors at the national MOC GI or 15 to 20 inspectors at
   each provincial-level DOC GI. These inspectors reserve the right to stop construction for
   investigation if they see any sign of fraud and corruption. Similar to the CPC's system, the
   Inspectorate passes on the case to the police and prosecutor once crimes are alleged. Both of these



                                             Page 24
        parallel complaints handling systems contain a reporting mechanism that can capture information
        on the number, type and handling of fraud and corruption allegations, which they periodically
        report up to the national level.

81. Neither the existing Procurement Law (issued in 2005) nor the new revised Public Procurement Law
    (just approved in November 2013) have a separate procedure for handling allegations of fraud and
    corruption in procurement,14 although they include provisions on prohibiting fraudulent and collusive
    practices. Currently, procurement complaints are handled in accordance with the procedures stated in
    Decree No. 85/2009/NĐ-CP that require complaints to be duly signed and stamped by a legitimate
    representative of the complaining bidder (anonymous complaints are not considered). For complaints
    related to contract award, the complainant must deposit a fee equivalent to 0.01 percent of the
    contract’s offered bid price (minimum VND 2 million and maximum VND 50 million) that will be
    forfeited if the complaint is not substantiated. Though the Government is in process of drafting a new
    implementing Decree following the issuance of the revised Public Procurement Law, which shall be
    applicable to the Program, the procedures for handling procurement complaints are expected to
    basically remain the same.15

82. Complaints are handled by procuring entities or program owners and appeals are reviewed by a
    competent agency – normally the Provincial People’s Committee. Complaints are handled as follows.
    First, they are reviewed by the procuring entity (equivalent to PMUs under the Program), who is
    responsible for responding to the complaining bidder within five working days. If the procuring entity
    is incapable of resolving the complaint or if the bidder is dissatisfied, the bidder may submit their
    complaint to the employer (equivalent to cities under the Program); and the employer is responsible
    for replying to the bidder within seven working days. If the bidder is still dissatisfied, it may escalate
    to the competent agency (equivalent to Provincial People’s Committees under the Program). The
    competency agency is responsible for responding to the bidder within ten working days. If the bidder
    remains unhappy, they may approach a court for redress. In case of complaints about bidding results,
    the complaints will be resolved based on the review and recommendation of a Consultative
    Committee, established on a case-by-case basis and headed by an authorized representative of the
    Department of Planning and Investment.

Anonymous complaints

83. According to the Law on Complaints and Denunciations, CPCs are not required to handle anonymous
    complaints. The inability to submit anonymous complaints may be a disincentive for citizens to
    provide information about fraud and corruption in the Program. However, all participating CPCs/GIs
    maintain the practice of accepting and logging anonymous complaints for their records. The officials
    noted that if anonymous complaints contained credible or serious allegations the inspectors would
    investigate them fully. The lack of a clear, consistent and affirmative policy and procedure for
    handling the anonymous complaints is a clear weakness in the current complaints handling system.

Complaints consolidation under RBNUDP-NM

84. Building upon the existing system of handling complaints at the city level, the Urban Development
    Agency (UDA) under MOC, which serves as the key implementing agency and coordinator for

14
   This is to distinguish fraud and corruption complaints with procurement petitions, for which the handling process
is described under Integrity Aspects in the Procurement Section of this Assessment.
15
   This fee applicable to complaints regarding contract award is being proposed to double (0.02 percent and VND
100 million, maximum) in the draft Decree on Selection of Contractors, expected to be issued in June 2014.




                                                   Page 25
    RBNUDP-NM, will aggregate and inform the Bank of the number of fraud and corruption
    allegations, as well as how they are handled (investigated, mitigated and sanctioned). The information
    will be collected from each CPC and respective PMU, as well as from concerned GIs under MOC,
    MPI, MOF, and will be done at least annually.

Sanction and debarment process

85. The abovementioned Laws on Anti-Corruption, on Complaints, and on Denunciation also regulate
    sanctions in line with the outcomes of the investigation carried out in the complaints handling process
    described above. Contractors can also be sanctioned for multiple warnings of poor performance as per
    the Procurement Law (Art. 75(1) (c)). This provision provides significant discretion to the tendering
    authority to determine “poor performance” and if misused could lead to sanctions and debarments for
    reasons beyond the violation of procurement rules and procedures or for fraud and corruption.
    Counterparts met during field visits were often unable to tell the team whether there had been any
    “poor performance” debarments in previous infrastructure projects.

86. Once the case is concluded, the CPC and GI will issue administrative sanctions on the responsible
    individual and firms. The outcomes are also reported vertically (to the Provincial People’s Committee
    and national-level MOC Inspectorate, respectively) and directly to the Ministry of Planning and
    Investment who maintains a national list of debarred firms and individuals (if related to procurement).
    This is consistent with Article 63 (1) of Decree 85/2009/NĐ-CP issued by the Government on
    10/15/2009, which regulates that any procurement sanctions issued will be applied nationally. Cities
    say that they check the national debarred list when taking procurement decisions, but there seems to
    be a mix between “blacklisting” as a result of committing a fraudulent or corrupt act and
    “blacklisting” for the lack of technical performance.

Experience under Past Bank Projects

87. The Bank has prepared and is supervising the implementation of the first PforR Program (Rural
    Water Supply and Sanitation under the National Target Program – RWSS NTP) in Vietnam, and also
    has experience with a range of urban projects in Vietnam. Lessons learned in the preparation of the
    RWSS NTP were examined and adopted in this assessment. A particular lesson has been that delays
    in implementation can result from limited understanding of the operational modalities associated with
    the PforR mechanisms, particularly in relation to existing systems and the arrangements for funding
    advances. The Bank’s experience in urban projects has shown that one of the common procurement
    issues that caused implementation delays in those projects was the unfamiliarity and inexperience of
    project implementing agencies with Bank procurement rules and procedures and the de facto
    application of both Bank and Government rules and procedures. By allowing the use of only
    Government rules and procedures in this Program, that bottleneck will be removed. However, other
    issues that have arisen under those projects that may continue to occur during the implementation of
    the Program. These include: (a) procurement capacity weaknesses; (b) inappropriate bidding practices
    (such as excessive rejection of bids for minor deviations or omissions); (c) procurement complaints;
    and (d) collusion in bidding. Lessons learned in other projects suggest that under the Program, such
    issues could be effectively mitigated through intensive training and capacity building, full reporting
    and serious handling of procurement complaints, and strengthened procurement oversight.

Previous relevant fraud and corruption complaints/investigations

88. Few complaints on fraud and corruption were reported by the CPCs in the Program area interviewed
    during this assessment. Most of the complaints filed or expressed involved issues related to land
    compensation. This small number should not be attributed to the citizens’ lack of knowledge about



                                               Page 26
     the complaints system or their rights to file complaints, as citizens do use the complaints system for
     other issues. It is more likely to reflect the limited scope of past infrastructure projects in the cities,
     which has not warranted significant attention from the citizens, or the use of the procurement
     complaints procedures by bidders.

89. Similar to the CPCs, the GI of MOC and DOCs receive many complaints, but only a small fraction
    falls under their jurisdiction and not many of them relate to fraud and corruption. Most of them
    involved issues beyond fraud and corruption and included complaints on resettlement and
    compensation, zoning, and construction order.

WB’s experience with integrity issues in the sector

90. INT has recently conducted two investigations into fraud and corruption in the same sector as the
    RBNDUP-NM based on disclosures to the World Bank by two international firms working on a
    number of Bank-funded projects in Vietnam. In both investigations, INT has evidence that the
    international firms used a local Vietnamese agent to make payments to project and government
    officials in order to influence the award of contracts and to be paid for their works in Vietnam. The
    firms failed to disclose the nature of their relationship with the Vietnamese agent as required under
    their contracts. They also fraudulently covered up payments to the agent through false claims for
    purported “ghost” services. In the one completed investigation the international consulting firm
    disclosed and admitted its misconduct in Bank-financed contracts in a number of Vietnam projects
    and reached a negotiated settlement with the Bank, agreeing to a sanction of conditional non-
    debarment for two and a half years. The firm dismissed employees/staff involved in the payments to
    project and government officials and has taken steps to implement a more robust integrity compliance
    program to prevent future misconduct. More generally, INT investigations in the sector have
    identified instances of misrepresentation of key staff and their qualifications by consulting firms and
    the use of payments to project officials in order to obtain tender and evaluation information and
    documents.

91. The use of local agents to funnel payments to project and government officials has been identified in
    a number of INT investigations. To address this risk, clients and Bank teams will need to focus
    greater attention on ensuring that bidders and contractors more fully disclose any relationships they
    have with local agents. Use of false claims for “ghost” services by local sub-consultants highlights the
    need for stronger and more consistent due diligence of subcontractors and greater scrutiny of
    subcontractors’ invoices.

C.       The Program Expenditure Framework
92. The assessment of the Expenditure Framework focuses “on those government budget and expenditure
    management issues that may put at risk the capacity of the program to reach its expected results.” It
    draws extensively on experience with the similar national programs financed through results-based
    lending, in clarifying both policy and practice in program implementation. It also draws extensively
    on the design of the Program, specifically the introduction of a new, performance-based fiscal transfer
    to support cities to plan, execute and sustain investments, alongside complementary measures to
    enhance city capacities and improve oversight by MOC and SAV, and support the ongoing
    development of national policy frameworks on urban development.

93. The technical analysis concluded that the government has put in place budget and expenditure
    management systems and practices that, with some well-recognized difficulties, support the Program
    in reaching its expected results. Two sources of difficulty stand out, both of which are addressed by
    the structure of the proposed operation. The first is a budget cycle (common to all of Vietnam’s


                                                  Page 27
     government budgeting) with timing inconsistencies that result in very late budget decisions and fund
     transfers that are disruptive to investment programs. The second is that the five-year plans and annual
     plans are made against notional resource availability, an important part of which is outside of central
     government control. In other programs, actual resources fell about 10 percent below initial projections
     and even those were concentrated in the last three years of the program. This provided a highly
     uncertain funding environment for cities implementing government programs. Finally, the long-term
     sustainability of key investments in urban infrastructure depends on adequate budgeting and sufficient
     resourcing in relevant sectors, across provinces and cities.

94. The IDA Credit will finance about 83 percent of the expected RBNUDP-NM expenditures in
    participating cities. The proposed IDA allocation will be an annual transfer. Government will provide
    Program cities with a predictable annual allocation within a multi-year Program envelope, including
    sufficient advances to commence with Program implementation. Funding to cities will also be
    disbursed in a single, predictable release, subject only to individual cities achieving pre-specified
    performance targets that match the World Bank DLIs. The remaining resources are those generated at
    the provincial, local, and household levels.

95. The expenditure framework in the program provides adequate resources to participating cities to
    execute a set of high priority sub-projects. The population weighted distribution of resources and the
    counterpart financing requirement provide suitable proxies to match resources to actual needs and
    priorities, across and within cities. These resources will provide a significant but manageable addition
    to resources available in each city, and thus provide a real incentive for cities to comply with
    performance requirements to actually receive disbursements.

96. This compliance with performance requirements will, in turn, strengthen the overall sustainability of
    the Program and sub-project investments, particularly through expanding own source revenues for
    operations, maintenance and future investment needs. Capacity support activities in the Program are
    also designed to assist cities to improve overall asset and revenue management practices. At the
    national level, the Program supports activities to assist in the further articulation of the national
    expenditure framework for urban governance in general and the NUDP in particular. These
    clarifications will enhance longer term funding predictability and thus the sustainability of support
    provided in the Program.

97. The RBNUDP-NM is decentralized in design and execution, with the city being the level of
    government with primary implementation responsibility. That said, the central government has a clear
    view (supported by the donor community) of the appropriate mix of program elements for effective
    urban infrastructure delivery.

D.       Program Fiduciary Performance and Significant Fiduciary Risks
98. The analysis of institutional frameworks and fiduciary arrangements under the Program has enabled
    an evaluation of its performance and the identification of significant fiduciary risks. This section
    reviews this as a precursor to identifying specific risks and mitigation measures in subsequent
    sections of the document.

Program budgeting and costing

99. Vietnam’s PFM legal framework provides a good foundation for government budgeting at both
    central and local level. Each city has a comprehensive five-year overall plan and detailed annual
    social-economic development plan approved by the Provincial People’s Committee. There is a well-



                                                Page 28
    defined budget preparation calendar and regulated budget development process. The overall budget
    presented in the cities’ annual budget has included all sources of funds (central, provincial, city’s
    revenue and official development assistance (ODA)). However, there remains a weak link between
    the financial budget and the social-economic targets contained in the plan at both provincial and city
    levels. The financial budget is prepared based on the projected availability of funding. Moreover,
    budget revisions are made only once per year, with approval of all levels, which is inflexible and may
    cause delay.

100. The current treasury system and procedures ensure that expenditures are listed in the approved
    budget estimates, are in line with the standards and norms of the State, are approved by the proper
    authority and supported by adequate documentation before processing. TABMIS also effectively
    facilitates the sharing of information and data and the cooperation in payment control and budget
    management between the treasury and financial bodies. However, a lack of available funds in the
    general State Treasury system may cause delay to the funding of specific approved projects.
    Moreover, funds allocated for one project can be temporarily utilized for another, which does not
    guarantee the smooth financing for results of the Program.

Procurement Arrangements and Implementation

101. The RBNUDP-NM constitutes the first regional implementation of the NUDP. This assessment thus
    used the past experience of similar procurement and contract management practices in the Program
    cities as a proxy for implementation performance.

102. The open competitive bidding procedures described in the procurement laws and regulations are
    found to generally adequately accommodate transparency, economy and efficiency of procurement
    process. Both the existing Procurement Law and the new revised Public Procurement Law mandate
    open competitive bidding as default method of procurement. Choice of other methods (including
    direct contracting, and competitive shopping) is allowed where open competitive bidding is not
    feasible. The laws however permit direct contracting to be automatically used for contracts whose
    cost estimates are below the specified monetary thresholds (currently VND 5 billion per contract for
    works; VND 2 billion for goods and VND 3 billion for consulting services; these thresholds are
    expected to be reduced to VND 0.5 billion according to the draft Decree on Selection of Contractors).
    In practice, the permission of monetary thresholds-based direct contracting has caused excessive
    abuse through wilful packaging into small-valued contracts. Under the Program, most major works
    contracts are expected to be procured under open competitive bidding given their nature and
    complexity. For consulting services assignments, as many of them could be of small monetary value,
    cities should be encouraged to group them into a larger assignment to be procured through open
    competitive bidding.

103. The reviews of sample procurement transactions implemented by Program cities under their similar
    ongoing projects found that the cities have procedurally complied with the relevant laws and
    regulations. All procurement transactions were completed in a timely manner (1.5-2 months).
    However, in terms of cost effectiveness and economy, only insignificant savings were achieved
    through these transactions (about 0.3-0.5 percent of the pre-bid cost estimate on average). This
    modest result was because of the overuse of direct contracting and the lack of effective competition in
    bidding processes. There were few contracts procured through open competitive bidding; each
    bidding transaction received only three to four bids with bid prices being rather close to each other.




                                               Page 29
104. The reviews, however, revealed a number of procurement issues and practices that could adversely
    affect the timeliness, cost-effectiveness, competitiveness and compliance with applicable rules of the
    Program. These are:
    a) Procurement plans are usually not prepared for the entire project or subproject but individual
        works. This piecemeal approach affects the timeliness of Program implementation and service
        delivery. In addition, there is a risk of wilful packaging of Unit of works into small contracts for
        use of direct contracting which adversely impacts cost-effectiveness and competitiveness.
    b) The Procurement Law provides that in order for a bidder to be awarded the contract, that bidder
        must have a bid price not exceeding the approved pre-bid cost estimate. Though the Law does not
        explicitly state that bids offering prices higher than the approved estimate shall be rejected, there
        was a quasi-automatic rejection of such bids in practice without further evaluation of their
        technical and commercial proposals. Since it may be difficult to ensure the reasonableness of the
        cost estimate, this practice could lead to rejection of good bids or cause unnecessary rebidding.
    c) The Procurement Law provides that a bid shall be rejected only if it does not respond to major
        technical or commercial requirements of the bidding documents. The Law also permits bidders to
        clarify their bids (to the extent that do not substantially alter their bids) and requires that bid
        evaluation shall take into account such clarifications. These requirements are appropriate since
        there are rarely perfect bids without any deviations. However, there was a common practice in
        many procuring agencies of immediately rejecting bids with small insignificant errors or
        shortcomings (such as having some missing qualification documents, submission of non-
        notarized documents, etc.) without giving the bidders an opportunity to clarify the perceived
        issues. This practice could certainly result in the undue rejection of substantially responsive bids
        and reduce effective competition.
    d) The Procurement Law provides that to be eligible to bid, a bidder shall be organizationally and
        financially independent of the Employer and not dependent on the same managerial agency as the
        Employer. While this provision is considered appropriate in order to prevent conflict of interest
        between bidders and project owners or procuring entities, it was found that there were cases
        where State-Owned Enterprises reporting to the project province’s People’s Committee still
        received awards of contracts procured by the same province. This practice could harm the
        integrity and fairness of procurement processes under the Program.
    e) The Procurement Law provides that firms and individuals debarred for their violation of the Law,
        including engagement in fraud and corruption, shall not be allowed to bid. The Bank also
        maintains a similar list of debarred firms and individuals and its policy is not to permit such firms
        and individuals to participate in Bank-financed procurement. However, the Law does not
        recognize the Bank’s debarment list. This gap could lead to unexpected contract awards to Bank
        debarred firms or individuals under the Program which would be a serious violation of the Bank’s
        Anti-Corruption Guidelines for PforR operations.16

105. The above issues can be addressed through: (a) Program activities and agreed actions in the Program
    Action Plan; (b) the inclusion of these program actions in the definition of CPC sub-projects eligible
    for financing from the performance-based transfer (through DLI 2); (c) through intensive capacity
    development measures to be carried out for Program cities, SAV, and other stakeholders; and
    (d) preparation and enforcement of a clear and hands-on Program Operational Manual.



16
  Bullet (g), paragraph 6 of World Bank’s Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption on
Program-for-Results Financing dated February 1, 2012 requires the Borrower to “ensure that any person or entity
debarred or suspended by the Bank is not awarded a contract under or otherwise allowed to participate in the
Program during the period of such debarment or suspension.”



                                                 Page 30
106. MOC is responsible for organizing such training courses as part of their capacity building
    responsibilities. Cities should also hire qualified consultants to assist them in handling the
    procurement process. In addition, the Government has established an e-Government Procurement
    system (e-GP, available at muasamcong.mpi.gov.vn). This e-GP system allows procuring entities to
    electronically handle bidding process (e-tendering) in a more transparent and fair manner with lower
    administrative costs. Program cities should be encouraged to gradually adopt this electronic
    procurement system for the Program.

107. In particular, there will be several large value bridges and other works contracts under the Program
    (several million US$). These works require substantial time for preparation of detailed designs (6-12
    months); bidding (2-3 months) and construction (18-24 months). Unrealistic or short-sighted
    procurement planning would impact the timely delivery of these works as well as the entire Program.
    To mitigate this risk, cities should give these works the highest priority and carry out early planning
    that is regularly updated during the actual implementation period. One of the mitigation measures that
    should be put in place is to hire detailed design consultants at an early stage using PPTAF funds.

Contract Management Performance

108. Bidding documents, which follow MPI’s Model Bidding Documents, include a contract form. The
    most commonly used forms of contracts for works are lump sum and admeasurement (bill of
    quantities); meanwhile most consulting services contracts follow lump sum form. Prior to signing
    contracts, procuring entities conduct contract negotiations with the selected bidder to finalize contract
    details. Generally, contracts signed by the Program cities were found to be consistent with the bidding
    documents. They contain key conditions and terms such as performance security, insurance, advance
    payment and progressive payments, completion dates, liquidated damages, safety and environment,
    warranty obligations, etc. These forms of contracts are assessed to be adequate to be used for the
    Program.

109. Program cities reported that contracts must normally be completed within the approved contract
    prices since it is difficult to seek additional budgets. However, while cities appeared to be able to
    carry out cost control for small works contracts, they found this challenging for large works. In such
    cases, cities often chose to phase construction by dividing the works into smaller portions that could
    then be completed according to the available budget. Variation orders were permitted in the contract
    documents but were often slowly processed due to time consuming clearance and approval processes,
    especially in case of budget overrun. Payments were made in a reasonably timely manner for small
    contracts with confirmed budgets. However, for some larger works where budgets were unstable,
    payments were often delayed. Contractual claims are not a common practice by contractors and also
    generally not accepted. Government laws and regulations do provide procedures for resolving
    contract disputes; however, no contract disputes or claims were recorded. This may be an indication
    that contract governance depends more on informal negotiation of issues than on proper application
    of contract conditions and relevant regulations. Training in contract administration could help in
    improving these practices. It will be important for Program cities to maintain sufficient budgets to
    enable good contract management.

110. Program cities reported that construction of small works under their ongoing projects was generally
    completed on time. However, construction of larger works was often delayed as a result of two major
    challenges: shortage of funds for contract payments and issues relating to resettlement. It is envisaged
    that implementation of civil works contracts under the Program may face similar challenges. In
    particular, the large road and bridge works under the Program (valued at several millions of US$ or
    higher) would require a substantial regular cash flow (including 20-30 percent of contract prices as
    advance payments and millions of US$ for monthly payments). Due to the nature of the PforR



                                                Page 31
    instrument, a major portion (75 percent or more) of disbursements can only be made once the works
    have been completed and certified. A shortage of cash flow is assessed to be one of the biggest
    challenges to good contract management and timely delivery of works and services under the
    Program. To effectively address this challenge, Program cities would have to ensure proper
    management of the advance disbursement and other partial disbursements as well as to find
    temporary funding sources. Another option that was considered is to partially transfer this risk to
    contractors by asking them to advance funds for construction. This option is not recommended as it
    has limited applicability and may impact the fairness of bidding, the contracting process and the
    quality of work produced.

Record Keeping and Reporting

111. Finance agencies and State Treasuries at all level (central, provincial and city) are utilizing the full
    functionality of TABMIS in budget execution and the production of financial reports. Reconciliation
    between spending units (CPC Units and PMUs) and the State Treasury is done on a monthly,
    quarterly and yearly basis. The CPC Finance and Planning Units and the Provincial State Treasuries
    are equipped with qualified and experienced staff who are skilled in the use of TABMIS as well as
    preparing financial reports in accordance with regulations. CPC annual financial statements are
    reviewed and authorized by the provincial Departments of Finance in a timely manner.

112. There are still a number of gaps in the city financial statements when compared to international
    standards and generally accepted practices. Capital expenditures (construction) implemented by a city
    but funded from the provincial budget are not included in the city’s financial statements. The city,
    through its PMU(s), only prepares the financial reports for each works when it completes the sub-
    project, and then sends the reports to the provincial Department of Finance for review. Both
    provincial-funded and city-funded works-in-progress and works completed but not yet paid, are not
    recorded anywhere in the city financial statements. Instead, a number of expenditures incurred and
    paid in January of the following financial year are still recognized in the financial statements, in order
    to utilize the previous year’s budget allocations. Those discrepancies make the city financial
    statements misleading.

113. Procurement and contract management documents are required by law to be maintained for five
    years (from the date of completion of the works) or longer for certain types of documents. Generally,
    Program cities have satisfactorily complied with this requirement. However, their filing systems are
    rather fragmented with documents being kept by different departments. This practice creates
    difficulties for document retrieval, inspections or audits. Cities should be requested to maintain their
    procurement files in a more systematic manner under the Program.

114. Procurement performance reporting was assessed to be rather poor and general. Reports on project
    implementation typically include general information on the procurement transactions conducted but
    lack details on the quality of such transactions (e.g., their timeliness and competitiveness). Reports on
    inspections and audits provide a short paragraph with generic comments on the compliance of
    procurement performance with procurement laws and regulations. For the Program, it is necessary to
    improve the quality of procurement reporting including the quality of inspection and audit reports.
    Such reports should be required to provide more substance on the quality of procurement processes
    conducted and highlight specific areas that need further attention or actions. Program monitoring
    should include a simple management information system (MIS) which would, inter alia, track
    implementation of procurement plans and procurement outcomes including key dates, numbers of
    bids submitted, numbers of bids included in price comparison, timeliness of procurement processes,
    and timeliness of implementation, etc.




                                                 Page 32
Staffing

115. The Program will be implemented in seven participating cities. Each city will establish a Project
    Management Unit to implement its respective sub-projects. Key staff for the PMUs are expected to be
    drawn from existing PMUs or from other departments in the city. In general, those persons already
    have some level of procurement experience and have already received procurement training.
    However, they still lack the experience and technical expertise necessary for the proper handling of
    competitive bidding and contract management for large works contracts. Once appointed they will
    therefore require additional training on procurement and contract management. This should be
    supplemented by the provision of more qualified technical experts. In addition, PMUs should hire
    qualified consultants for procurement and contract management work. MOC should organize
    procurement training for PMUs and develop a detailed Program Operational Manual for their
    reference.

Controls, Oversight and Accountability

116. The Government personnel system is well governed by an extensive array of regulations and
    instructions that includes several mechanisms for controlling staff expenses. The 2005 State Audit
    Law requires internal auditing to be implemented in every organization using State budget, funds and
    assets. Expenditures are controlled by the relevant level of the State Treasury.

117. However, the use of cash payments is a popular practice. There is no vendor management and
    associated expenditure payment control system. Key controls are not in place, such as checking of
    duplicate payments by vendor or invoice. There is no established internal audit function at city level
    and the legal framework on internal auditing is weak with no clear definition of the concept, scope
    and nature of internal auditing and its role in the internal control framework of government. The
    inspection function is similarly fragmented, under-resourced and technically weak. There is limited
    use of citizens’ feedback and a weak complaints and denunciations system is used to assess service
    quality and hold agencies accountable for performance.

118. Reviews of current practices found that in most Program cities, after completion of works, the cities
    hired an independent auditing firm to audit the entire process, including a review of the procurement
    and contract management process. This independent audit was carried out to facilitate the final
    account of contracts as well as the subsequent inspection by the provincial inspectors. Provincial
    inspectors (from the Provincial Inspectorates and the Department of Planning and Investment
    Inspectorates) usually carry out annually planned inspections of all aspects of project implementation
    by the city including procurement performance.

119. In addition to this regular inspection, SAV periodically carries out an audit of the city’s project
    implementation on an ad hoc basis. This audit also includes a review of compliance with procurement
    law and contract management performance. The audit report is comprehensive and covers all
    expenditures and sources of funding. Findings of auditors are seriously followed up by provinces and
    cities. However, audits are currently conducted on 2-3 year cycles rather than annually, and do not
    provide an opinion on a city’s financial statements, compliance and internal control systems.
    According to the Program cities’ reports, no major issues were detected by past inspections and audits
    except some minor problems with incorrect contract payments.

120. Generally, the assessment found that existing legal requirements and decision making arrangements
    can in principle protect the integrity of the bidding process. However, there are concerns about
    violations or noncompliance since this system lacks effective enforcement. Strengthening the roles,



                                               Page 33
    functions and performance of SAV in procurement audits would help to mitigate this risk. It is
    assessed that the procurement control and audit system applicable to the Program can assure a
    reasonable level of compliance by the cities with the Procurement Law. Nonetheless, such inspection
    and audit practices mainly cover procedural issues and do not seem to be able to provide an in-depth
    review of the quality of procurement performance in terms of economy, efficiency and value for
    money. To help improve the quality of the Program’s procurement performance audit, it is necessary
    to: (a) enhance procurement oversight functions, capacity and performance of supervisory agencies
    such as Provincial State Inspectorates, Department of Investment Inspectorates and State Audit; (b)
    establish and monitor procurement performance indicators; and (c) improve the quality of
    procurement reporting, including the quality of inspection and audit reports.

Complaints Handling Systems

121. All project cities reported that there were no procurement-related complaints received under any
    projects they have been implementing. This was apparently because bidders do not fully trust the
    government’s complaint handling system, which appears to be rather rigid and lacks an effective
    independent mechanism to ensure complaints are fairly reviewed.

122. According to the Law on Complaints and Denunciations, CPCs are not required to handle
    anonymous complaints of any form. The inability to submit anonymous complaints may be a
    disincentive for citizens to provide information about fraud and corruption in the Program. However,
    all participating CPCs/GIs maintain the practice of accepting and logging these complaints for their
    records. The officials noted that if anonymous complaints contained credible or serious allegations
    the inspectors would investigate them fully. The Bank’s experiences in Vietnam show that
    procurement complaints were frequently received under Bank-financed projects and most of them
    were anonymous. Bank policy requires anonymous complaints to be seriously considered and reviews
    of such complaints have helped to identify and address many procurement problems and unacceptable
    practices. The lack of a clear, consistent and affirmative policy and procedure for these (anonymous)
    complaints is a clear weakness in the Program’s complaints handling system. Under the Program,
    cities should therefore be encouraged to accept and review anonymous complaints.

Sanctions and Debarment

123. Contractors can be sanctioned for multiple warnings of poor performance per the Procurement Law
    (Art. 75(1) (c)). This provision provides significant discretion to the tendering authority to determine
    “poor performance” and if misused could lead to sanctions and debarments for reasons beyond the
    violation of procurement rules and procedures or fraud and corruption. Cities report that they check
    the national debarred list maintained by MPI when taking procurement decisions. There appears to be
    a mix between “blacklisting” as a result of committing a fraudulent or corrupt act and “blacklisting”
    for the lack of technical performance. In the cities we visited, the CPCs were not able to tell us about
    any recent examples of investigations and/or sanctions related to serious fraud and corruption cases.




                                                Page 34
E.      Fiduciary Risks
124. The fiduciary assessment identified the following key areas that need to be addressed to ensure that
    the Program is able to reach its stated goals: program planning and budgeting, bidding and
    contracting, program execution, program accounting and reporting, internal controls and internal
    audit, and governance and anti-corruption. These areas are explained below.

Program Planning and Budgeting

125. The primary risk in Program planning relates to delays in approving and/or revising the annual
    budget to ensure adequate funding for cities to execute selected sub-projects. Budget allocations are
    allocated centrally to each province, which in turn need to allocate Program funds to participating
    CPCs. This process needs to be completed by the December of each preceding year for funds to be
    appropriated for expenditures in a timely manner. Similarly, budget revisions need to be made and
    approved upon demand of the Program. While, with the addition of IDA credit to the state budget,
    overall resources are expected to be adequate for Program implementation, these risks are considered
    to be substantial. Specifically, there are risks that: inadequate funds will be made available to cities
    for Program implementation; the disbursement of funds will be unpredictable; and cities or provinces
    will divert program funds despite the availability of budget appropriation and budget allocation.

126. To mitigate these risks it is recommended that:
    a) Cities (with guidance from MOC) prepare an overall five-year financial plan to implement the
        Program. Each year an accurate budget proposal should be produced by cities based on the
        estimated work progress and cash flow of the coming year to ensure there is no gap in the funding
        necessary to achieve the Program results.
    b) Central and provincial government should ensure that a mechanism for results-based financing is
        included in the Government annual budget cycle of related provinces, and that the annual budget
        allocation is adequate to achieve each year’s objectives.
    c) The Ministry of Finance should issue official guidance on the financing mechanism of the
        Program, and specifically provide for clear procedures to transfer funds from MOF to cities
        through cities’ special accounts that should be opened at the provincial State Treasury. These
        special accounts should only be used for the achievement of the Program results. This
        requirement should be a Condition of Negotiations; and
    d) A system of pre-financing (advances) reconciled with results based disbursements needs to be
        introduced to avoid delays in Program funding during implementation at the local level (before
        results are achieved and verified).

127. There are moderate risks associated with insufficient scrutiny of budget proposals by the legislature
    and a lack of transparency in the budget process. The risk of budget appropriations being diverted to
    other activities or programs during the year is considered to be low. A final risk factor relates to
    unrealistic cost estimates that result in low quality works and services. Program cities should be
    encouraged to prepare cost estimates based on cost norms that are reflective of market prices, and
    MOC should provide detailed guidance on cost estimation in the Program Operational Manual.

Bidding and Contracting

128. There are risks that existing procurement procedures and processes will result in a low level of
    competition in competitive bidding that will impact on cost-effectiveness and competitiveness.
    Firstly, existing procedures may lead to an unjustified rejection of bids due to minor deviations and



                                                Page 35
    omissions and as a result of bid prices exceeding cost estimates. Secondly, direct contracting
    procedures may be abused in ways that impact on cost-effectiveness and competitiveness. Thirdly,
    contract awards to dependent SOEs may generate conflicts of interest and compromise the quality of
    works and services delivered. To mitigate these risks it is recommended that procurement actions are
    included in the Program Action Plan that is agreed with Government, and effectively implemented
    during Program execution. Additionally, cities should be encouraged to use the e-GP system for
    managing procurement. MOC should provide detailed guidance on procurement matters in the
    Program Operational Manual.

129. The primary risk to contracting is that a shortage of cash flows causes delays to contract payments
    which result in slow construction and late delivery of works and services. To mitigate this risk,
    program cities should appropriately utilize Program advances and all DLI disbursements and should
    also mobilize other temporary funding sources for contract payments. Effective, timely budgeting,
    procurement planning and execution as well as reporting procedures are important elements that
    should be in place to mitigate this risk.

Program Execution

130. There is a risk that a fragmented approach to procurement planning will affect the timeliness of
    Program implementation and service delivery, that unrealistic or late procurement planning for
    critical large works and consulting services contracts will result in completion delays, and that wilful
    packaging of works and services into small contracts for the use of direct contracting will occur.
    These practices, should they occur, would affect cost-effectiveness and competitiveness. To mitigate
    these risks it is recommended that Program cities plan procurement for entire sub-projects and phases
    with priority being given to critical large works and consulting services. Critical detailed design
    contracts should be procured in advance using PPTAF funds. Program cities should also be
    encouraged to bundle small contracts into larger ones for the use of competitive bidding to the extent
    possible. The MOC should provide detailed guidance on these matters in the Program Operational
    Manual.

131. There is a risk that weak procurement capacity in Program cities will result in delays, low quality
    procurement or noncompliance affecting timeliness, cost-effectiveness and competitiveness. To
    mitigate this risk it is recommended that:
    a) program cities be required to appoint or assign qualified procurement, contract management and
        technical experts for PMUs, and that this is included as a DLI; and
    b) MOC provide procurement training and contract management for PMUs, and that this is included
        as a DLI.

Program Accounting and Reporting

132. There are substantial risks of delays in recording transactions in the accounting system, due to the
    late transcription of transaction into TABMIS (after year end). This may result in an inability of the
    accounting system to prepare timely and reliable financial reports (both management reports and the
    annual program financial statements), and will need to be closely supervised by State Treasuries, the
    SAV and the World Bank. There is also a moderate risk that rigidity in the chart of accounts will
    prevent the addition of new codes to keep track of program related transactions, and a low risk that
    cities are unable to keep track of resource transfers and expenditures of service delivery units.

133. In order to ensure that Program annual financial statements are prepared in accordance with
    International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) it is recommended that MOC coordinate



                                                Page 36
    with CPCs (Finance and Planning Unit) to prepare Program financial statements annually. The
    financial statements need to cover all Program activities, expenditures and sources of funds, in
    accordance with the applicable IPSAS. Cities must prepare financial statements for their own
    components of the Program and then submit them to MOC for consolidation with direct MOC
    expenditures under the Program. This consolidated Program financial statement must then be
    submitted to SAV for auditing, and will require additional effort from SAV to assist CPCs to present
    financial data in IPSAS compliant formats for the purposes of the Program Audit. Program financial
    statements must be completed before February 15 of the following year to be ready for audit. This
    requirement will be reflected in the Financing Agreement.

134. The quality of SAV audits on other donor funded projects is considered to be acceptable and has
    been delivered on a timely basis. There is a moderate risk that the SAV is unable to prepare and
    submit an audit report within a reasonable period after the close of the financial year, and that it may
    lack the capacity, resources and skills to perform Program financial statements audits and other
    verification activities as required. The risk that government will not respond to or follow-up on audit
    findings and recommendations is considered to be low. In order to mitigate these risks it is
    recommended that:
    a) SAV be engaged by MOC to perform the audit of Program financial statements annually,
        according to an audit Terms of Reference agreed between MOC and SAV and reviewed by the
        World Bank;
    b) SAV be supported to perform the Program financial audit via a DLI;
    c) the Audit report is to be provided within an acceptable time frame, covering: (i) an opinion on the
        truth and fairness of the Program financial statements; (ii) and opinion on the effectiveness of
        Program internal control; and (iii) an opinion on the Program’s compliance with the Financing
        Agreement, law and regulations; and
    d) SAV be provided with capacity support to expand the frequency and content of its audit activities
        at city level as part of overall capacity building activities supported by the Program.

Internal Controls and Internal Audit

135. There is a substantial risk that the internal audit process and Inspectorates are unable to provide
    assurance on the robustness of and compliance with internal controls, and cannot help to identify and
    address procurement problems in Program cities’ performance. There is also a moderate risk that the
    internal control system is unable to prevent or detect serious irregularities, misuse, and inefficient use
    of program funds. To mitigate these risks it is recommended that:
    a) MOC establishes an effective internal audit function for this Program by assigning it to
        authorized and qualified people;
    b) the Program Action Plan includes a specific commitment related to the internal audit function;
        and
    c) the capacity of MOC and cities to monitor procurement performance, Program results and report
        on Program results, which serves as basis for disbursement, should be strengthened through
        capacity building activities.

136. There is a related risk that the lack of clear procurement performance indicators and poor
    procurement reporting does not enable effective procurement audit to be carried out. This risk can be
    mitigated though the establishment and monitoring of procurement performance indicators, and
    through capacity building measures to improve the quality of procurement reporting, including
    quality of inspection and audit reports.




                                                 Page 37
Governance and Anti-corruption

137. There is a risk that proper governance practices, particularly cooperation between levels of
    government and between political and administrative arms of local government are eroded through
    the duplication of activities or an over-reach of authority by one party. These risks are inherent to
    many systems of governance globally, and are difficult to mitigate through a single program. The
    Program should provide support to government (through a DLI) to continue with the evolution of the
    decentralized architecture for local governance through policy reviews, reforms, and preparations for
    the scaling up of the implementation of the NUDP.

138. There is a risk that a lack of clarity in the relative authority of various inspectorates may lead to a
    lack of follow-up of complaints. Due to the establishment of numerous Inspectorates, their authority
    to process and settle complaints and denunciations is tightly defined vis-à-vis each other. For
    example, according to the Law on Construction, inspectors of MOC or local construction departments
    are only authorized to process complaints and denunciations relating to violation of the Law on
    Construction. If the denunciation does not fall under their jurisdiction, they must refer it to another
    authority. In fact, MOC and the department of construction have referred many cases to other
    authorities, especially cases related to land clearance or compensation issues which are typically
    referred to the local authority (e.g., the competent People’s Committees) who may be in conflict of
    interest with the denunciators. The multiple agencies dealing with complaints and the interlocking
    “referral system” that connects them can create a confusing and difficult situation for citizens trying
    to file complaints with the right authority. The multiple-entry complaints system, while providing a
    number of options for citizens, may be confusing and may result in complaints being passed around
    agencies or lost in the transfer process making it difficult for citizens to follow up their complaints.
    The use of written log books in some implementing provinces raises questions about the quality of the
    data collected. The overall reform of the complaints handling system is beyond the scope of the
    Program, due to its extensive nature. However, to mitigate these risks is it recommended that
    improved and consolidated reporting on complaints be required on a regular basis. The lack of any
    relevant prior complaints on fraud and corruption has meant that the team is unable to identify other
    gaps or weaknesses that may appear during implementation of the RBNUDP-NM. Improved
    reporting would assist in monitoring this situation, and would allow adjustments to be made during
    implementation if proven to be necessary.

139. There is a risk that inadequate staffing of inspection agencies will constrain the ability of the
    Program to collect, manage and investigate allegations, especially when the scope of infrastructure
    investments expands to three to four times the regular size that the city government (CPC) is used to.
    While central government GIs have numerous staff to carry out the required inspections, staffing in
    the city inspectorate units varies greatly. Some of the implementing cities had sufficient staff to create
    a dedicated complaints handling unit while others had as few as two inspectors at the city level that
    had to cover all functions including complaints handling. It is recommended that the adequacy of
    staffing is reviewed at Program mid-term, alongside a review of reports on complaints handling, to
    assess whether additional capacity support or other interventions are required.

140. There is a risk that the formal denial of the submission of any anonymous complaints will prevent
    the discovery of procurement problems and compromise the quality of procurement work. It is
    recommended that all complaints, including anonymous ones, be duly considered and addressed.
    There is also a risk that the non-application of Bank debarment/suspension lists results in contract
    awards to debarred firms and/or individuals. It is recommended that agreements be reached with the
    Government to share Bank disbarment lists with participating cities, and that their compliance is
    supervised and audited during Program implementation.




                                                 Page 38
F.      Monitoring Fiduciary Performance over Program Period
141. While key fiduciary areas requiring specific actions for strengthening in government systems have
    been listed in the Program Action Plan, it will also be important to monitor the overall fiduciary
    performance throughout the duration of the Program. Table 2 identifies the specific indicators which
    should be monitored (together with the relevant baseline position) to provide the framework to
    measure improvements in the performance of financial management and procurement processes.

                              Table 2: Fiduciary performance indicators

     Indicator                            Measure                                   Baseline
PROCUREMENT
Procurement planning     Number of comprehensive procurement plans      One procurement plan prepared
                         prepared for all sub-projects                  for each works.
Contract packaging       Numbers and percentages of contracts           A typical procurement plan for
and distribution of      procured under open competitive bidding and    a works included one civil
procurement methods      direct contracting                             works contract, one consultant
used                                                                    contract for detailed design and
                                                                        one consultant contract for
                                                                        construction supervision. This
                                                                        resulted in many small contracts
                                                                        procured through direct
                                                                        contracting. Currently, Program
                                                                        cities have proposed roughly 90
                                                                        contracts for works and nearly
                                                                        200 contracts for consulting
                                                                        services
Time for bid             Number of days between bid opening and         45-60 days
evaluation               contract award
Bidders’ participation   Number of bidders submitting bids in each      3-4
in open competitive      bidding process
bidding
Procurement savings      Percentages of balance between contract        0.3-0.5 percent of pre-bid cost
                         prices and approved pre-bid cost estimates     estimates
                         over approved pre-bid cost estimates
Quality of Bid            Number of bids rejected due to offering a    Almost 100 percent
evaluation practices         bid price higher than the cost estimate
                             and/or minor deviations or omissions
                          Number of contracts awarded to SOEs
                             dependent on implementing Program          Some cases found
                             provinces                                  Occasional checking for
                          Results of checking against Government’s     Government’s debarment lists;
                             and Bank’s debarment/suspension lists      no checking for Bank’s
                             shown in bid evaluation reports            debarment/suspension lists
Contract                  Percentage of contracts completed within     Most civil works contracts
administration               original completion period                 delayed
                          Percentage of payments delayed
                                                                   Payments for civil works often
                          Number of variation orders required and delayed
                                                                   Variation orders frequently



                                              Page 39
      Indicator                         Measure                                         Baseline
                         processed                                         occurred in works contracts
Complaint Handling    Number of complaints received (including            No procurement-related
                         anonymous ones) and number of                     complaints received.
                         complaints actually considered and                Anonymous complaints not
                         handled                                           officially accepted
Frequency and         Number of inspections and audits (that               Inspections         conducted
Quality of               include procurement performance review)               annually. Audits conducted
Procurement              conducted per year                                    on ad hoc basis
Performance           Number of inspection and audit reports that
Inspection and Audit     include detailed procurement performance           Past inspection and audit
                         assessment against agreed indicators                  reports   provided    little
                      Number of inspection and audit reports that             information on procurement
                         found     procurement     problems     or             compliance
                         noncompliance
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Budget allocated by  Annual variance (percent) between annual              In Hoa Binh, budget allocated
provinces vs. budget budget proposed by cities and budget                  by province meets only 80
proposed by Cities   allocated by provinces                                percent of City’s proposal.

                                                                           Other Cities prepare budget
                                                                           proposals based on the
                                                                           availability of funds as
                                                                           informed by provinces
In-year budget            Proportion of the annual budget adjustment/      In-year budget revision is
adjustment or             reallocation made by PPC vs. the amount of       unpredictable, and is only
reallocation vs.          budget approved annually                         decided around the end of the
annual budget                                                              year when additional funds or
approved                                                                   unused funds become available.
Availability of           Readiness of Program funds for spending          Lack of funds in general State
Program funds for         units to request payments for Program            Treasury system sometimes
Program activities        activities                                       causes delay in payments for
                                                                           some projects
Effectiveness of          Coverage, quality and management response        Nil. No internal audit function
internal audit function   to quarterly internal audit reports, frequency   exists.
in MOC and Cities         and distribution of audit reports
Quality and               Completeness and timeliness of annual reports    City financial statements are
timeliness of annual                                                       produced timely but not yet
financial statements                                                       follow generally accepted
for the Program                                                            accounting principles.
Quality of audit          Scope, nature and adherence to auditing          Lack of audit opinion
report                    standards acceptable to the Bank. Audit
                          Opinion on consolidated financial statements
Timeliness of             Report received by the Bank within the period    Audit only every two to three
issuance of audit         agreed in the legal agreement                    years
reports
Follow-up on audit        Evidence of timely and adequate follow-up by     Seriously followed up by
recommendations           the Program management on audit                  provinces and cities
                          recommendations




                                                Page 40
G.       Fiduciary Elements of the Implementation Support Plan
Main Focus of Implementation Support

142. The fiduciary elements of the Program’s Implementation Support Plan are listed in Table 3.

                                   Table 3: Implementation Support

  Time                         Focus                   Skills Needed            Resource Estimate
 First 12    Implementation of the Program           Legal; fiduciary;    2 supervision missions plus 2
 months      Action                                  engineering/         mini-missions
             Plan (PAP); changes in operational      procurement;         2 x 5 people x 2 weeks = 20
             procedures and their communication      social; monitoring   weeks
             to cities; establishment of             and                  Plus
             arrangements for independent            evaluation; and      2 x 2 people x 1 week = 4
             verification; strengthening of the      technical (urban     weeks
             M&E system; and city and                economics and        Total 24 weeks
             consolidated national planning.         finance)
 12 – 48     Reviewing implementation progress       Legal; fiduciary;    2 supervision missions per
 months      and crosschecking the linkage           social;              year 2 x 3 yrs x 4 people x 2
             between city planning and results,      environment;         weeks
             providing support in case of disputes   monitoring and       = 48 weeks
             relating to                             evaluation; and      Plus mid-term review
             Verification (national-city or          technical (urban     1 x 6 people x 2 weeks = 12
             between GOV and the Independent         economics and        weeks
             Verification Agent (IVA))               finance)             Total 60 weeks
 Other       Independent audit/                      Independent          2 people for 4 weeks
             assessment of                           technical            Total 8 weeks
             verification of                         expertise
             results

143. The skills mix of the task team required for implementation support is shown in the Table 4.

                                   Table 4: Task team skills required

Skills                                           Staff Weeks     Trips
Governance                                       6               NA
Fiduciary                                        8               3

Proposed Financial Management action plan

144. It is recommended that the following actions be agreed with the Government prior to the Credit
    negotiations and subsequently be implemented during the Program execution:
    a) proposed Program actions. The government will build and implement an effective internal audit
         function for the Program;
    b) proposed DLI requirements. A Program Report is to be produced by MOC annually following a
         template agreed with the World Bank, summarizing key implementation aspects and fulfillment
         of the PAP. Sub-projects must be appraised and implemented in compliance with the PAP actions
         (as explained in the POM) and accompanied by an acceptable annual financial audit report for the



                                                Page 41
       Program financial statements of the city. The PMU under UDA must assign a qualified staff to
       take charge of the internal audit function established in the PMU; and
    c) other requirements prior to negotiations. The Ministry of Finance should issue an official
       document guiding the specific budget cycle and fund flow arrangements for this Program, before
       negotiation.

Proposed Procurement action plan

145. In accordance with the results of Fiduciary System Assessment presented above, it is recommended
    that the following Program Action Plan be agreed with the Government prior to the Credit
    negotiations and subsequently be implemented during the Program:
    a) All proposals for detailed designs, construction supervision and bids for civil works, whether
        below or above cost estimates, shall be evaluated; proposals and bids shall not be rejected only on
        the basis of minor, non-substantive deviations.
    b) At least 30 percent of city consulting contracts for detailed designs, construction supervision will
        be competitively bid, progressively increased to 80 percent by the end of the Program period. At
        least 90 percent of city civil works contracts will be competitively bid, progressively increased to
        100 percent by the end of the Program period.
    c) State-Owned Enterprises dependent on Program provinces/cities/departments will not be allowed
        to participate.
    d) Firms and individuals on the local, national or Bank debarment/suspension lists will not be
        allowed to participate.

146. To facilitate the effective monitoring of Program procurement, the reporting system and practices
    should improve. It is therefore proposed that Program implementation reports by Program cities/MOC
    should include the following information on procurement performance:
    a) copies of updated procurement plans;
    b) procurement transactions completed in the reporting period which list the following information,
        inter alia:
           i. contract title and code;
          ii. approved cost estimate;
         iii. procurement method followed;
         iv. advertisement date;
          v. participating bidders’ names and their bid prices as read out and recorded;
         vi. names of bidders rejected and reasons for rejection;
        vii. name of successful bidder and bid price offered;
       viii. date of contract award approval;
         ix. contract signing date;
          x. final contract amount;
         xi. contractual completion date; and
        xii. actual completion date.
    c) procurement inspections/audits conducted during the reporting period (copies of reports
        attached);
    d) dates, venues, and numbers of participants who attended procurement training and capacity
        building activities conducted during the reporting period (with lists of participants attached); and
    e) emerging procurement and contractual issues that require attention and actions.




                                                Page 42
147. The Program Operational Manual should provide for development by MOC of best practice
    guidelines for procurement by the city PMU, including the following:
    a) preparation of medium-term procurement plans showing all packages to be procured by the city
        PMU (whether or not funded by the Program) during at least an annual budget cycle. These plans
        would not necessarily obviate the “approval to proceed” now obtained from Provincial level
        immediately before initiating procurement for each package;
    b) use of market prices as a basis for cost estimate (including for consultant fees);
    c) ensuring adequate length of advertising, with tender documents available from the first day of
        advertising. If not directly forbidden by law, bidders should be permitted to examine tender
        documents at the PMU office before deciding to purchase. Clear procedures for disseminating
        information / clarifications to bidders should be introduced, perhaps including a pre-bidding
        meeting or site inspection for larger sub-projects;
    d) establishment of clear, objective and appropriate bid evaluation criteria which should be included
        in the Instructions to Bidders; and
    e) introduction of sole-sourcing procedures, particularly for recruitment of consultants, designed to
        ensure that the qualifications of the best available candidates are compared and evaluated and that
        there is an auditable record of the decision making process.

148. Capacity support should be provided to CPCs to support them to comply with procurement rules and
    procedures. Further details on this support are included in the Technical Assessment.

Application of the Anti-Corruption Guidelines (ACGs)

149. It is recommended that the following actions be agreed with the Government prior to the Credit
    negotiations and subsequently be implemented during the Program:

    a) Agreement on information sharing and reporting on fraud and corruption allegations. Based
       on this assessment and the team’s field visits, there does not appear to be a unified national
       system for collecting and reporting on how the authorities handle allegations of fraud and
       corruption. Therefore, in order to ensure that the client will be able to comply with its reporting
       obligations under the ACGs, the client has committed to provide this information from the seven
       participating cities and the Ministry of Construction. The Urban Development Agency under
       MOC, which serves as the key implementing agency and coordinator for the RBNUDP-NM,
       should be tasked to aggregate and inform the Bank of the number of fraud and corruption
       allegations, as well as how they are handled (investigated, mitigated and/or sanctioned) per an
       agreed simple template (see Table 5). The information should be collected from each CPC and
       respective PMU, as well as from concerned GIs under MOC, and should be reported to the Bank
       team at least annually.




                                               Page 43
                      Table 5: Proposed template for reporting complaints

                             [NAME OF REPORTING ENTITY]
  Item                                  [Summary Title of Complaint]
  Reference No.                         [Reference number assigned to complaint]
  Location                              [City / Area]
  Date Received                         [Date]
  Complainant                           [Name of Complainant or Blank if Anonymous]
  Anonymous                             [Y / N]
  Alleged Perpetrator                   [Name(s)]
  Description of Allegation              [Summary of specific allegations made]
  Stage of Handling of Allegation       [Initial Review, Investigation, Prosecution, etc.]
  Description of Progress in
                                         [Summary of progress made]
      Investigation
                                        [Provide final investigative report where
  Outcome of Investigation
                                             available]

b) Clarify debarments under the Program. In light of the readily available debarment lists at the
   provincial and national levels, the Bank should seek an agreement with the client to: (i) share the
   respective debarment list and basic information including the name of the debarred entity, date
   and duration of debarment, and reason for debarment (the Bank should make it readily available
   to MOC to share it with the participating cities); and (ii) carry out supervision and audit during
   implementation to establish actual performance on enforcing the debarment lists.

c) Client to ensure that Program participants are obligated to cooperate with Bank investigations.
   The Prime Minister has approved the Bank’s investigative rights and MOC has issued an order to
   all participating provinces and cities on compliance with the Bank’s Guidelines On Preventing
   and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing and full cooperation with
   the Bank on investigations related to the Program.




                                           Page 44
