                                          89335

                 CROATIA
            PROGRAM FOR RESULTS

HEALTH SYSTEM QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENT
                    (P144871)

          FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT




                 JANUARY 2014
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS


      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
      BACKGROUND AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
B1.    Institutional Framework ................................................................................................... 3
B2.    Program Activities............................................................................................................ 5
B3.    Program Implementation .................................................................................................. 9
B4.    Assessment of Program Expenditure Framework .......................................................... 10
      SUMMARY OF FIDUCIARY RISKS AND MITIGATION ACTIONS
      PERFORMANCE OF PROGRAM FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS AND ARRANGEMENTS
D1.    Program Planning and Budgeting .................................................................................. 18
D2.    Procurement planning. ................................................................................................... 18
D3.    Program Procurement ..................................................................................................... 19
D4.    Program Accounting and Financial Reporting ............................................................... 20
D5.    Hospitals Acting as Central Bodies for Public Procurement ......................................... 21
D6.    Program Treasury Management and Funds Flow .......................................................... 25
D7.    Internal Controls and Internal Audit .............................................................................. 26
D8.    Program Audit ................................................................................................................ 27
D9.    Key Fiduciary Performance Indicators .......................................................................... 28
      GOVERNANCE
      INPUTS TO IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN




                                                                i
        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

A Fiduciary System Assessment (FSA) was carried out in accordance with OP/BP 9.0 that evaluated the
fiduciary systems pertaining to the Health System Quality and Efficiency Improvement Program for
Results. The integrated fiduciary assessment comprised separate assessments of the fiduciary risks
relating to the Program’s (i) procurement; (ii) financial management; and iii) governance. The objective
of the assessment was to provide reference that could be used to monitor fiduciary system performance
during the implementation of the above referenced operation, as well as to identify actions, as relevant, to
enhance the performance of the systems. Findings from the assessment, as well as a review of existing
analytical and diagnostic work1, conclude that the overall fiduciary and governance framework is
adequate to support the implementation of Croatia’s Health System Quality and Efficiency Improvement
Program for Results and includes summary table of the key risks and the corresponding mitigation actions
identified.

The Program’s financial management and procurement systems and institutions provide reasonable
assurance that the financing under the Program is used for intended purposes, with due regard to the
principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency and accountability. Specifically, Croatia’s
financial management systems for the Program (planning, budgeting, accounting, internal controls, funds
flow, financial reporting, and auditing arrangements) provide a reasonable assurance on the appropriate
use of Program funds and safeguarding of its assets. Furthermore, the Program’s financial management
systems perform at a satisfactory level to support the achievement of Program results (see Technical
Assessment).

The scope of the FSA covered the Program institutional framework, fiduciary management capacity and
implementation performance, and institutions and systems responsible for governance and anti-corruption
aspects within the Program. The FSA, within the context of reviewing the performance of institutions
responsible for implementing and management program expenditures, included a sample of 7 hospitals to
review their fiduciary management capacity.

On July 1, 2013, Croatia became a full member of the European Union (EU). As part of the accession
process to the EU, the country’s legal and regulatory framework, systems and institutions, responsible for
public financial management, including public procurement, enforcing the rule of law and combating
corruption, have been assessed as having met the comprehensive requirements of the acquis
communautaire (specifically Chapter 32 of the acquis communautaire), the body of laws and directives
each member state must meet in order to be accepted as a full member of the EU.

The public procurement system2 includes public contracts, contracts for contracting entities in the utilities
sector and concessions with uniform legal protection. The new Public Procurement Act (PPA) is effective
as of January 1, 2012, and was recently amended in June 2013 to address changes in some of its
provisions with regard to Croatia’s accession to the European Union on July 1, 2013. It regulates the
procedures for award of public contracts and framework agreements for the procurement of supplies,
works or services, legal protection in relation to those procedures and the competences of the central state
administration body competent for the public procurement system. Pursuant to the PPA, in 2012 the
Government of the Republic of Croatia has passed all of the subordinate regulations with regard to


1
  Various OECD SIGMA reports covering (i) public expenditure management, (ii) Public Internal Financial Control
including internal controls and internal audit, (iii) external audit, and (iv) public procurement.
2
  Croatia’s public procurement system is defined by the 2008 (June) Strategy for the Development of the Public
Procurement System. The legislative framework for Croatia’s public procurement system has been found to comply
with the requirements of the acquis communautaire.

                                                       2
drafting tender documents, issuing procurement notices, use of common procurement vocabulary (CPV),
and control over the implementation of the PPA.

Procurement under the Program will be carried out in accordance with the Croatian PPA. There is a
considerable capacity within the framework of the agency for management and implementation of public
procurement. Officials involved in carrying out of the procurement process have a formal certification in
procurement as required by the PPA. It is not expected that any of the contracts for civil works, goods and
services/Technical Assistance (TA) would exceed the current OPRC review thresholds. The Bank will
not be involved in the activities with regard to the development of the health information system and
eHealth priority.

The DLI related to procurement that will assure that the cost savings potential from centralized
procurements is used, and that the centralized procurement is conducted in a transparent way is defined as
follows:

    DLI 8.      Percentage of total public spending on medical consumables, drugs, and devices for
    hospital (inpatient and outpatient) services made through centralized procurement/framework
    contracts and disclosed on the Ministry of Health website in simplified and understandable format.


        BACKGROUND AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

In preparation for the Program for Result operation in support of Croatia’s National Health Strategy 2012-
2020, an Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (including governance), was conducted. As the program has
been defined in the technical assessment, the fiduciary and governance assessment covers (i) the
administrative budget of the Ministry of Health, (ii) the centralized or joint procurement managed by
individually qualified hospitals on behalf of the state-owned hospital network, and (iii) a subset of
medical procedures which are subject to health care financing (reimbursement of claims) through the
Croatian Health Insurance Fund.3

This report is organized along the following lines: presentation of institutional arrangements and national
framework; review and assessment of Program fiduciary systems and, including a discussion of baseline
performance measurement and indicators, as well as fiduciary risk. While governance and anti-corruption
issues are featured prominently throughout the various national systems, institutions, and functions, the
report presents these issues in a separate section. Finally, the report includes inputs to the implementation
support plan as well as a number of supporting annexes.

        INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK

The public procurement environment in the Republic of Croatia is defined by the Croatian Public
Procurement Act (PPA), effective as of January 1, 2012. The act regulates the procedures for award of
public contracts and framework agreements for the procurement of supplies, works or services, legal
protection in relation to those procedures and the competences of the central state administration body
competent for the public procurement system. The PPA contains provisions which comply with the
following acts of the European Union.



3
  The subset of medical procedures included under the technical and fiduciary definition of the ‘program’ have been
identified as the first examples of efficiency gains as these procedures will be performed through out-patient or
ambulatory care clinics rather than through in-patient (admittance) services.

                                                         3
       Directive 2004/17/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004
        coordinating the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water, energy, transport and
        postal services sectors (OJ L 134, 30.4.2004.)
       Directive 2004/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on the
        coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts, public supply contracts and
        public service contracts (OJ L 134, 30.4.2004.)
       Directive 2005/75/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 November 2005
        correcting Directive 2004/18/EC on the coordination of procedures for the award of public works
        contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts (OJ L 323, 9.12. 005.)
       Directive 2005/51/EC of 7 September 2005 amending Annex XX to Directive 2004/17/EC and
        Annex VIII to Directive 2004/18/EC of the European Parliament and the Council on public
        procurement (OJ L 257, 1.10.2005.)
       Directive 2007/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2007
        amending Council Directives 89/665/EEC and 92/13/EEC with regard to improving the
        effectiveness of review procedures concerning the award of public contracts (OJ L 335,
        20.12.2007.)
       Articles 2, 12 and 13 of Directive 2009/81/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
        13 July 2009 on the coordination of procedures for the award of certain works contracts, supply
        contracts and service contracts by contracting authorities or entities in the fields of defense and
        security, and amending Directives 2004/17/EC and 2004/18/EC (OJ L 216, 20.8.2009.).

There are four additional regulations, which complement the PPA and were adopted by the Government
of Republic of Croatia in January 2012.

The first of the series of complementary legal documents is the Regulation on the Methodology for
drawing up and handling tender documents and tenders. This Regulation lays down the content,
methodology for drawing up and handling tender documents, defining the subject matter of the tender,
setting the evaluation and qualification criteria, the form and content of the evaluation report and all other
matters related to tender documents and carrying out of the tender procedures. The regulation applies both
to public procurement contracts and framework agreements. It also provides details related to electronic
transmission and receipt of tenders.

The second is the Regulation of Public Procurement notices, which lays down the European threshold
values, the format and content of standard forms for procurement notices, and the method and conditions
for their publication.

The third is the Ordinance on the Application of the Common Procurement Vocabulary (CPV). This
Ordinance lays down the numerical codes accompanying the wording that describes the supplies, works
and services comprising the subject-matter of procurement and the conditions for applying the Common
Procurement Vocabulary (CPV). The Ordinance has three Annexes defining the Common Procurement
Vocabulary (CPV) (Annex I), Main Vocabulary (Annex I.A), Supplementary Vocabulary (Annex I.B),
Correspondence table between CPV and Provisional Central Product Classification of the United Nations
(CPC Prov.), (Annex II), Correspondence table between CPV and General Industrial Classification of
Economic Activities within the European Communities (NACE Rev. 1) (Annex III) and Correspondence
table between CPV and CN Combined Nomenclature (Annex IV).

The forth is the Regulation on the Control Over the Implementation of the Public Procurement Act. This
Regulation governs authorizations of the central state administration body responsible for the public

                                                      4
procurement systems (i.e. Ministry of Economy), the procedure and other important issues related to
control of the implementation of the public procurement act.

The key central institution competencies for public procurement in the Republic of Croatia are:

       the Directorate for the Public Procurement System within the Ministry of Economy, responsible
        for the development, improvement and coordination of the entire public procurement system in
        Croatia;
       the Central Procurement Office of the Government of the Republic of Croatia, established in the
        second half of 2009 is responsible for carrying out the central procurement of certain procurement
        categories, defined in a special Decision of the Government of the Republic of Croatia, as well as
        playing the role of a contracting authority for central state administration bodies. The products,
        services and works procured by the central Procurement Office comprise the following 17
        procurement categories - - office furniture, office supplies, expendable materials, office
        equipment, computers and computer equipment, mobile telecommunication services and
        equipment, fixed network telecommunication services and equipment, motor vehicles, vehicle
        repair and maintenance services, car tires, fuel, electric power supply, postal services, insurance
        services, software licenses, cleaning of the premises, regular maintenance of facilities in the seat
        of public procurement entities.
       Ministry of Finance is responsible for concessions contracts and operations;
       Public Private Partnership Agency for the public private partnership contracts; and
       The State Commission for the Supervision of Public Procurement Procedures for review
        procedures, which is an autonomous and independent government body, responsible for
        considering appeals in connection with public procurement procedures, concession award
        procedures and procedures for selection of private partners in public private partnership projects.
        The Act on the State Commission for the Supervision of Public Procurement Procedures contains
        provision that have been aligned with Directive 2007/66/EC of the European Parliament and of
        the Council of 11 December 2007 amending Council Directives 89/665/EEC and 92/13/EEC with
        regard to improving the effectiveness of review procedures concerning the award of public
        contracts (OJ L 335, 20.12.2007).

        PROGRAM ACTIVITIES

The Government of Croatia’s National Health Care Strategy sets out development directions for the
health sector and is the framework for making policy and operational decisions, including the distribution
of budgetary resources. The Croatian health care system is primarily determined by the Health Care Act,
which forms the fundamental framework of the National Health Care Strategy 2012–2020. This Strategy
is the umbrella document determining the context, vision, priorities, and goals for health care in the
Republic of Croatia over this period. Croatia became an EU member in July 2013, so the Strategy is also
oriented to planning the development of health care in the context of the social, legal, and economic
framework of the EU. More specifically, the Strategy takes into account (a) Europe 2020, the EU strategy
for growth; (b) Health 2020, the new health policy of the World Health Organization European Region;
and (c) the Common Strategic Framework 2014–2020, which forms the basis for financing from EU
funds.

The National Health Care Strategy 2012–2020 identifies the strategic problems and reform priorities for
the health care sector. The strategic problems identified are: (a) poor connectivity and insufficient
continuity of health care across levels in the health system; (b) uneven or unknown quality of care; (c)
inadequate efficiency and effectiveness of the health care system; (d) poor or uneven availability of health
                                                     5
care across regions; and (e) relatively poor health indicators, particularly those related to risk factors and
health behaviors. The estimated total cost of implementing the 8 year strategy is about EUR 409 M.

The National Health Care Strategy identifies the following eight main Strategic Priorities:

(i) Developing a Health Information System and eHealth. With a focus on: a) establish an electronic
    health record for patients, b) increase the use of health care and statistical information to support
    decision making, and establishing the reporting and warning system, c) generate a functional
    improvement, modernization and maintenance of the existing information systems in health care, d)
    increase standardization and certification, e) change management and training, and f) introduce new
    legal regulations for the sector (estimated EUR 45M).

(ii) Strengthening and better using human resources in health care. Developing a strategic plan of
     human resources development, strengthening protection of health care workers, introducing vertical
     and horizontal mobility, improving specialization planning and approvals, adjusting regulations for
     work after mandatory retirement age (estimated EUR 12M).

(iii) Strengthening management capacity in health care. The specific areas of focus include education
      and differentiation of management, data analysis, planning and researching the health care system,
      and strengthening the management authority of community health centers (estimated EUR 14M).

(iv) Reorganizing the structure and activities of health care institutions . Improving integration and
     cooperation in primary health care and public health, developing and implementing a hospital master
     plan to rationalize and modernize hospital services, increasing the continuity of care between hospital
     and out-of-hospital services, structural modifications to hospitals, and increasing centralized (joint)
     procurement for hospitals (estimated EUR 260M).

(v) Fostering quality in health care through (a) improving quality of monitoring, health worker
    education, and better public information for users; (b) developing, implementing, and monitoring
    clinical guidelines and accreditation; (c) introducing performance-based contracting and performance-
    based payments, with a specific emphasis on pay-for-quality initiatives; and (d) developing and
    implementing a formal Health Technology Assessment (HTA), including strengthening capacity to
    implement HTA (estimated EUR 40M).

(vi) Strengthening preventive activities by increasing the budgetary share of preventive activities in the
     health budget, improving management of preventive activities and programs including the
     introduction of performance-based contracting for prevention and strengthening preventive care at the
     primary care level; strengthening systems to monitor harmful environmental factors and early
     warning/response systems (estimated EUR 24M).

(vii)     Preserving financial stability of health care by focusing on strengthening the voluntary health
     insurance market, improving financial discipline in the health care system through greater
     accountability, improving the strategic allocation of health resources, and reducing corruption and
     informal payments (estimated EUR 10M).

(viii)     Improving cooperation with other sectors and society in general by Strengthening
     intersectoral cooperation (among ministries), with local and regional self-government and with civil
     society and media (estimated EUR 4M).




                                                      6
The Program

The proposed Program to be supported by the Bank would cover 5 out of the 8 priorities as defined in the
Government’s National Health Care Strategy (2012-20) (the Government program), within the boundaries
defined in terms of (a) Program duration; (b) Priorities supported; (c) Institutions involved. The Program
implementation period is from 2013 to 2017. To improve two critical areas of the health services (quality
and efficiency) and considering the objectives and pillars of the CPS it was agreed with the Government
that the Program would include 5 out of the 8 priorities of the National Health Care Strategy 2012 –2020
that are oriented to addressing the main reform challenges facing the Croatian health sector. These
challenges and the relevant activities for addressing them are the following:

Rationalizing the health facility network, to be addressed through Priority iii (Strengthening management
capacity in health care) and Priority iv (Reorganizing the structure and activities of health care
institutions), including: Implementing hospital master plan, Implementing hospital reforms, governance
and management changes, promoting group practices for general practitioners, expanding secondary-level
ambulatory services, including high-resolution ambulatory centers, redefining long-term health care
services and palliative care

Improving quality of health care services, to be addressed through Priority v (Fostering quality in health
care) and Priority vi (Strengthening preventive activities), including: implementing of a hospital
accreditation, implementing of HTA to all new health technologies, building a body of clinical protocols
and care pathways, detecting and proper recording of specific “sentinel events for quality?, implementing
technical/clinical audits and payment mechanism to incentivize the use of clinical guidelines, using of the
existing e-prescription system for quality control purposes.

Promoting financial sustainability of the health sector, to be addressed through Priority vii (Preserving
financial stability of health care), including: further development of central procurement, outsourcing of
nonmedical services, strengthening the performance-linked component in payments to hospitals and
ambulatory services, developing the MoH capacity to develop and present proposals to be financed by EU
structural funds.

Program Development Objective/s (PDO)

The proposed PDO is to improve the quality of health care and efficiency of health services in Croatia.

Program Key Results and Disbursement-Linked Indicators

The key results for the Program include the following:

   i.   The first phase of the hospital master plan implemented and achieving all of the following
        milestones: (a) the total number of acute care beds reduced by 20 percent, from 15,930 to 12,800;
        and (b) 80 percent of hospitals financially consolidated within the redefined institutional
        architecture, in line with the Master Plan.

  ii.   Quality control procedures in place including: (a) 40 percent of rationalized hospitals, among
        those contracted by the Croatian Health Insurance Fund (HZZO) and subject to technical audit in
        the previous year; and (b) at least 70 percent of HZZO-contracted hospitals accredited through an




                                                    7
           independently run accreditation process4.

    iii.   Public spending on health reduced from 6.6 percent to 6.1 percent of GDP.5

Disbursement-Linked Indicators were selected to identify key results linked to the the Program. Attention
has been paid to a number of criteria. First, the Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) are achievable
and challenging at the same time, combining ambition and feasibility so that the financial risk attached to
each DLI would have the right impact. Second, intermediate and end-of-Program targets for all DLIs
were chosen to allow an adequate disbursement flow (with 50 percent for achieving the intermediate
target) while maintaining incentives to achieve end-of-Program targets for second and final disbursement.
Third, the DLIs are strongly aligned with government priorities, which should guarantee both synergistic
effect and sustainability.

The DLIs for the PforR include the following:

DLI 1. The total number of acute care beds to be reduced from the baseline of 15,930 (paid by the
HZZO) to 15,000 and further to 12,800 by converting some of them into “social beds,? “long-term? or
“palliative care? beds,? “day care posts,? or closing them down
DLI 2. At least two substantial “hospital reshaping scheme? subprojects6 implemented.
DLI 3. Percentage of hospitals that became financially consolidated (with zero debt during the
preceding year) within the redefined institutional architecture, in line with the Master Plan.
DLI 4. Percentage of all surgeries included in the predefined lists of elective surgeries7 performed as
ambulatory surgeries in the last six months.
DLI 5. Percentage of rationalized hospitals (as defined in the hospital rationalization master plan),
among those contracted by the HZZO and subject to technical audit in the previous year, publicly
disclosed as best-performing hospitals based on explicit key performance indicators and quality indicators
to manage NCDs as defined by the HZZO.
DLI 6. Percentage of HZZO-contracted hospitals accredited through an independently run accreditation
process.
DLI 7. Percentage of doctors for whom HZZO-defined prescription patterns in the last six months was
found to be “non-satisfactory? and with whom a corrective course of action was discussed on a person-to-
person basis.
DLI 8. Percentage of total public spending on medical consumables, drugs, and devices for hospital
(inpatient and outpatient) services made through centralized procurement/framework contracts and
disclosed on the Ministry of Health website in simplified and understandable format.

4
   Hospital accreditation is an assessment process, usually implemented by an independent agency, used to measure
the level of performance of health organizations in relation to established standards and a tool to implement quality
improvements.
5
   Also stated in the CPS FY14–17.
6
   Following finalization of the Master Plan, the Ministry of Health will identify two or more potential hospital
reshaping schemes in agreement with the Bank and implement at least two of the agreed subprojects to their full
functionality. Hospitals reshaping scheme means designing and operationalizing schemes with substantial
adjustment in the way two or more hospitals are merged, organized, managed, and funded, and moving forward with
the necessary actions in the legal, financial, managerial, and other spheres to provide more efficient ambulatory care
and reducing the inpatient acute care .
7
  . Elective surgeries: cataract surgery; knee arthroscopy; surgery of varicose veins; anal surgery (hemorrhoids);
carpal syndrome corrective surgery; removal of osteo-synthetic material

                                                          8
DLI 9. Percentage of general practitioners working in group practices.
DLI 10. Percentage of hospitals with surgery wards that have established quality- and safety-related
sentinel surveillance schemes showing the rates of specific events: (a) avoidable, non-traumatic, diabetes-
related lower-limb amputations; (b) postoperative pulmonary embolism; and (c) deep vein thrombosis.

Key Capacity-Building and Systems-Strengthening Activities

The implementation of the first phase of the National Health Care Strategy will require the inputs of
several technical assistance activities to improve planning and to strengthen and adjust the institutional
framework and monitoring and information system. With the support of the ongoing World Bank
Development of Emergency Medical Services and Investment Planning Project (DEMSIPP, closing
December 31, 2013), the Ministry of Health, and the Croatian Institute for Health Insurance (HZZO) are
(a) conducting a hospital rationalization analysis to develop a hospital rationalization plan; (b) developing
EU proposals to mobilize resources to finance investments in support of the hospital rationalization
process; (c) assessing options for outsourcing medical and nonmedical hospital services; (d)
implementing a communication campaign to inform the public about the benefits of the health sector
reform being implemented; (e) designing the Business Process Reengineering in the HZZO; and (f)
implementing a Geographic Information System (GIS) that will improve data availability and allow
proper monitoring and evaluation, which requires a reliable and de-aggregated information system.

In addition, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Health agreed that US$ 10 million would be
allocated to the MOH budget to finance technical assistance to support the strengthening process of health
sector regulations and planning. These funds would finance, among other things, the design of protocols
and tools to implement technical audits and other quality control mechanisms, the strengthening of the
Health Technology Assessments (HTAs), the development of detailed plans for the hospital reshaping
schemes, and the development and implementation of communication strategies.

        PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

The three most critical stakeholders involved in implementing the proposed Program are the Ministry of
Health (MOH), the HZZO, and the Agency for Quality and Accreditation in Health Care and Social
Welfare (AQAHS). In the context of the proposed Program, the MOH is the primary beneficiary that will
be responsible for using the funds available through the proposed Program to support the reform and
restructuring of the Croatian health care system according to priorities and directions defined in the
Croatian National Health Care Strategy 2012–2020. The HZZO is the main stakeholder responsible for
implementing reforms that will achieve the results targeted by the proposed Program. As the single payer
in the mandatory health insurance system, the HZZO has a central role to play in achieving the proposed
Program results in terms of collecting data and using contracting (of health facilities/general practitioners-
-GPs) and monitoring/control/quality supervision mechanisms to implement the desired changes in the
health care system (for example, contracting and payment based on Key Performance Indicators and
Quality Indicators, stimulating ambulatory surgeries, monitoring prescription patterns, auditing hospitals,
and incentivizing GP group practices). The MOH is, however, responsible for supervising HZZO
activities, and contributions to HZZO revenues for mandatory insurance constitute a part of the State
Budget revenue. The MOH is currently also responsible for managing all (except one) hospitals. In the
long term, however, once the financial rationalization of hospitals is completed, the MOH will once again
decentralize management. Finally, the AAQHS is responsible for supporting the HZZO in ensuring the
quality of contracted providers from whom the HZZO purchases mandatory health insurance services.
The main contribution of the AAQHS in this respect is to facilitate and implement accreditation of health

                                                      9
care institutions and ensure standards of quality in service provision.

Results Monitoring and Evaluation

In order to monitor progress toward achieving the PDO, the Program Results Framework will use three
PDO-level Results Indicators, while the ten DLIs will serve as Intermediate Results Indicators compiled
in three subsets, each contributing to one of the three Intermediate Results Areas.

Measurement and verification of the progress toward achievement of the Program’s objectives will be
based on the country’s existing monitoring and evaluation systems, largely because the proposed
operation would contribute to the government’s program of health sector reforms by disbursing against
achievement of a subset of its key results. The HZZO will be responsible for collecting monitoring data
and verifying documentation for most of the Intermediate Results Indicators (7 out of 10) and providing
aggregated reporting on achievement of related results to the Ministry of Health on a semiannual and/or
annual basis. Specifically, the HZZO health information systems, strengthened under the Development of
Emergency Medical Services and Investment Planning Project (DEMSIPP), will be the primary source of
monitoring data related to the HZZO’s role in contracting health services and quality monitoring/control
of service delivery, such as the total number of contracted acute care beds, performed elective surgeries,
and doctors’ prescription patterns. Hospital-level data, such as hospital financial plans and reports, will be
reported by the concerned hospitals directly to the HZZO.

The Ministry of Health, through its Directorate for Health Protection, will be responsible for assembling
all the data and documentation necessary for monitoring, verification, and evaluation purposes, including
the system-level data for the three Intermediate Results Indicators, namely public spending made through
centralized procurement/framework contracts, implementation of hospital reshaping subprojects, and data
related to establishment of group practices. Given that the Ministry of Health will be the primary
beneficiary responsible for using the PforR funds, it will bear the ultimate responsibility for monitoring
overall progress toward achievement of the Program’s results, as well as for ensuring timely collection
and provision of monitoring data and verification documents to the World Bank and Ministry of Finance.

The Program may, with the agreement of the Government and Bank, be restructured to respond to any
changed circumstances during its implementation, including through modifying its development
objectives and/or DLIs.

        ASSESSMENT OF PROGRAM EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK

The types of expenditures and their estimated costs under the Government’s program 2012 -2020 are
indicated in the tables below. The Program expenditures will be managed by the MOH (administrative
budget), the Health Insurance Institute (HZZO) and hospitals (reimbursements for the provision of
medical services) and the MOH Central Procurement for Health executed by select hospitals.

With overall health spending at 7.8 percent of GDP, Croatia is near the top of the list compared to new
EU members, and spends significantly more than countries with similar GDP per capita in the region. At
17.7 percent, the health sector’s share of public expenditures (about EUR 3.1 B) is higher than the 15.6
percent average for all EU countries. In this fiscally constrained environment, the Croatian health system
faces a mismatch among available public resources, growing expenditures, and increasing needs.

Health financing is organized according to social health insurance principles. A single fund, the Croatian
Health Insurance Fund (HZZO), covers the entire population (about 4.4 million beneficiaries comprised
by: 1.52 million active workers, 1.05 million pensioners, 1.15 million family members and 0.63 million
individuals covered by special programs).

                                                     10
The bulk of HZZO’s revenue comes from contributions collected from the population augmented by
transfers from the Government for “mandatory activities.? The following categories of the population are
expected to contribute to the fund: active workers (34 percent), active farmers (0.8 percent), and
pensioners (24.1 percent). Dependents of these categories, insofar as they are not contributors in their own
right, are automatically covered (26.4 percent). Formal exemptions include the unemployed, the 100
percent disabled, and organ and blood donors, which combined represent 14.6 percent of the insured.
People working in the grey economy do not contribute and yet receive coverage. There is a formal and
explicit mechanism by which the state contributes on behalf of exempted categories.

Contributions to the compulsory health insurance scheme are paid to the treasury and form part of the
state budget from which the HZZO receives funds to cover mandatory health insurance. The compulsory
health insurance scheme is not entirely dependent on contributions from salaries but also receives central
government transfers.

The proposed Program supports 5 out of the 8 Government Program defined priorities, and Bank
contributions will represent 41 percent of the total Program estimated cost and 18 percent of the total
Government Program. The expenditure analysis, the discussion of financial sustainability of the Program
and the analysis of the efficiency of spending is discussed in detail in the Technical Assessment.

Table 1. Government Program 2012–2020 (EUR Million)
                                                                  2012-2017 2018-2020         2012-2020
1. Developing a Health Information System and eHealth                   30        15                 45
2. Strengthening and better using human resources in health
   care                                                                   7            5               12
3. Strengthening management capacity in health care                      10            4               14
4. Reorganizing the structure and activities of health care
   institutions                                                        125           135             260
5. Fostering quality in health care                                     25            15              40
6. Strengthening preventive activities                                  14            10              24
7. Preserving financial stability of health care                         6             4              10
8. Improving cooperation with other sectors and society in
   general                                                               2             2                4
Sub-total Strategies 3 , 4, 5, 6 and 7 between 2013-2017               180
Total                                                                  219           190             409


     Table 2. Program Financing                            Table 3. Estimated profile of Program
            (EUR Million)                                      expenditures (EUR Million)
Source                         Amount                    Civil Works                              95
GoC                              105.0                   Medical equipment and goods              25
IBRD                              75.0                   Technical Assistance                      4
Total Program Financing          180.0                   Human resources                           8
                                                         Services + Operational cost              48
                                                         Total                                   180

The Program will finance various categories of contracts, including civil works, goods and services. Most
of the civil works would be rehabilitation of existing facilities and more detailed information on them will

                                                    11
be provided as soon as the Hospital Master Plan is finalized. It is expected that civil works will take place
in 2016-2017 and they will be financed with EU structural funds. The goods contracts include medical
equipment, various consumables, materials, food for hospitals.




                                                     12
           SUMMARY OF FIDUCIARY RISKS AND MITIGATION ACTIONS

Based on the findings of FSA, the overall fiduciary risk is Moderate.

Although the experience with the joint procurement until now could be considered as quite positive, there
are areas which need enhancement and further improvement related mainly with the long time for drafting
and preparation of the technical specifications for medical equipment, consumables, materials and
medications for hospitals, the lack of contract administration and monitoring system; further building and
sustaining of capacity for procurement management, and development and application of e-procurement

The key institutions (MOH, Health Insurance Fund, Hospitals) all have functioning financial management
information systems, adequate financial and accounting staff to plan budgets, execute and record
transactions and produce in-year and year-end financial reports. In each of these institutions/groups, an
internal control framework is evident, with clear rules and procedures (for the segregation of and
articulation of individual duties and responsibilities for key financial management functions). The Fiscal
Responsibility Act8 requires that the head of each budget institution prepares and signs a statement (as
well as answers a questionnaire provided by MOF) attesting to the legal, functional and purposeful use of
budget resources and the efficient and effective functioning of financial management and controls for the
funds provided to the institution through the state budget.

There are however three key areas of risk – (i) the impact of reduction in HZZO budget allocations that
finance the reimbursements to hospitals, (ii) the inability of hospitals to manage or renegotiate the terms
of liabilities, and (iii) the lack of adequately functioning internal audits for hospitals which are required,
under law, to have such units established.

No      Risk Type             Risk          Risk Description                  Mitigation Actions
.                             Rating
1       Ineffective           Substantial   HZZO budget allocations are       The mid-year budget revisions
        planning to                         reduced mid-year thereby          should be immediately shared
        incorporate                         reducing     the      amounts     with      all    involved    budget
        mid-year
                                            reimbursed     to    hospitals.   institutions, particularly hospitals.
        changes
        (reductions) to                     Hospitals are not informed in     This will allow hospitals make in-
        budget                              a timely manner of these          year adjustments to financial
        allocations                         reductions, thereby creating      plans and budgets in an effort to
                                            serious financial and fiscal      limit      entering     into    new
                                            constraints.                      obligations which may not be
                                                                              adequately supported through the
                                                                              original budget plan.

2       Long time for          Moderate     The process of preparation of     Preparation and implementation
        drafting and                        technical specifications is       of a realistic plan for preparation
        preparation of                      lengthy. This results in a long   of technical specification and
        the technical
                                            time of preparation and           tender documents well in advance
        specifications
        for medical                         launching the of tender
        equipment                           procedures
                                                                              Use of contemporary methods and
        procured by the                                                       techniques, for preparation of

8
    Official Gazette 139/10

                                                         13
    Ministry of                    There is a trend of receiving     non-restrictive,      well-defined
    Health                         complaints with regard to the     technical specifications, based on
                                   technical specifications and      relevant characteristics and/or
                                                                     performance requirements, in
                                   that they are restrictive and
                                                                     order to promote broadest
                                   are directed to a specific        possible competition.
                                   manufacturer. This delays the
                                   procurement and contract
                                   award process.
3   Long time for       Moderate   The process is quite lengthy     Use of contemporary methods and
    drafting and                   and it delays the preparation    techniques, for preparation of
    preparation of                 and launching of the tender      non-restrictive,        well-defined
    the technical                  procedures.                      technical specifications, based on
    specification for                                               relevant characteristics and/or
    consumables,                   There are no standards and performance requirements, in
    materials and                  catalogues for commonly order to promote broadest
    medications for                used      consumables       and possible competition.
    hospitals,                     materials in many cases there
    subject to joint               are repetitive requests for Development              of      common
    procurement                    same item, defined in a standards and a catalogue, as
                                   different way.                   relevant,    for     defining     the
                                                                    procurement items and categories,
                                   Although        the    technical subject to joint procurement
                                   specifications are drawn up
                                   on the basis of numerous To enhance the procurement
                                   consultations with various process of medications by better
                                   institutions                and defining their specifications and
                                   representatives of the private groups/lots       in     the    tender
                                   sector, majority of complaints documents.
                                   are related to the technical
                                   specifications and that they
                                   are restrictive and are directed
                                   to a specific manufacturer.
                                   This delays the tender process
                                   and in some cases results in a
                                   need for cancellation and
                                   repetition of the tendering
                                   process.
4   Lack of contract    Moderate   There      is    no    adequate Development of an adequate
    administration                 information available with contract           administration      and
    and monitoring                 regard         to       contract monitoring system, including
                                   administration and monitoring
    system                                                          defining the process and capacity
                                   of implementation.
                                                                    needed, the evidence of contract
                                                                    performance with regard to time,
                                                                    quality and cost, inspection of
                                                                    quality of the goods and services
                                                                    delivered, timeliness of payment
                                                                    and effective contractual dispute
                                                                    resolution, as applicable, and

                                                14
                                                                          enforcement     of     contractual
                                                                          remedies.

                                                                          Ensuring consistency of actual
                                                                          status and information published
                                                                          at the website of the MOH and the
                                                                          Directorate        for     Public
                                                                          Procurement System


5   Inefficient         Substantial   Ineffective practices to collect    The MOF-MOH hospital financial
    practices to                      co-payments       due      from     rehabilitation plan should include
    limit liabilities                 patients; Hospitals are unable      new measures to improve the
    as well as the                    to      manage        liabilities
                                                                          hospitals’     ability  for    the
    accumulation of                   (contracts) in order to permit
    arrears and                       renegotiation of terms and          management of obligations and
    receivables                       conditions of payment.              liabilities (consistent with the
                                                                          PPA) and to improve the
                                                                          effectiveness        of   revenue
                                                                          management.

                                                                          The HZZO should immediately
                                                                          update reimbursement allocations
                                                                          and inform hospitals of any
                                                                          changes to the DRG financing
                                                                          system, particularly in the event
                                                                          of downward budget revisions.

6   Capacity            Moderate      The PPA required that staff Ensure the continuous and
    building                          involved in procurement sustainable development of the
                                      management     has  formal capacity of staff in procurement
                                      certification.
                                                                  and contract management, both in
                                                                  the Ministry of Health and the
                                                                  relevant hospitals, responsible for
                                                                  the joint procurement.

                                      Hospitals which meet the            For the hospitals included in the
                                      threshold, as defined by the        Program,    over     the   5-year
                                      Law on Internal Audit, should
                                                                          implementation period, 20% of
                                      establish             adequately
                                      functioning     and      trained    hospitals each year will be
                                      internal audit units.               confirmed to have an effectively
                                                                          functioning     internal    audit
                                                                          department.

7   E-Procurement       Moderate      The institutions could benefit Further to         the Government’s
    is not yet                        of its application by having a Strategy           2013-2016    for

                                                    15
     implemented in                    more transparent, quicker and development of e-Procurement in
     Croatia.                          more      efficient    public Republic of Croatia, to pursue
                                       procurement process.          options for introducing e-
                                                                     procurement within the scope,
                                                                     limits and timeline of the above
                                                                     referenced Strategy.

                                                                         Initially to assess the options of
                                                                         introducing e-Procurement (e-
                                                                         catalogue, e-marketplace etc.) for
                                                                         smaller value contracts, subject to
                                                                         joint procurement and which are
                                                                         below the thresholds of the Public
                                                                         Procurement Act.


        PERFORMANCE OF PROGRAM FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS AND ARRANGEMENTS

Within the framework of the Ministry of Health is organized through centralized procurement, involving
(i) the Central Procurement Office, which is responsible for carrying out the central procurement of
certain procurement categories, as defined in a special Decision of the Government of the Republic of
Croatia, (ii) the Ministry of Health through its Sector Independent Service for Public Procurement, which
is responsible for carrying out procurement of vehicles, medical equipment, civil works, consultant and
non-consultant services, licenses, electricity and postal services for the needs of the Ministry and all
health care institutions, including primary care departments, state hospitals and county hospitals, and (iii)
Central Bodies for Public Procurement, responsible for carrying out of a joint procurement of
consumables and materials for all state hospitals participating in the Government’s hospital rehabilitation
program and county hospitals, which choose to participate.

The main objective of the Ministry of Health is to work on improving, promoting and protecting the
health of Croatian citizens, and to perform administrative and other tasks concerning its main purpose of
operation. According to Law on the structure and scope of ministries and other state administration bodies
(Official Bulletin 39/13), Ministry of Health participates in preparation of programmes and projects and
implementation of projects from the programmes of the European Union and other types of international
support The ordinance on the internal structure of the Ministry of Health regulates the structure and duties
of organizational units.

The ordinance amending the ordinance on the internal organization of the Ministry of Health, adopted on
7 March 2013 by the Government of the Republic of Croatia is of particular interest, since it implemented
changes in the organization of MOH that directly affect the units and people responsible for the proposed
Program for Results operation. The organization of the Ministry of Health is as follows:




                                                     16
                                                                              Minister of
                                                                               Health


                                                 Minister’s
                                                                                                          Deputy Minister
                                                 Cabinet

                                                  General                                                    Assistant
                                                 Secretariat                                                 Ministers




                                                                                                    Independent
                             Directorate for       Directorate for          Directorate for                                  Independent       Institute for
                                                                                                     Service for
                                 Health               Sanitary                 Legal and                                      Service for    Transplantation
                                                                                                       Public
                               Protection            Inspection             Financial Affairs                               Internal Audit   and Biomedicine
                                                                                                    Procurement




                                                    Sector for European
 Sector for Promotion
                                Sector for           Funds, Structural
  and Protection of
                                Inspection              Reforms and
        Health
                                                   International Projects




                             Service for the
                           Implementation of                                      Service for Accession
                          International Loans                                     and Structural Funds
                        and Structural Reforms



               Unit for the             Unit for the                     Unit for                Unit for Monitoring
            Implementation            Implementation                 Coordination and                    and
             of International           of Structural                Programming of              Implementation of
                  Loans                   Reforms                        Projects                      Projects



The Sector Independent Service for Public Procurement was established in the beginning of 2013. It
comprises 6 staff, certified to carry out public procurement. It is planned that in the future the Sector will
expand and the planned number of staff to work there shall be increased to 15 staff. The Sector is
responsible for carrying out procurement for needs of the Ministry and all health care institutions,
including primary care departments, state hospitals and county hospitals in three procurement categories:
public works (new construction and rehabilitation works), goods (vehicles, medical equipment, licenses,
etc.) and services (consultant and non-consultant, including electricity and postal services etc.) The
contracts that the Ministry is procuring for the health institutions are for capital investment works and
equipment, that the health institutions cannot cover from their own funds.




                                                                                 17
Croatia scored well on the Open Budget Index Survey (Croatia’s Open Budget Index score is 61 out of
1009). According to the calendar set out in the Budget Act, the MOF drafts at the end of May the
Economic and Fiscal Policy Guidelines. Guidelines are based on the Strategy of Government Programs
for the three-year period ahead and get adopted by the government. In recent years, the adoption of the
guidelines has moved to the end of July or beginning of August. All key indicators provided by the
guidelines (including the limits set by the government) are then transferred into instructions for drafting
the state budget. When receiving those instructions, budgetary users prepare their proposals of financial
plans, within which they autonomously decide on the allocation of funds to programs, activities, and
projects in their jurisdiction. In preparing the plan for their programs, project activities must comply with
the limits set for the overall level of spending. In practice, ministries usually are not satisfied with the
allocated limits. They may ask the government to change the limit but with an explanation provided,
which the government may accept on the basis of its reasoning. By October 15, the MOF drafts the state
budget for the fiscal year and the projection for the next two years and submits these to the government.
The government determines the proposed budget and projections by November 15, and submits them to
the Parliament for approval. By the end of the year the Parliament adopts the annual budget and
projections for the next two years.

Revenue, income, expenses and expenditures are reported in compliance with the following budget
classifications: 1) organizational, 2) economic, c) functional d) locational (central and subnational
government) e) programmatic f) sources of funding10. There are two key medium-term strategic
documents which define government structural reforms – the PEP and the Strategy of Government
Programs. Croatia began publishing a Citizen’s Budget since 2012.11

The hospital’s budget is prepared annually in current year month October for the next year. Also at the
same time a projection is prepared also for the subsequent 2 years. Such plans are approved by the
hospital’s director or [financial rehabilitation] manager if the hospital is under such temporary
management set-up. The Management board or [Financial Rehabilitation] board approves the budget by
the end of the budget preparation year. During the year the budgets are revised few times depending on
the requirements for revisions.



Funds for the public procurement contracts are secured from the state budget. An annual procurement
plan is prepared on the basis of the annual budget of MoH. The MoH issues a Decision with which the
annual procurement plan is approved. In preparing the procurement plan, the Ministry collects
information with regard to the needs of the various departments within the Ministry of Health and also
from the various health institutions (state and county hospitals, primary health care departments etc.). It
contains information in line with the requirements of the Public Procurement Act, i.e. including the
subject matter of procurement and its reference number, estimated value, type of public procurement
procedure, including the procedure for awarding of a public service contract, as relevant, information if
the public procurement procedure would result in a public procurement contract or a framework
agreement, planned commencement of the procedure and the planned duration of the public procurement
contract or the framework agreement. The procurement plan is published on the website of the Ministry
of Health immediately after the Decision for it is issued, as well as it is sent to the Directorate of Public


9 http://internationalbudget.org/wp-content/uploads/OBI2012-CroatiaCS-English.pdf
10
   Law on Budget (Official Gazette 87/08
11
http://www.mfin.hr/adminmax/docs/IZVRSENJE%20DRZAVNOG%20PRORACUNA%20ZA%20PRVO%20POLUGODISTE%202013..pdf

                                                                   18
Procurement Systems in the Ministry of Economy. All revisions, changes, additions in the procurement
plan are approved by the Minister of Health and published as indicated above.



The most commonly used procurement procedure for procurement of goods, works and services is the
open tendering procedure. The rationale for selection of a public procurement procedure is in accordance
with the nature, scope and value of the public procurement contract, as well as in accordance with the
rationale for justification of each public procedure as regulated in the Act.

Tender documents. The tender documents12, including technical specifications are prepared in-house.
The technical experts that have prepared the technical specifications usually participate later on in the
evaluation process. The experts participating in the preparation of the tender documents are appointed
with a Decision of the Minister of Health, and the list of these experts is published on the Ministry’s
website. While there are no standard tender documents, the documents are drafted in accordance with the
requirements defined in the Regulation on the methodology for drafting and handling tender documents
and tenders (see the FSA for further detail). The tender documents, including the technical specification
and the procurement notice are uploaded on the Narodne Novine platform. The official newspaper where
all procurement notices and tender documents are published is also available online, as required by the
PPA. All interested prospective bidders could see this information and could download the documents
free of charge.

Opening and evaluation of bids. Tenders are opened in public and minutes of public opening are
prepared in a form and content as defined in the above referenced Regulation. A copy of the minutes is
made available to all authorized representatives of the tenderers. Evaluation is done in accordance with
the evaluation and qualification criteria in the tender documents and is carried out by an evaluation
committee.

Contract administration. There is no formal data with regard to contracts administration. For facilitating
the contract administration and its monitoring, it is recommended that an adequate contract administration
and monitoring system is defined, including defining the process and capacity needed, the evidence of
contract performance with regard to time, quality and cost, inspection of quality of the goods and services
delivered, timeliness of payment and effective contractual dispute resolution, as applicable, and
enforcement of contractual remedies. Due to the centralized and joint procurement, considerable savings
were achieved in 2012 and 2013.

Complaints Handling Mechanism. The existing PPA elaborates on the legal protection and appeals
mechanism and the Ministry of Health and the relevant hospitals central bodies respect it. The
independent state body responsible for reviewing appeals in connection with public procurement
procedures, concession award procedures and procedures for selection of private partners in public private
partnership projects is the State Commission for Supervision of Public Procurement Procedures.
Therefore, all appeals with regard to a public procurement procedure are submitted to the State
Commission. The PPA defines the time limits for lodging an appeal. Depending on the contract value, an
appeal should be submitted within a period of 10 days (for higher value contracts) or 5 days (for smaller
value contracts) from the date of the respective step of the procedures, as relevant. More specifically, an
appeal may be submitted within the above referenced time limits from the date of (i) the publication of
contract notice relating to the content of the contract notice and tender documents, and supplementary
documents, if any; (ii) the publication of modifications to the tender documents relating to the content of
the modification of the tender documents; (iii) the opening of tenders relating to the procedures for

12
     For the purpose of this report, tender and bidding documents, tender and bid have the same meaning.

                                                          19
opening of tenders; (iv) the receipt of the award decision or cancellation decision relating to the procedure
of examination, evaluation and selection of tenders, of the reasons for cancellation. Any appellant, who
fails to file an appeal at a specific stage of the open procedure in accordance with the prescribed time line,
loses the right to appeal with regard to the previous stage in a later stage of the procedure. The PPA
provides the amounts of the fees for initiating the appealing procedure. After an appeal is received, the
contracting authority is required to submit all supporting documents within a 5 day term.

The decisions of the Commission are published on its website, on which the information is updated on a
daily basis. The time for resolution of the appeals varies depending on the nature of the complaint and it
sometimes may take a month even longer. The most common types of appeals with regard to the public
procurement procedures carried out by the Ministry of Health and the hospitals are with regard to the
technical specifications or the decision on contract award. The fiduciary assessment report provides
information on the number and type of appeals/complaints submitted during the 2012 and 2013.

Debarment System. There is no formal debarment system in the country, however, the proposed
operation shall be subject to the Bank’s 2011 (revised) Anti-Corruption Guidelines and will not enable
services of firms and individuals debarred by the Bank. The list of such debarred firms and individuals
can be found at the following website: http://www.worldbank.org/html/opr/procure/debarr.html



The Ministry of Health uses a modified accrual basis where revenues are recorded on a cash basis and
expenditures recognized when incurred. Accounting in hospitals is maintained following principles
determined in the Rulebook for budget accounting and budget plan13 (Official Gazette No. 31/11), and
this enables hospitals to prepare various different reports throughout the year. The accounting in hospitals
is the same as for any other budget user as revenues and expenditures are recognized following modified
accruals basis of accounting. For the health sector, the modified accruals accounting policies includes the
following:

           No depreciation or amortization – these are not accounted for or calculated
           No recognition of revenue and expenses related to changes in value of non-financial assets
           Revenue is recognized in the period when it has become available to the hospital, given that it can
            be measured
           Expenses are recognized when incurred in the reporting period to which they relate, independent
            from the fact in which period the payment took place
           Expenses for consumption of short-term financial property are recognized when purchased
            (except in health sector such expenses are recognized at the pint of actual consumption or sales)
           For donations of non-financial assets, revenue and expenses are recognized according to their
            estimated value

Budget users, whose value of property and annual revenue does not exceed HRK 100,000 (approximately
USD 18,000) are not required to prepare and submit financial reports or apply a financial plan. As a
minimum such budget users are required to maintain petty cash book and book of revenue and expenses.
The decision to exempt a lower-tier budget user from the general requirements is determined by the
supervising ministry or central (higher) budgetary authority.

Monthly reports are prepared by the 10th of the month for the previous month and such reports are
prepared and submitted to the HZZO (the Health Insurance Fund). The reports contain the following

13
     http://www.mfin.hr/adminmax/docs/Pravilnika_o_proracunskom_racunovodstvu_i_Racunskom_planu.pdf

                                                                 20
information: revenue and expenses, amounts invoiced in excess of limits assigned by the HZZO,
receivables by days, number and structure of employees, balance of the transaction account, expenses for
expensive medication and transplantation, number of practitioners and gross salary expenses of the
practitioners.

Quarterly reports are submitted to the FINA (the payment agent of the government and linked the
Treasury). The quarterly reports include data and information on revenue and expenses for the period,
liabilities, receivables, inventory balances, transaction account balance, number and structure of
employees. Semi-annual reports are submitted to HZZO, MOH and FINA and include information on
revenue and expenses of the budget user. Annual reports produced by hospitals include a Balance Sheet,
report on income and expenditures, report on changes in value and extent of assets and liabilities, and
these reports are submitted to the MOH, HZZO and FINA.

The details on reporting requirements of the hospitals are published in Instructions on application of FM
system and controls in health institutions in the process on financial rehabilitation whose funders are local
or regional counties whose rights are currently resting. The instructions have been issued by the MOF and
published on 1 July 2013.14 The mentioned instructions include reporting requirements for health
institutions outside of the financial rehabilitation plan.

Most of the hospitals have an automated accounting system. However reports for MOH, HZZO and
FINA are produced manually depending on requirements determined by the government’s decisions.
Some general statements such as trial balances and accounts balances can be prepared automatically from
the system but all other reports are normally produced manually.

The accounting and financial reporting systems in the MOH, HZZO and at the level of hospitals were
found to perform adequately in managing expenditures, including transfers to lower tier budget users (i.e.,
from HZZO to hospitals). However on major areas of deficiency noted is that hospital inventory systems
are not connected to the general ledger - most hospitals have a separate system for inventory
management. Therefore important information for management decision not available in a timely manner
and risk of transferring wrong data into the general ledger manually is high.

Similarly salaries are and will continue to be accounted for in a separate system. Recently the government
has decided to reform the manner in which all public sector salaries are managed and accounted for by
managing this through a new centralized system. Salary payments will be executed by FINA and all
budget users will have the same software where all information on all public sector employees will be
captured and maintained. The assessment of such system was not part of this fiduciary assessment and
therefore the team was not able to assess it. The system is only now being piloted and has not yet fully
implemented by all budget users. There were several complaints about the functionality and
comprehensiveness of the system but it was not possible to conclude on actual issues and risks involved
in this reform initiative.



The responsibility for coordination and monitoring of the joint procurement carried out by the relevant
hospitals lies with the Sector for European Funds, Structural Reforms and International Projects. It
comprises 13 people, of which 5 have certification in public procurement. The Sector is within the Health
Protection Department in the Ministry of Health. It has been created recently with the current
reorganization that took place at the Ministry of Health. The Sector is also responsible for the Service for


14
     http://www.mfin.hr/adminmax/docs/naputak%20ustanovama%20u%20zdravstvu%20u%20sanaciji%20(osnivaci%20JLPRS).pdf

                                                               21
the Implementation of International Loans and Structural Reforms and Service for Pre-Accession and
Structural Funds.

The decision on joint procurement was adopted by the Ministry of Health as part of the three year plan of
the Government for rehabilitation of hospitals, to achieve the most efficient public procurement and
economical spending of its financial resources, as well as to achieve best value for money. It is in line
with the provisions of the Public Procurement Act (Official Gazette, no. 90/11) and defines the
institutions which will be responsible to conduct the joint procurement for selected procurement
categories, as well as the institutions which are obliged to implement joint procurement through central
bodies for public procurement.

The Decision for compulsory implementation of joint procurement through the central bodies for public
procurement/public institutions whose founder is the Republic of Croatia, for conclusion of framework
agreements for specific subjects of procurement (public procurement categories) was issued by the
Minister of Health on May 31, 2012.15 Initially there were 9 state owned hospitals and the National
Health Insurance Fund assigned to implement joint procurement for various procurement categories
through the above Decision of the Minister of Health. While centralized procurement is mandatory for the
state owned hospitals, it is left to the local governments/counties to decide how to organize the public
procurement for the county and general hospitals. County hospitals may participate in the centralized
procurement and some of them do participate.

Those institutions which are bound to participate in the joint procurement pursuant to the Decision are not
permitted to conduct procurement of goods and services as defined in the Decision individually. As an
exception, they may proceed with a procurement process only after obtaining the consent of the Ministry
of Health. The hospitals responsible for the implementation of the joint procurement have the status of
central procurement bodies, as defined in Article 8 of the PPA. They have the status of authorized clients
and before drafting the tender documents, they are obliged to collect all the relevant information for
implementation of the joint procurement.

The table below provides the names of the hospitals, assigned the role of central procurement bodies
authorized to perform joint procurement and the relevant procurement categories.


 No.       Central Body for Public                                   Subject of Procurement
                  Procurement
1.       Ministry of Health                   Medical equipment, other goods, civil works, consultant services,
                                              non-consultant services.
2.       Zagreb Clinical Hospital Center      All medication included on the CIHI list which have generic
                                              parallels, disposable and implant materials for ophthalmology and
                                              neurosurgery, cardio electro-stimulators, laparoscopy instruments
                                              and disposable material for electro surgery, disposal materials for
                                              endoscopy and endoscopy apparatus, materials, equipment and
                                              instruments for infusions, biopsies, injections, administration of
                                              cytostatic
3.       Rijeka Clinical Hospital Center      Laboratory diagnostics, microbiology, contrast dyes, equipment
                                              for implanting and testing cardio electro-stimulators,

15
  The Decision for compulsory implementation of joint procurement through the central bodies for public
procurement/public institutions whose founder is the Republic of Croatia, for conclusion of framework agreements
for specific subjects of procurement (public procurement categories) is referred to throughout the report as “the
Decision?

                                                        22
                                            disposable materials for medically assisted procreation, bags and
                                            filters for blood
4.      Split Clinical Hospital Center      Food products, materials for existing ECG monitors and
                                            defibrillators and other equipment for monitoring cardio function,
                                            glass, plastic, metal and wooden medical disposal materials,
                                            disposal surgical materials.
5.      Dubrava Clinical Hospital           implant and disposable materials for cardio-surgery, implant and
        Center                              disposable materials for vascular surgery, implant and disposable
                                            materials for plastic surgery, implant and disposable materials for
                                            gastroenterology, disposable materials for anesthesiology,
                                            disposable materials for, sterilization, disposable materials for
                                            transfusiology, disposable materials for hemodialysis, disposable
                                            materials for dentistry, disposable materials for extra-corporal
                                            circulation
6.      Mercur Clinical Hospital            Medical gases
7.      Sisters of Mercy Clinical           Implant and disposable materials for intervention radiology and
        Hospital Center                     intervention cardiology, disposable materials for nuclear
                                            medicine, other medical disposable materials (bandages, needles,
                                            injections, plaster, infusion systems, gloves, catheters, drains)
8.      Dr. Fran Mihaljevic Clinic for      Fuel, disposable sanitary materials
        Infectious Diseases
9.      Lovran Orthopedic Hospital          Implant and disposable materials for orthopedics and trauma
                                            surgery, apparatus for fractures, screws, fixation plates, systems
                                            for implanting plates and screws
10       National Health Insurance          Mail, electricity, telephones (landlines and mobile), internet,
        Institute                           office materials (including toners and ink)
11.     Osijek Clinical Hospital Center     Mali, laboratory diagnostics and microbiology*

* This hospital was assigned initially through the Decision of the Minister of Health dated May 31, 2012
to carry out joint procurement for the referenced procurement categories, however, due to not very
successful implementation it was removed from the list through the Decision dated March 4, 2013.

As part of the joint procurement and its initiation in May 2012, 45 tenders have been launched with an
estimated value of HRK 2,300,000.00 including VAT. As of September 2013, 32 framework agreements
were concluded at the actual value of HRK 1,646,223,443.73 including VAT. The savings achieved based
on the current status was about 27% which is seen as a considerable achievement. Additional data can be
found in the full FSA report.

Procurement planning. The hospitals which are obliged to apply the Decision, sign an Agreement which
authorizes the central body for public procurement to implement the joint public procurement and to
conclude framework agreements. The framework agreements are concluded with one supplier for a
period of two years. The Head of each public institution authorized to conduct joint procurement as the
central body for public procurement, appoints authorized representatives to prepare tender documents,
including technical specifications. The list with the names of the authorized representatives is sent to the
Ministry of Health and is published on its website. Budget resources are made available by each
institution and are included in their financial plan for the year. The central bodies for public procurement
are obliged to collect data with regard to the needs of each hospital, to draw technical specifications, to
make consultations with the relevant institutions. Each hospital, signatory to the Agreement, has to
provide to the central procurement body, authorized to implement joint procurement for a specific
procurement category, information with regard to the items, manufacturer, quantities used, unit prices and

                                                    23
financial resources spent in the last three years, i.e. 2009, 2010, 2011. In addition, hospitals/public
institutions for which the joint procurement is conducted have to provide information on their future
needs for a period of two years. The central procurement body draws up a “Table of Needs? covering two
years. It should be submitted to the Ministry of health for approval. The procurement planning is based on
the above referenced information.

Preparation of tender documents and technical specifications. Hospitals have their own systems to
monitor their usage of goods and materials. While each hospital operates an inventory monitoring
system, this system is not connected to the hospital’s general ledger or accounting system. The persons
involved in the preparation of the specifications are medical doctors and other various experts, depending
on the material(s) to be tendered. It is required by the Decision that the technical specifications for each
procurement article is drawn in a way that would allow the products of at least three different
manufacturers to participate and compete. The preparation of technical specifications and the tender
documents is a lengthy process and often takes several months to accumulate basic information, as it
involves numerous consultations with the public institutions for which the joint procurement is
conducted, with the business community, and a consultative group comprising various ministries and
institutions. In addition to the time allowed for review and consultations, the initial collection of
information on the needs of each institution and the definition of the items needed takes a long time.

There are no common standards for defining the procurement categories and in many cases it appears that
different institutions define the same item in a different way. Consolidating and aligning the definitions of
the procurement items is an issue, and provokes numerous complaints by potential tenderers, as well as in
a couple of cases it required cancellation of the tendering procedure and revision of the technical
specifications and tender documents. This issue is relevant in procurement of food products, textile items,
various consumables and even generic medicines.

The MOH publishes the first draft of the technical specifications with the tender documents on its website
for comments, allowing for free access to this information to any party concerned, including prospective
tenderers, citizens, other interested institution etc. The time for discussion and comments is three weeks to
a month. All comments received are delivered to the relevant central body responsible for the specific
joint procurement. After all comments are addressed the final document is presented for review and
approval by a commission, set up by the Ministry of Health. The commission comprises various
institutions, including Ministry of Interior, Central Procurement Office, Agency for Protection of Market
Competition, Ministry of Regional Development, the State Commission for Supervision of Public
Procurement Procedures. Within 5 days after the approval of the tender documents by the Ministry of
Health, the tender procedure is launched.

Procurement process, procedures, opening, evaluation and award. The commonly used procurement
procedures for the purpose of the joint procurement are the open tendering procedure as defined in the
PPA. In exceptional circumstances and with justification in accordance with the PPA, the negotiated
procedure with prior publication is applied. As noted before, there are no standard bidding documents
and each hospital, responsible for the joint procurement drafts its own bidding documents in accordance
with the requirements defined in the Regulation on the methodology for drafting and handling tender
documents and tenders. The bidding documents, including the technical specification and the
procurement notice are published/uploaded on the Narodne Novine platform. They could be downloaded
free of charge by interested tenderers. Although the tender documents are published electronically, the
bids are submitted on paper. The time for preparation of bids is between 40 and 110 days, depending very
much on the value, nature, complexity of the contract and the complaints received.

The bidding documents define the terms and conditions of the respective tender, and they include the
qualification requirements for the bidders, as defined in the PPA, the evaluation criteria, and a contract

                                                     24
form. The tenders are opened publicly and the required information is recorded in minutes in accordance
with the procedure defined the Regulation on the methodology for drawing up and handling tender
documents and tenders. After the bids are reviewed for their technical merits, they are compared by price
and the contract is awarded to the bidder who meets the qualification and technical requirements and
offered the lowest price. In average the evaluation process takes between 60 and 90 days, but it could take
even more, in cases where there are more groups of items included in one tender. Once the decision to
award the contract is finalized (i.e. after the obligatory standstill period), the central body for central
procurement shall conclude a framework agreement for two years.

The framework agreement is sent to the public institutions, and they, immediately after receipt of the
framework agreement, conclude individual contracts for the specific procurement categories relevant for
them. The public institutions are obliged to submit to the Ministry of Health information on the individual
contracts concluded, including information on savings achieved on an annual basis (through analyzing
and comparing against the results of the previous year). In case when any of the institutions has
previously signed a contract for a specific procurement category for a lower unit price, than the one in the
framework agreement, the institution is obliged to report to the Ministry of Health and keep the specific
arrangement.

There is no standard form of the framework agreement and the contract; however, the PPA and the
Regulation on the methodology for drawing up and handling tender documents and tenders provide very
clear instructions on the mandatory information which should be included. In addition, the Ministry of
Health instructed that the supplier should submit a performance guarantee for the framework agreement
which is usually up to 5% of value and an advance payment and performance guarantee for each contracts
to be concluded with the relevant hospitals.



For the MOH and Centralized Procurement (health sector) budget resources are planned in accordance
with the national budget framework and policies. Budget resources are made available to the MOH
which is responsible to manage its expenditures in accordance with the limits and ceilings imposed by the
MOF. While only the MOF and Treasury are operating within the government’s central SAP system, the
MOH operates its own budget management system, which is connected through an interface to the
Treasury and FINA. It is through this interface that the MOH is able to issue payment orders which are
then executed (as long as there is budget availability within the ceiling) by FINA. There are no separate
bank accounts for the MOH as it falls under the Single Treasury Account of the government.

The HZZO receives its budget through MOH. The budget for HZZO is generated through (tax)
collections on insurance premia and is allocated to reimburse hospitals for medical services provided as
defined under the health sector’s DRG system (about 89%), to support allowances as defined by law for
sick and health-related administrative leave (about 8-9%) and to support the HZZO’s administrative
functions (less than 2%) .

Each hospital has its own independent treasury management and specific funds flow. Each hospital has
its own transaction account opened in a commercial bank. Majority of hospitals revenue is generated
from a contract relationship with HZZO. Other hospital’s revenue is generated from either of the
following: property lease, apartment accommodation of patients who pay directly to the hospital etc.
Additionally, budget resources are transferred to hospitals for the implementation and execution of
centralized procurement. Only the select hospitals which have been identified and included in the
Decision of the Minister of Health (see previous section) are eligible to receive these budget transfers.



                                                    25
The hospitals invoice their services to HZZO two times a month. The invoices are sent in a digitalized
form Also HZZO assigns monthly limits for all hospitals and reimburses the invoiced services on a
monthly basis. Usually, if the hospitals invoice to HZZO amounts above the monthly limits, such excess
amounts are not being reimbursed by the HZZO. Until 2010 hospitals management boards used to write
off the excess receivables towards HZZO or account for it off balance sheet, after 2010 no write offs are
made any more but the receivables towards HZZO are significant (example of Dubrava hospital: 2010,
2011 and 2012 HRK 86 million) – that in turn results in a very bad financial position of the hospitals and
also in accumulating arrears in the hospitals (extending the payment to their own suppliers because of
liquidity issues). After the last hospital financial rehabilitation, HZZO has introduced changes in DRG
pricing after which all prices for all types of services provided by the hospitals have been decreased by
almost 30%. What is currently happening is that with occupancy rate of close to 100% hospitals will not
be able to reach their monthly limits and will collect even less funds from HZZO. This in turn could result
with increased arrears in hospitals (reported by several hospitals visited).

The team has observed that in almost all hospitals liabilities (payables to private sector suppliers, vendors
and contractors) are not being settled in timely manner. Liabilities should be paid in due time, i.e. in
compliance with the relevant legislation (Law on liabilities payment dates Official Gazette 125/11). The
legislation has determined that all contracted liabilities should be paid within 30 days from the receipt of
an invoice or similar payment request document if nothing was specified in the contract. Otherwise the
parties may contract up to 60 days payment deadline, or even longer deadline. The liabilities due dates
cannot be longer than 60 days (Article 3, line 2, OG 125/11). Almost all hospitals visited are not
respecting the payment deadlines specified in the contracts with their suppliers. Therefore they are
constantly running a risk of being charged penalty interest or even cancellation of the contract.

The total revenue of the HZZO compromises revenue from the state budget, revenue according to special
regulations (Complementary Health Insurance, Additional health insurance and Private Health Insurance),
revenue from financial assets (positive exchange rate differences), revenue from services rendered
(leases), and income from other financial assets and liabilities.



Republic of Croatia, as a full EU member is part of Public Internal Financial Control (PIFC) agenda. It
has established Central Harmonisation Unit in-charge for PIFC coordination, well established Laws and
regulation in this area (Financial management and control as well as Internal Audit). Internal controls are
well established in MOH and hospitals. There are clear written procedures for authorisations, segregation
of duties, reconciliations etc. covering expenditure and financial management as well as procurement
responsibilities.

The Law on Internal Audit for Public Sector 16(19 December 2006) determines how internal audit units
should be established, the requirements to be met by the internal auditors, obligations of the head of the
internal audit department or group, and the independence of both the internal audit department and the
head of internal audit. The law further defines the standards of internal audit (and defines compliance
with the standards) and provides the regulatory framework for the planning and execution of internal
audits, particularly for projects financed under EU programs (structural funds).

Internal audit in MOH is more advanced. The MOH’s internal audit department comprises of 4 staff – 2
are certified internal auditors while the other 2 area in the process obtaining the professional certification.
The internal audit department conducts regular audits which review IPA funding (provided by the EU),
among other areas of audit coverage. The internal audit department prepares a regular audit plan – 5

16
     http://www.mfin.hr/adminmax/docs/Zakon%20o%20sustavu%20unutarnjih%20financijskih%20kontrola.pdf

                                                                 26
audits were planned for 2012 and 5 had been carried out to completion and were found to have complied
with internal audit standards.

By contrast, internal audit in hospitals is still at a very embryonic stage. Larger, more developed hospitals
have already established internal audit departments with staff assigned to perform this job, while other
hospitals are in the phase of establishing internal audit department. As per the new Internal Audit
Rulebook for public sector users (Official Gazette as of 15 July 2013) each hospital will have to have an
internal audit department if it employees over 50 employees and if its annual expenses and/or expenditure
exceed HRK 80 million. As per the IA rulebook, Ministries are obliged to have an internal audit
department and the MOH complies with this requirement17.

The HZZO’s Service for Control Directorate is responsible for the supervision and control over the
execution of contractual obligations of healthcare institutions and of health professionals (including those
in private practice) and who provide health and health related services (e.g., procurement and distribution
of medicines, orthopedic and other aids (hereinafter: the contractual entities). This unit executes its
supervisory responsibilities in accordance with national laws and bylaws, international contracts on social
insurance, general and individual enactments, and, following the performance of supervision, and in case
of ascertaining illegal and incorrect actions and failures to comply with contractual obligations, the
issuance of some of the contracted measures.

The method of performing supervision and controls within the contractual entities of the Institute, as well
as in organizational Offices of the Institute, is regulated and is being executed in compliance with the
provisions of the Rulebook on Authorities and Method of Operations of Inspectors in the Croatian Health
Insurance Institute (“Official Gazette?, issues No: 59/09 and 48/11; hereinafter: the Rulebook) as well as
Articles 15 and 14a of the Rulebook on Authorities and Method of Operations of Authorized Doctors of
Medicine and Commissions of Physicians of the Croatian Health Insurance Institute (“Official Gazette?,
issues No: 113/09, 126/09, 4/10, 88/10, 1/11,50/11, and 88/11).

The inspectors (based in the regional offices of the Health Insurance Institute) regularly review and
exercise a control function over billing invoices and regular monthly reports on hospital operations.
Special attention is paid to the review those hospitals (and clinics) which report significant discrepancies
in the performance of contractual obligations including reports on rates of sick leave (doctors), the index
of expenditure of the funds intended for prescription medicines, rats for reimbursement of healthcare
services provided for primary care, and reports on invoices when inpatient treatment of an insured person
conflicts (or overlaps) with the period when other patient services were provided to the same patient.
Detailed tables of supervision data can be found in the full FSA (Annex 4, tables 1-5) which demonstrate
the coverage of directorate and specifically respond to concerns over billing, citizen complaints
(regarding services), and other issues including hospital procurement of specific medical devices.



The State Audit Office (SAO) is in-charge of the financial and performance audit in Croatia public sector.
The MOH is audited annually by the SAO. However hospitals, clinics and other health institutions are
audited on a more irregular basis. As result some hospitals are audited annually while others are audited
every 4 years, depending on the situation in a certain hospital.

Croatia’s State Audit Office (the Supreme Audit Institution) is considered strong. The State Audit
Office’s (SAO) external audit report of Government is publicly available, and external audits meet the
requirements of International Organization of Supreme Auditing Institutions (INTOSAI) auditing

17
     http://www.mfin.hr/adminmax/docs/Pravilnik%20o%20unutarnjoj%20reviziji%20korisnika%20proracuna.pdf

                                                                  27
standards. The SAO has in place a long-term development strategy formally adopting INTOSAI and
developing more modern audit tools and practices. However despite these strengths, the performance of
the SAO can be further improved. The SAO should improve the timeliness of the Audit Report by
publishing public audits six months after the end of the fiscal year, and publishing reports listing actions
taken by the executive to address audit recommendations.

The Croatian SAO has issued qualified-exception opinion on the Ministry of Health financial statements
for the year ended 31 December 2011, which included benefit programs executed by the new Ministry of
Social Protection and Youth. Similarly the HZZO has received a qualified-exception opinion on its 2011
financial statements. Furthermore, the SAO has conducted audit of 30 health institutions (hospitals,
clinics, for the FY 2011. The SAO has issued 2 unmodified audit opinions (Karlovac, and Pozega), while
the remaining 28 hospitals received qualified audit opinions.

For the Program, the financial audit of the MOH carried out annually by the SAO will include the audit of
the administrative budget of the MOH. The separate annual financial audit of the HZZO will include the
financing (reimbursement) to hospitals. The scope of the financial audit of HZZO includes the SAO’s
review of the work and findings of the HZZO’s Service for Control Directorate, which foc uses its control
work on hospitals as previously noted. These two separate audit reports, which will be submitted to the
Bank within 12 months of the close of the Program’s financial year, will meet the Program audit
requirements under OP 9.00.



         DESCRIPTION                            BASELINE
Budget Variance
HZZO Service for Control
Directorate has:

(A) conducted regular
inspections of hospitals under the
Program
(B) conducted specialized
reviews based on risk
assessments or significant
complaints regarding health
services provided
Internal Audit units functioning
in large hospitals (increase in
coverage by 20% each year over
5 years of the Program)
Improving the quality and
timeliness of financial statements
of MOH (should be prepared
within 90 days of the end of the
fiscal year)
Audited financial statements of
the Program received within 12
months of the end of the previous
fiscal year
Number of External Audit

                                                    28
recommendations that have been
implemented for:
(A) MOH
(B) HZZO


        GOVERNANCE

Within the context of this health program, there are a few institutions and specific functions which are
directly related to combating fraud and corruption, and which have been found to be in full compliance
with the expectations as set forth in the acquis.      As such, this operation will rely on national
institutions and public bodies responsible for combating fraud and corruption – i.e., the
government will use its own systems for responding to concerns (from citizens, contractors, etc.)
related to governance.

Within the health sector, the key governance (including corruption) concerns include the (i) value of
goods procured – both through the central procurement body (central tendering) and through the health
sector system for centralized procurement (including both medical and non-medical goods); (ii) the
systemic cases of abuse of sick leave (authorizing more leave for insured patients than was justified); (iii)
inaccurate billing (incorrect or over-billing) for health services rendered and which qualify for
reimbursements from the Health Insurance Institute.

A fourth area of concern, but which is outside the scope of this operation and practical mitigation
measures, relates to dramatic reduction or cuts in rates of reimbursement from central government (the
MOF through the MOH through the Health Insurance Institute) to hospitals for health services rendered.
While these cuts have been administered in the context of a series of measures to implemented a more
austere short- and medium-term fiscal framework (in response to the growing budget deficit), the impact
has had detrimental effects at the level of hospitals. Operational plans which in many cases (observed)
were carefully crafted in a medium term context have been discarded as clinics and hospitals which had
enjoyed past budget surpluses are now running deficits and accumulating significant arrears.

The following, in particular, are the key aspects of governance and anti-corruption which have been
reviewed in the context of this operation:

           Program Expenditure Area                 Governance-related Function/Institutions
Centralized Procurement                        (i) the public procurement law and functions of the
                                               central procurement body
                                               (ii) the complaints handling mechanism for public
                                               procurement
                                               (iv) the Croatian Anti-Corruption body
MOH Administrative Budget                      (iii) the system of internal control and the function
                                               of internal audit – PIFC (Public Internal Financial
                                               Control, Chapter 32 of the acquis)
                                               (v) the transparency inherent in statutory
                                               government (budgetary) reporting requirements
                                               (vi) the Fiscal Responsibility Act
                                               (vii) the external audit and oversight function
                                               (Chapter 32 of the acquis),
Hospital Financing (reimbursement) through the (v) the transparency inherent in statutory
Croatian Institute for Health Insurance        government (budgetary) reporting requirements


                                                     29
                                                       (vii) the external audit and oversight function
                                                       (Chapter 32 of the acquis),
                                                       (viii) the Service for Control Directorate of the
                                                       Health Insurance Fund.

The three main areas identified as relevant for the assessment include:

           Transparency, integrity and accountability in selection of the activities included in the
            Program;
           Systems capacity to handle risks of fraud and corruption throughout implementation of the
            Program activities;
           Integrity issues within the Croatian health sector supported through the Program.

Transparency, integrity and accountability in selection of the Program’s activities
The first step in assuring transparency, integrity and accountability in selection of the activities included
in the Program was made by focusing Program activities on the strategic problems and priorities
identified in recently adopted National Health Care Strategy 2012–2020, preparation of which included a
wide consultation and a consensus building among all key stakeholders. The current doctors and nurses
strike indicates that implementation of the reforms listed in the Strategy will not pass without strong
oppositions and disagreements when it comes to operational details, however, the general consensus has
been achieved among the key stakeholders regarding the strategic problems and priorities identified in the
Strategy. Consequently, PforR also supports necessary reforms identified and selected through open
democratic process.

Transparency and accountability in selection of the concrete activities supported by the Program will be
secured through consultations and negotiations with the key stakeholders which will happen before
adoption of any of the foreseen Action plans for implementation of the Strategy, including Master plan
for hospitals and others. The current strike again indicates that these processes will have to be wide open
and very thorough in order to get the implementation documents accepted by critical mass of the key
stakeholders.

Consequently, it is fair to conclude that the PforR will support implementation of priority reform
measures and activities of the Croatian Health Care System, which have been and will be identified and
selected through open democratic process.

Systems capacity to handle risks of fraud and corruption throughout the Program implementation
The most solid aggregated indicator of the borrower’s systems capacity to handle risk of fraud and
corruption is the recent Croatian EU membership, as establishment and proven reasonable effectiveness
of all systems relevant for handling of fraud and corruption was one of the key and the most scrutinized
criteria for Croatian EU membership.

More specifically, Croatia has EU harmonized legislation framework and institutional arrangement for
public procurement. The main law regulating the subject of public procurement including the procedures
for submission and processing of complaints is Public Procurement Act (Official Gazette 90/2011,
83/2013) that enters into force on January 1, 2012.

As stipulated by the Act on the State Commission for Supervision over Public Procurement Procedure
(Official Gazette 18/2013), the central body responsible for handling of all complaints on the public
procurement in Croatia is the State Commission for Supervision over Public Procurement Procedure. The
State Commission standard procedures are in line with the highest standards of transparency and


                                                     30
accountability, all their decisions being publicly available on their web portal (www.dkom.hr), with
content available both in Croatian and English languages.

The State Commission has five members, one of whom acts as the Head, and one as Deputy Head. They
are appointed by Croatian Parliament on the proposal of the Croatian Government. Three members of
State Commission, one of which has to be Head or Deputy Head, constitute a quorum necessary for
decision-making. Decisions of the State Commission are passed by a majority vote at the council
meetings. No Commission member shall abstain from voting.

The State Commission submits to the Croatian Parliament annual reports on its work (if requested by the
Parliament, reports are submitted for a period shorter than one year). The report includes data and
analyses concerning legal protection in public procurement procedures, granting of concessions and
selection of private partners in public-private partnership projects. The reports has specified content,
including the data on: total number of the appeals received; the number of appeals received by individual
stages of the procedure; the number of cases categorized by various possible outcomes (e.g. dismissed,
rejected, upheld or suspended appeal procedures; approval of continuation of the procedure and /or award
of a public procurement contract; annulled decisions, procedures and actions of the contracting authorities
due to unlawfulness; annulled public procurement contracts); the number of fines levied and the amounts
thereof; average time for adoption of decisions both form the date of receipt of appeal and from the date
of completion of the appeal case documentation; the contracting authorities having five or more appeal
procedures before the State Commission, including the number of legitimate appeals in such appeal
procedures and the total number of implemented appeal procedures related to the concerned contracting
authorities; the most common reasons for lodging appeals; the most common irregularities established by
the State Commission; legal actions against the State Commission’s decisions; the number of submitted
accusatory motions.

According to the Report, in 2011, altogether 1,921 complaints were received (7.61% of the total number
of the public procurement procedures in Croatia in 2011.); out of which 1,888 were solved until 12/31.
Approximately ¼ of complaints were adopted, resulting with annulation of the public procurement
process, while ¼ was rejected and ¼ dismissed. Seven charges were filed at court for violation of the Law
on public procurement. Contracting authorities having five or more appeals included also a number of the
hospital and clinic centers, as they are relatively frequent buyers; however, percentage of the adopted
complaints in their case was below average. The total value of public procurements that were scrutinized
because of the complaints was above 3.5 billion USD. The average time for adoption of decision was 61
days, while average public procurement duration was 63 days.

In line with the Regulation on control over the implementation of the Public Procurement Act (Official
Gazette 10/12), the Ministry of economy is the central governmental body responsibility for control of the
law implementation, meaning that it also has to react (within 8 days period) based on the received
complaints related to some public procurement procedure. If the law violations are confirmed, the
Ministry files charges against responsible parties at court.

The main body within the Croatian criminal justice system in charge of anticorruption is Bureau for
Combating Corruption and Organized Crime (generally known as USKOK) attached to the State Attorney
office, formed in 2001, whose functioning is regulated by Law on Bureau for Combating Corruption and
Organized Crime (Official Gazette 76/09, 116/10, 145/10, 57/11, 136/12). It has a counterpart in the
Criminal Police Directorate (the Police National USKOK), as well as in the judiciary (the Court
Departments for Criminal Cases in the Jurisdiction of USKOK). Already completed and still ongoing
processes against the highest political figures in Croatia (including the former Prime Minister and some
other Ministers) are fair indicators of the system’s capacity, operative effectiveness and independent


                                                    31
functioning. Any potential allegations of fraud and corruption in the Program should be submitted to
USKOK, which will then react by initiating investigative procedure.

The systems handling the risks of fraud and corruption in implementation of the Program are in place and
functioning.

Integrity issues within the Croatian health sector supported through the Program
The National Health Care Strategy itself admits that health sector is very prone to corruption, and that
Croatia is not an exception to it. A long waiting lists and lack of transparency in their creation and
functioning, lack of clinical protocols and care pathways, lack of quality standards, monitoring and
control within the system, all of these create environment which allows corruptive behavior.
Consequently, the Strategy among the priority measures also includes Combating the corruption and non-
formal payments in the health sector.

The ministry has established so called White Phone – a free phone service at which users / patients can
report their complaints on the work of the medical staff within the sector, or any other complaints
regarding their inability to realize their rights on medical services. Through the established service users
are informed about their rights and about the next steps through which they should be able to realize
them. If the complaints cannot be solved immediately, they are recorded and patient is informed in
writing on the solution of the reported problem. Received complaints can also trigger some further
investigative or even corrective action within the system.

In average, around 900 complaints are received monthly, out of which ¼ are complaints related to
unprofessional behavior of the medical staff (long waiting, unkindness, inability to get information); 1/3
are related to issues with the health insurance; 10% are related to waiting lists and e-appointments for
various medical treatments; while the rest are questions related to addresses, working hours, contacts in
various medical institutions. Complaints related to wrong medical treatment are relatively rare.

The service has been criticized by the representative of the Croatian Association for the Promotion of the
Patient’s Rights for being more complaints collecting and recording mechanism than operative in
assisting patients in solving their problems.

More specifically, regarding the expected impacts of the PfR on the integrity within the Croatian health
sector, it is clear that the Program focus on improving systems efficiency (through better management,
structure, organization and control) directly contributes to improving the operating environment which
leaves less space for corruptive behavior.




                                                    32
        INPUTS TO IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN

The Bank’s fiduciary team will regularly review the previously noted baseline indicators. The team will
pay particular focus (i) on the establishment of functioning internal audit units for large hospitals under
the Program, (ii) the level of reimbursement payments from HZZO to hospitals and whether adjustments
to reimbursements have been shared in a timely manner with hospitals and if hospitals have adjusted their
budget and financial plans to account for these adjustments, (iii) the implementation of the regular control
and supervision work plans of the HZZO’s Service for Control Directorate, (vi) the implementation of
significant audit recommendations (issued annually by the SAO) by the MOH and HZZO respectively.

Additionally, the team will support the government in the development of a framework to monitor and
enforce improved expenditure management performance at the level of hospitals. This framework has not
yet been developed but will be a key component to ensuring longer term sustainable public expenditure
management practices once the hospital financial rehabilitation plans have been completed.

Although the experience with the joint procurement until now could be considered as quite positive, there
are areas which need enhancement and further improvement related mainly with the long time for drafting
and preparation of the technical specifications for medical equipment, consumables, materials and
medications for hospitals, the lack of contract administration and monitoring system; further building and
sustaining of capacity for procurement management, development and application of e-procurement, and
drafting a program operational manual.

In addition, the Bank fiduciary team will also work with the Borrower to monitor overall implementation
progress and address areas which need improvement as identified above, as well as it will have a
continued involvement as follows:

       Reviewing implementation progress and achievement of program results, including effectiveness
        and quality of procurement planning, timeliness and cost effectiveness of delivering of goods and
        services to end-users, competitiveness of the procurement processes, extent of the implementing
        agency’s compliance with the applicable rules with regard to use of different procurement
        methods, timeliness and efficiency of contracts’ implementation and payments.
       Providing support for implementation issues and institutional capacity building, as relevant.
       Monitoring the performance of the fiduciary systems and audits, as well as compliance with
        fiduciary provisions of the legal covenants and the program Action Plan.




                                                    33
No.              Subject of Procurement                    Number of Number of Estimated cost Actual cost in HRK Savings in %      Savings in     Bid opening   Framework       Opening/Sign        Re-        Number and nature of
                                                             items    hospitals in HRK without without VAT as per                   amount            date       agreement     date difference   tendering        Complaints
                                                                                     VAT         the Framework                                                  signing date       in days
                                                                                                   Agreement


                                                                                                           Zagreb Clinical Hospital Center
1
      all medication included on the CIHI list which          440        42      219,361,720.59    121,460,940.00   44.63%        97,900,780.59    9/4/2013      9/17/2013           13            None      at the review stage
1.1   have generic parallels
1.2   disposable and implant materials for
                                                              71         25       37,579,532.00     26,422,582.86     30%         11,156,949.14    1/30/2013                                         4       second procedure at the
      -       ophthalmology                                                                                                                                                                                  stage of reviewing
      -       ophthalmology                                                        6,909,600.00      6,710,906.98     3%           198,693.02      6/12/2013
      -       neuro-surgery,                                  106        15       84,570,000.00     68,725,995.36   18.73%        15,844,004.64    9/18/2013     9/30/2013           12            None      at the review stage
      -
1.3   cardio electro-stimulators                                                                                                                                                                             ongoing data collection
      laparoscopy instruments and disposable                                                                                                                                                                 ongoing data collection
1.3   material for electro surgery
      disposal materials for endoscopy and                                                                                                                                                                   ongoing data collection
1.5   endoscopy apparatus
      materials, equipment and instruments for                                                                                                                                                               ongoing data collection
      infusions, biopsies, injections, administration of
1.6   cytostatics
      Total                                                   617        82      348,420,852.59    223,320,425.20   35.90%                                                                           4

                                                                                                           Rijeka Clinical Hospital Center
2
      cleaning and maintenance                                 18        21       19,967,710.00     19,134,502.28   4.17%          833,207.72      2/4/2013                                         7
2.1   textile                                                  24        17       24,359,267.25     20,423,462.64   16.16%        3,935,804.61     7/10/2013                                        13
      regens, tests and supplies for pathology and            144        15       73,082,720.67                                                                                                              at the stage of examination
2.2   cytology                                                                                                                                                                                               and evaluation
                                                              133        23       89,830,111.29                                                                                                              at the stage of examination
2.3   materials for hygiene needs and care                                                                                                                                                                   and evaluation
2.4   laboratory diagnostics
2.5   microbiology
2.6   contrast dyes
      equipment for implanting and testing cardio
27    electro-stimulators
      disposable materials for medically assisted
2.8   procreation
2.9   bags and filters for blood
      Total                                                   319        76      207239809.2        39,557,964.92   20.33%                                                                          20




                                                                                                                     34
3                                                                                             Split Clinical Hospital Center

3.1                                                   238   17   140,998,733.20     117,749,408.22     16.49%                                                    None
       food products
                                                                  60,075,007.45      54,584,086.81     9.14%         5,490,920.64
       meat, meat products, eggs and honey
                                                                   7,044,965.48       5,937,343.48     15.72%        1,107,622.00
       fish and fish products
                                                                   8,800,164.68       7,630,381.00     13.29%        1,169,783.68
       bread products
                                                                  29,436,053.25      26,015,170.88     11.62%        3,420,882.37
       fresh fruit and vegetables
                                                                  25,442,802.19      20,803,541.06     18.23%        4,639,261.13
       various food products
                                                                  11,762,357.50       7,537,301.90     35.92%        4,225,055.60
       fruit and vegetable
                                                                  32,164,698.46      24,678,935.00     23.27%        7,485,763.46
       milk and products
3.2.   materials for existing ECG monitors and
       defibrillators and other equipment for
       monitoring cardio function
3.3    glass, plastic, metal and wooden medical
       disposal materials
3.4    disposal surgical materials
3.5    implant and disposable materials for cardio-
       surgery
       Total                                          238   17   315,724,782.21     264,936,168.35     16.09%
4
                                                                                            Dubrava Clinical Hospital Center

4.1    implant and disposable materials forvascular   61    5    136,246,999.24   Tender ongoing
       surgery
4.2    implant and disposable materials forvascular   49    12    17,487,895.36      15,075,062.67     13.80%        2,412,832.69   4/22/2013                    None
       surgery
4.3    implant and disposable materials forplastic    3     8      6,271,105.00       5,006,417.00      20%          1,264,688.00   1/25/2013   1/21/2013   4    None
       surgery
4.4    implant and disposable materials for           15    14    53,522,903.44      46,137,678.33      14%          7,385,225.11   2/8/2013    4/10/2013   61    4
       gastroenterology
4.5    disposable materials for anesthesiology        327   16   106,452,744.50   Tender ongoing                      #VALUE!

4.6    disposable materials for sterilization         49    11    13,562,058.93       7,651,042.90     43.58%        5,911,016.03   4/24/2013                     3
4.7    disposable materials fortransfusiology         18    12    42,127,406.96      22,837,486.74     45.79%       19,289,920.22                                 3
       disposable materials for gastroenterology                  53,522,903.44      46,137,678.33     13.80%        7,385,225.11   2/8/2013    4/10/2013   61
       disposable materials for transfusion                       42,127,406.96      22,837,486.74     45.79%       19,289,920.22   2/11/2013   4/12/2013   60
4.8    disposable materials for hemodialysis          105   16     6,271,105.00   Tender ongoing                      #VALUE!

4.9    disposable materials for dentistry                                                                                                                               Collecting information on
                                                                                                                                                                        needs is ongoing in order to
                                                                                                                                                                        for defining the subject of
                                                                                                                                                                        procurement
4.10 disposable materials for extra-corporal                                                                                                                            Collecting information on
     circulation                                                                                                                                                        needs is ongoing in order to
                                                                                                                                                                        for defining the subject of
                                                                                                                                                                        procurement
       Total                                          627   94   477,592,528.83     165,682,852.71     65.31%


                                                                                                       35
5                                                                                                             Mercur Clinical Hospital Center
5.1   medical gases                                             1         23     35,500,000.00        30,845,216.70        13.11%                                                            None
6                                                                                                        Sisters of Mercy Clinical Hospital Center
6.1   implant and disposable materials for :
      -intervention cardiology                            18        10          147,276,154.58       134,181,006.24     8.89%         13,095,148.34       1/31/2013        5/21/2013   110    3
      - intervention radiology                            30        10           88,446,033.90        81,477,609.59     7.88%          6,968,424.31       1/28/2013        7/17/2013   170    15
      -intervention neurology                             9         3            31,649,596.50        30,084,943.50     4.94%          1,564,653.00       2/8/2013         6/7/2013    119    2
      disposable materials for nuclear medicine           30        10           84,813,543.42        65,658,833.34     22.58%        19,154,710.08                        9/6/2013           36
6.2   other medical disposable materials:
      -       bandages                                                                                                                                                                              gathering tenders
      -       needles                                     11        25           6,061,793.08           3,908,660.45    35.52%         2,153,132.63                                           3     standstill period
      -       injections                                                                                                                                                                            gathering tenders
      -       plaster                                      5         22          29,286,945.98        26,317,321.60     10.14%         2,969,624.38       1/23/2013        3/28/2013   64    None
      -       infusion systems                             2         23          17,759,183.86        16,494,495.86     7.12%          1,264,688.00                                          None
      -        gloves                                      9         25          36,905,662.00        27,552,792.57     25.34%         9,352,869.43                                           2     standstill period
      -       catheters                                    4         23          12,216,833.52         6,680,402.53     45.32%         5,536,430.99                                           1
      -       drains                                       7         21          22,497,733.83        10,863,359.48     51.71%        11,634,374.35                                           3     standstill period
      Total                                               125       172         476,913,480.67       403,219,425.16     15.45%                                                                65
7
                                                                                                     Dr. Fran Mihaljevic Clinic for Infectious Deseases

7.1   fuel                                                          15          177,500,000.00       103,018,087.50     41.96%        74,481,912.50                                          None
7.2   disposable sanitary materials
      implant and disposable materials for orthopedics
      and trauma surgery
      Total                                                         15           177,500,000.00      103,018,087.50     41.96%
8
                                                                                                                Lovran Orthopedic Hospital

8.1   implant and disposable materials for orthopedics                                                                                                                                              Data not collected
      and trauma surgery
8.2   apparatus for fractures, screws, fixation plates,                                                                                                                                             Data not collected
      systems for implanting plates and screws

      Total
9
                                                                                                            Croatian Health Insurance Institutre

9.1   mail
9.2   electricity                                                   28           198,105,032.59      127,874,378.69     35.45%        70,230,653.90                        3/1/2013          None
9.2   telephones (landlines, mobile, internet)                      21            34,020,197.18       33,800,219.18     0.65%          219,978.00                          2/4/2013          None
9.4   office materials (including toners and ink) group             21            70,624,996.00       42,913,256.00     39.24%        27,711,740.00                        3/1/2013          None
      A&C
      Total                                                         70           302,750,225.77      204,587,853.87     32.42%
10
                                                                               Osijek Clinical Hospital Center *removed from the list of central bodies for public procurement




                                                                                                                         36
PI-1: Aggregate Expenditure Out-turn Compared to Original Approved Budget

This indicator assesses the difference between the actual and the originally budgeted primary expenditure
for the MOH as well as for the selected sample of hospitals, for the last three fiscal years (2010-2012). No
amounts were excluded from the relevant calculations, as all are considered to be under government’s
control (i.e. externally funded projects). The closer the out-turn to the original budget, the higher the
rating. It is important to note that the Ministry of Health and Social Protection chased its existence on 21
December 2011, and it has been divided into Ministry of Health and Ministry of Social Protection from
that date onwards. Therefore the budget for 2012 is approximately only half of the budget for 2010 and
2011 respectively since it considers only one Ministry, namely the Ministry of Health.

The overall rating for PI-1 is C meaning that the actual expenditure deviated from budgeted expenditure
by more than an amount equivalent to 15% of budgeted expenditure. This was mainly to the improperly
budgeted merger as explained in footnote number 5, and over-budgeted expenses in Rijeka Clinical
Hospital Centre (-18%). Otherwise the expenses are being properly budgeted in the MOH and in other
hospitals which were subject to the team’s assessment.




                                                    37
Table 1: Percentage difference between expenditure Out-turn and Budget
                                                                   Original
                                                                                    Actual out-
Year/Hospital                                                     budget in                              % Diff.
                                                                                  turn in HRK
                                                                     HRK
Ministry of Health - Administrative Budget
                                       2010                 1,287,655,364         1,135,483,911         -11.82%
                                       2011                 1,213,572,278         1,111,428,260          -8.42%
                                      201218                  613,434,495           577,092,924          -5.92%
Dimension rating: B

Sisters of Mercy Clinical Hospital Centre
                                        2010                  546,283,918         739,408,13019          35.35%
                                        2011                  933,916,882          960,884,116            2.89%
                                        2012                  949,787,633         898,005,09820          -5.45%
Dimension rating: D

Dubrava Clinical Hospital
                                                  2010        481,370,000           481,555,547            0.04%
                                                  2011        474,654,000           483,395,799               2%
                                                  2012        578,850,113           504,689,550             -13%
Dimension rating: C

Dr. Fran Mihaljevic Clinic for Infectious
Diseases
                                        2010                  174,508,026           189,535,259                9%
                                        2011                  197,033,000           191,176,236               -3%
                                        2012                  181,085,500           186,064,225                3%
Dimension rating: A

Rijeka Clinical Hospital Centre
                                                  2010        861,880,921           762,294,059             -12%
                                                  2011        882,456,214           763,707,026             -13%
                                                  2012        938,621,961           765,096,991             -18%
Dimension rating: D

Lovran Orthopedic Clinic
                                                  2010          66,562,000            60,959,972              -8%
                                                  2011          59,253,000            61,150,230               3%
                                                  2012          61,787,100            59,852,985              -3%
Dimension rating: B




18
   Ministry of Health and Social Protection chased its existence on 21 December 2011, and it has been divided into Ministry of Health and
Ministry of Social Protection.
19 On 21 July 2012 The Clinic Sisters of Mercy merged with 3 other clinics (Cancer clinic Zagreb, Children’s diseases clinic Zag reb and Trauma
clinic Zagreb)
20
   On 2 May 2012 Children’s diseases clinic Zagreb demerged from the group of 4 hospitals

                                                                     38
                PI-2: Composition of Expenditure Out-turn Compared to Original Approved Budget
                The purpose of this PI is to assess the extent to which the composition of budget changes from that originally planned by the MOH as well as for
                the selected sample of hospitals. The PEFA Secretariat has set out a formula for calculating the variance between the out-turn and the approved
                budget. The original provision on each main budget head is adjusted by the overall percentage difference between budget and out-turn as measured
                by PI-1, and the differences between these adjusted figures and the actual out-turns on each line are then summed. This measure of total variance
                is then represented as a percentage of the total expenditure out-turn.
                The second dimension of the PI looks at the amount of expenditure charged to the Contingency Reserve; the larger the amount charged to the
                reserve rather than reallocated to specific budget lines, the less transparent the budget, and the lower the rating. However this dimension has not
                been assessed due to the fact that we are assessing the MOH and hospitals individually and the budget reserve is available on the level of the entire
                budget of the Republic of Croatia.

                Overall rating for PI-2 Dimension i) is A - it means that Variance in expenditure composition exceeded 5 % in no more than one of the last
                three years. Dimension ii) for PI-2 was not assessed as it is not considered relevant.

Year/Hospital                                                    2010                                                                 2011                                2012
                                                                                                                                                                    Actual out-
                               Actual out-     Adjusted                    Absolute      %       Actual out-        Adjusted                    Absolute      %                     Adjusted                   Absolute      %
                                                             Deviation                                                            Deviation                             turn in                   Deviation
                             turn in HRK        budget                     deviation   Diff.   turn in HRK           budget                     deviation   Diff.                    budget                    deviation   Diff.
                                                                                                                                                                          HRK
Ministry of Health - total
budget
Salaries                       64,716,964     66,670,200    (1,953,236)    1,953,236    3%       64,390,152      64,774,480       (384,328)      384,328     1%      53,872,762    54,300,124   (427,362)       427,362     1%
Other employee expenses         2,015,107      2,157,000      (141,893)      141,893    7%        2,310,276       2,381,610        (71,334)       71,334     3%       1,258,423     1,267,038        (8,615)      8,615     1%
Contributions on salaries      11,156,261     11,295,000      (138,739)      138,739    1%       11,035,745      11,137,440       (101,695)      101,695     1%       8,671,838     8,755,116      (83,278)      83,278     1%
Reimbursable to
                               11,415,251     12,702,646    (1,287,395)    1,287,395   10%       11,511,781      15,955,420      (4,443,639)    4,443,639   28%       8,553,594    11,365,095   (2,811,501)    2,811,501   25%
employees
Material and Energy             4,844,774      4,889,800       (45,026)       45,026    1%        5,275,005       5,346,700         (71,695)       71,695    1%       4,790,688     5,676,700     (886,012)      886,012   16%
Services                       58,894,260     66,011,195    (7,116,935)    7,116,935   11%       53,888,383      64,888,168     (10,999,785)   10,999,785   17%      62,212,418    71,199,852   (8,987,434)    8,987,434   13%
Other expenses                 15,256,830     16,135,213      (878,383)      878,383    5%       12,355,424      13,453,500      (1,098,076)    1,098,076    8%       9,836,881    11,315,840   (1,478,959)    1,478,959   13%
Other financial expenses        4,858,782      5,159,073      (300,291)      300,291    6%        5,402,361       5,767,550        (365,189)      365,189    6%         142,364       722,200     (579,836)      579,836   80%
Aid to foreign
                                4,792,080      4,800,000        (7,920)        7,920    0%        5,459,238         5,529,092       (69,854)      69,854     1%       4,132,290     4,300,000     (167,710)     167,710     4%
governments
Aid within country            134,417,636    135,613,021    (1,195,385)    1,195,385    1%      105,797,715     103,380,547       2,417,168     2,417,168    2%      25,332,370    27,115,856   (1,783,486)    1,783,486    7%
Reimbursable to citizens
and households based on        23,766,561     23,978,336     (211,775)      211,775     1%       26,526,030      27,012,700       (486,670)      486,670     2%      10,492,378    10,307,810       184,568     184,568     2%
insurance
Reimbursable to citizens
and households from the       600,716,928    610,181,666    (9,464,738)    9,464,738    2%      587,601,156     535,698,690      51,902,466    51,902,466   10%      42,360,347    42,661,400     (301,053)     301,053     1%
budget
Current grants                 16,460,295     16,708,611     (248,316)      248,316     1%       15,279,103         9,237,200     6,041,903     6,041,903   65%      14,593,730    14,486,063       107,667     107,667     1%
Penalties and damage
                                  775,001       775,001               -            -    0%        1,643,025         1,677,850       (34,825)      34,825     2%      13,142,958    20,000,000   (6,857,042)    6,857,042   34%
reimbursable
Intangible property               665,218        933,218      (268,000)      268,000   29%          983,239       1,250,000        (266,761)      266,761   21%         408,298       411,000       (2,702)        2,702    1%
Buildings                      95,645,080    106,581,394   (10,936,314)   10,936,314   10%       57,699,853      78,736,173     (21,036,320)   21,036,320   27%      76,498,229    77,265,589     (767,360)      767,360    1%
Plant and equipment            84,732,507     90,116,549    (5,384,042)    5,384,042    6%      118,976,752     162,748,742     (43,771,990)   43,771,990   27%     193,927,156   200,549,514   (6,622,358)    6,622,358    3%
Transport assets                   96,143        299,000      (202,857)      202,857   68%       25,123,556      19,649,000        5,474,556    5,474,556   28%       4,916,819     4,917,847       (1,028)        1,028    0%


                                                                                                               39
Intangible manufacturing
                                  258,232         421,500      (163,268)      163,268    39%        169,463      25,463,321     (25,293,858)    25,293,858   99%    41,434,932    46,817,451    (5,382,519)    5,382,519   11%
assets
Total expenditure            1,135,483,911   1,175,428,423   (39,944,512)   39,944,512   3%    1,111,428,260   1,154,088,183    (42,659,923)   174,332,109   15%   576,578,476   613,434,495   (36,856,019)   37,440,489   6%
Dimension rating:B
Sisters of Mercy Clinical
Hospital Centre
Gross salaries                321,507,971     340,466,000    (18,958,029)   18,958,029   6%     457,868,688     456,288,534       1,580,154      1,580,154    0%   423,442,466   425,200,000    (1,757,534)    1,757,534   0%
Other employee costs
                                8,486,168      13,681,500     (5,195,332)    5,195,332   38%     15,832,295      11,869,984       3,962,311      3,962,311   33%    10,088,888     7,957,000     2,131,888     2,131,888   27%
(awards, early retirement)
Contribution on salaries      100,176,269     105,514,788     (5,338,519)    5,338,519   5%      78,125,973      77,934,910         191,063       191,063     0%    67,290,254    64,400,000     2,890,254     2,890,254   4%
Employee transport costs
                               14,518,982      15,022,000      (503,018)      503,018    3%      19,214,021      19,242,955         (28,934)       28,934     0%    19,842,333    19,088,000       754,333      754,333    4%
(from/to work)
Other material employee
                                2,029,689       2,430,000      (400,311)      400,311    16%      2,410,807         2,899,362     (488,555)       488,555    17%     2,096,391     1,883,000       213,391      213,391    11%
costs
Capital expenditure            38,582,552      26,130,500     12,452,052    12,452,052   48%     14,279,672      28,699,165     (14,419,493)    14,419,493   50%    18,968,510    14,435,167     4,533,343     4,533,343   31%
Pharmaceuticals               101,913,258      81,677,724     20,235,534    20,235,534   25%    155,532,042     169,926,726     (14,394,684)    14,394,684    8%   136,747,794   131,489,000     5,258,794     5,258,794    4%
Medical material               67,679,303      70,974,268     (3,294,965)    3,294,965    5%    104,863,115     109,759,493      (4,896,378)     4,896,378    4%   100,526,795    99,684,100       842,695       842,695    1%
food                           11,110,211      12,442,120     (1,331,909)    1,331,909   11%     14,469,254      12,736,321        1,732,933     1,732,933   14%    13,681,145    13,532,000       149,145       149,145    1%
Energy                         10,716,864       8,701,632       2,015,232    2,015,232   23%     16,353,656      15,391,477          962,179       962,179    6%    15,973,186    16,887,000     (913,814)       913,814    5%
Current and investment
                               10,936,799      15,259,174     (4,322,375)    4,322,375   28%     17,314,812      13,880,277       3,434,535      3,434,535   25%    18,487,764    16,000,000     2,487,764     2,487,764   16%
maintenance
Blood and blood products        6,881,788       6,158,954        722,834      722,834    12%      8,149,955         6,828,500     1,321,455      1,321,455   19%     9,050,199     6,500,000     2,550,199     2,550,199   39%
Cost of services provided
by other health                 5,178,846       8,348,179     (3,169,333)    3,169,333   38%      6,951,067         6,966,547       (15,480)       15,480     0%     5,242,112     4,100,000     1,142,112     1,142,112   28%
institutions
Other various material          5,529,212       5,426,574         102,638      102,638    2%      7,215,266       4,990,393        2,224,873     2,224,873   45%     9,240,032     8,695,500        544,532      544,532    6%
Postal services                 2,690,183       2,955,698       (265,515)      265,515    9%      3,661,476       3,587,872           73,604        73,604    2%     2,977,409     3,123,000      (145,591)      145,591    5%
Spare parts                     3,191,412       2,785,013         406,399      406,399   15%      3,263,891       3,487,664        (223,773)       223,773    6%     2,641,918     3,022,000      (380,082)      380,082   13%
Office supplies                 2,310,987       3,593,566     (1,282,579)    1,282,579   36%      3,186,290       2,336,527          849,763       849,763   36%     2,497,769     2,250,000        247,769      247,769   11%
Cleaning materials              2,220,566       4,541,210     (2,320,644)    2,320,644   51%      2,938,841       3,091,459        (152,618)       152,618    5%     2,481,465     1,832,000        649,465      649,465   35%
Medical gases                   1,191,480         948,641         242,839      242,839   26%      1,693,172       1,479,150          214,022       214,022   14%     1,633,690     1,670,000       (36,310)       36,310    2%
Financial expenses                621,488         526,000          95,488       95,488   18%        720,035         762,585         (42,550)        42,550    6%     2,181,879     1,233,100        948,779      948,779   77%
Other expenses                 21,553,021      20,258,665       1,294,356    1,294,356    6%     25,326,199      30,567,914      (5,241,715)     5,241,715   17%    26,896,310    29,666,600    (2,770,290)    2,770,290    9%
Other extraordinary
                                  381,081         450,000        (68,919)      68,919    15%      1,513,588         4,738,264    (3,224,676)     3,224,676   68%     6,016,789     3,600,000     2,416,789     2,416,789   67%
expenses
Total expenditure             739,408,130     748,292,206     (8,884,076)    8,884,076   1%     960,884,115     987,466,079     (26,581,964)    26,581,964    3%   898,005,098   876,247,467    21,757,631    21,757,631   2%
Dimensionrating:A
Dubrava Clinical
Hospital
Gross salaries                209,081,607     207,480,000      1,601,607     1,601,607   1%     206,274,765     206,694,168       (419,403)       419,403     0%   214,915,081   215,000,000       (84,919)      84,919    0%
Other employee costs
                                5,225,174       6,300,000     (1,074,826)    1,074,826   17%      7,504,605         7,600,000       (95,395)       95,395     1%     5,320,843     5,300,000        20,843       20,843    0%
(awards, early retirement)
Contribution on salaries       35,291,323      35,078,000        213,323      213,323    1%      35,432,837      35,800,000       (367,163)       367,163     1%    34,049,261    35,000,000     (950,739)      950,739    3%
Employee transport costs
                                7,214,103       7,100,000        114,103      114,103    2%       7,555,521         7,700,000     (144,479)       144,479     2%     8,993,355     9,000,000        (6,645)        6,645   0%
(from/to work)
Other material employee
                                1,220,731       1,060,200        160,531      160,531    15%      1,045,519         1,060,000       (14,481)       14,481     1%      868,189       840,000         28,189       28,189    3%
costs
Capital expenditure            21,143,976      16,722,400       4,421,576    4,421,576   26%     14,727,471      13,877,400         850,071       850,071     6%    18,387,504    18,399,000      (11,496)       11,496    0%
Medical matierial             129,677,688     138,300,000     (8,622,312)    8,622,312    6%    139,583,946     140,000,000       (416,054)       416,054     0%   147,342,521   147,601,768     (259,247)      259,247    0%
Energy                         26,334,229      25,200,000       1,134,229    1,134,229    5%     26,620,216      27,000,000       (379,784)       379,784     1%    30,638,268    31,000,000     (361,732)      361,732    1%
Current and investment
maintenance (material          12,694,908      11,200,000      1,494,908     1,494,908   13%     10,372,870      10,600,000       (227,130)       227,130     2%     9,641,114    10,033,000     (391,886)      391,886    4%
and services)
Postal services                 1,696,359       1,710,000        (13,641)      13,641    1%       1,763,609         1,800,000       (36,391)       36,391     2%     1,744,150     1,800,000       (55,850)      55,850    3%



                                                                                                               40
Spare parts                    1,433,272     1,600,000     (166,728)       166,728     10%       930,822          950,000      (19,178)      19,178     2%       828,863       850,000      (21,137)      21,137     2%
Office supplies                5,126,107     5,200,000       (73,893)        73,893     1%      5,654,268      5,690,000        (35,732)      35,732    1%      5,737,301     5,800,000      (62,699)      62,699    1%
Financial expenses               403,862       209,000        194,862       194,862    93%        366,814        362,097           4,717       4,717    1%        282,515       280,000         2,515       2,515    1%
Other expenses                25,012,208    25,770,600      (758,392)       758,392     3%     25,562,536     26,100,000       (537,464)     537,464    2%     25,940,585    27,263,000   (1,322,415)   1,322,415    5%
Total expenditure            481,555,547   482,930,200    (1,374,653)    20,044,931     4%    483,395,799    485,233,665     (1,837,866)   1,837,866    0%    504,689,550   508,166,768   (3,477,218)   3,477,218    1%
Dimensionrating:A
Dr.Fran Mihaljevic
Clinic for Infectious
Diseases
Gross salaries                67,303,512    67,000,000       303,512       303,512      0%     66,831,558     67,650,000      (818,442)     818,442     1%     65,603,516    67,000,000   (1,396,484)   1,396,484    2%
Other employee costs
                               3,018,811     3,120,000     (101,189)       101,189      3%      3,599,763        2,276,000    1,323,763    1,323,763   58%      2,801,915     2,889,000     (87,085)      87,085     3%
(awards, early retirement)
Contribution on salaries      11,546,295    11,600,000       (53,705)       53,705      0%     11,504,664     11,710,000      (205,336)     205,336     2%     10,466,264    11,600,000   (1,133,736)   1,133,736   10%
Employee transport costs
                               3,110,822     3,205,000       (94,178)       94,178      3%      3,180,876        4,000,000    (819,124)     819,124    20%      3,097,280     3,125,000     (27,720)      27,720     1%
(from/to work)
Capital expenditure            2,950,371     1,437,635     1,512,736      1,512,736   105%      1,289,891      1,000,000         289,891     289,891   29%      4,057,736     1,000,000    3,057,736    3,057,736   306%
Pharmaceuticals               49,048,129    42,340,000     6,708,129      6,708,129    16%     55,443,697     57,097,000     (1,653,303)   1,653,303    3%     54,989,698    52,710,000    2,279,698    2,279,698     4%
Medical matierial             31,307,943    28,336,000     2,971,943      2,971,943    10%     29,008,646     34,520,000     (5,511,354)   5,511,354   16%     23,246,018    22,789,000      457,018      457,018     2%
Food                           1,687,621     2,150,000     (462,379)        462,379    22%      1,672,724      1,700,000        (27,276)      27,276    2%      1,755,967     1,650,000      105,967      105,967     6%
Energy                         4,238,805     2,931,000     1,307,805      1,307,805    45%      4,736,232      4,624,000         112,232     112,232    2%      5,557,701     5,351,500      206,201      206,201     4%
Current and investment
                               4,903,826      212,391      4,691,435      4,691,435   2209%     4,228,235         441,000     3,787,235    3,787,235   859%     4,780,694     1,500,000    3,280,694    3,280,694   219%
maintenance
Blood and blood products               -       31,000        (31,000)       31,000    100%                                             -           -                                                -           -
Cost of sevices provided
by other health                2,640,073     2,540,000       100,073       100,073      4%      2,540,041        2,640,000     (99,959)      99,959     4%      2,736,186     2,870,000    (133,814)     133,814     5%
institutions
Other various material           930,676       880,000          50,676       50,676     6%        762,365          785,000      (22,635)      22,635    3%        637,138       808,000     (170,862)     170,862    21%
Postal services                  634,327       640,000         (5,673)        5,673     1%        670,212          700,000      (29,788)      29,788    4%        596,200       620,000      (23,800)      23,800     4%
Spare parts                       78,939        50,000          28,939       28,939    58%         96,184           50,000        46,184      46,184   92%         86,699        98,000      (11,301)      11,301    12%
Office supplies                  944,510     1,020,000       (75,490)        75,490     7%        964,314          950,000        14,314      14,314    2%        835,512       965,000     (129,488)     129,488    13%
Cleaning materials             1,089,404     1,100,000       (10,596)        10,596     1%      1,079,674        1,100,000      (20,326)      20,326    2%      1,069,775     1,051,000        18,775      18,775     2%
Medical gases                    355,019       245,000        110,019       110,019    45%        310,895          400,000      (89,105)      89,105   22%        269,804       341,000      (71,196)      71,196    21%
Financial expenses                53,153       100,000       (46,847)        46,847    47%         58,043           90,000      (31,957)      31,957   36%         90,371        38,000        52,371      52,371   138%
Other expenses                 3,692,092     5,570,000    (1,877,908)     1,877,908    34%      3,198,222        5,300,000   (2,101,778)   2,101,778   40%      3,354,086     4,680,000   (1,325,914)   1,325,914    28%
Other extraordinary
                                    931                           931          931                                                     -           -                                                -           -
expenses
Total expenditure            189,535,259   174,508,026    15,027,233     15,027,233     9%    191,176,236    197,033,000     (5,856,764)   5,856,764    3%    186,032,560   181,085,500    4,947,060    4,947,060    3%
Dimensionrating:A
Rijeka Clinical Hospital
Centre
Gross salaries               363,008,458   369,977,928    (6,969,470)     6,969,470     2%    366,912,194    366,683,348        228,846     228,846     0%    371,905,186   372,226,650    (321,464)     321,464     0%
Contribution on salaries      61,665,633    62,746,500    (1,080,867)     1,080,867     2%     62,622,917     62,570,784         52,133      52,133     0%     58,838,440    58,948,882    (110,442)     110,442     0%
Employee transport
                              14,276,130    14,199,996        76,134        76,134      1%     14,190,437     14,227,391       (36,954)      36,954     0%     14,066,579    14,065,098        1,481       1,481     0%
costs(from/to work)
Other employee costs          13,046,970    15,468,060    (2,421,090)     2,421,090    16%     15,298,605     15,509,073       (210,468)     210,468    1%     11,949,005    15,643,132   (3,694,127)   3,694,127   24%
Capital expenditure           22,358,392   120,418,920   (98,060,528)    98,060,528    81%     23,756,420     25,076,557     (1,320,137)   1,320,137    5%     21,848,045    22,905,499   (1,057,454)   1,057,454    5%
Pharmaceuticals              100,618,643    88,506,000     12,112,643    12,112,643    14%    102,450,845    104,062,558     (1,611,713)   1,611,713    2%    105,981,138   103,885,973     2,095,165   2,095,165    2%
Medical material              86,926,503    81,144,000      5,782,503     5,782,503     7%     81,198,012     87,593,469     (6,395,457)   6,395,457    7%     76,134,898    79,057,950   (2,923,052)   2,923,052    4%
food                           7,176,019     7,800,000      (623,981)       623,981     8%      7,320,350      7,207,171         113,179     113,179    2%      6,873,084     6,967,658      (94,574)      94,574    1%
Energy                        18,353,596    16,050,000     2,303,596      2,303,596    14%     20,635,068     22,080,808     (1,445,740)   1,445,740    7%     23,326,400    22,191,105    1,135,295    1,135,295    5%
Current and investment
                              13,792,005    10,560,000     3,232,005      3,232,005    31%     13,693,919     12,463,061      1,230,858    1,230,858   10%     15,435,988    14,514,600      921,388     921,388     6%
maintenance
Blood and blood products       6,609,936     3,600,000     3,009,936      3,009,936    84%      7,043,392        6,885,884      157,508     157,508     2%      7,739,824     7,755,068     (15,244)      15,244     0%



                                                                                                            41
Cost of services provided
by other health               12,491,933    13,560,000    (1,068,067)    1,068,067     8%     12,503,403     12,106,864        396,539     396,539    3%     12,644,952    12,191,520      453,432      453,432    4%
institutions
Other various material         5,071,399     5,880,000      (808,601)      808,601     14%     3,130,931      3,896,516       (765,585)     765,585   20%     3,688,594     3,522,057       166,537      166,537   5%
Postal services                2,119,868     2,040,000         79,868       79,868      4%     2,514,711      2,269,019         245,692     245,692   11%     2,584,997     2,594,767        (9,770)       9,770   0%
Spare parts                    1,201,179     1,680,000      (478,821)      478,821     29%     1,740,642      1,688,213          52,429      52,429    3%       948,483       954,293        (5,810)       5,810   1%
Office supplies                2,418,918     2,400,000         18,918       18,918      1%     2,800,936      2,690,012         110,924     110,924    4%     2,680,870     2,631,818         49,052      49,052   2%
Cleaning materials             2,742,522     2,640,000        102,522      102,522      4%     2,639,454      2,677,408        (37,954)      37,954    1%     2,390,400     2,432,377      (41,977)       41,977   2%
Medical gases                  2,188,432     2,100,000         88,432       88,432      4%     2,035,613      2,029,441           6,172       6,172    0%     1,963,542     2,007,703      (44,161)       44,161   2%
Financial expenses             2,672,298       141,996      2,530,302    2,530,302   1782%       250,140        281,652        (31,512)      31,512   11%       693,029       643,736         49,293      49,293   8%
Other expenses                23,555,224    21,303,516      2,251,708    2,251,708     11%    20,969,037     20,167,690         801,347     801,347    4%    23,403,536    25,318,222   (1,914,686)    1,914,686   8%
Total expenditure            762,294,058   842,216,916   (79,922,858)   79,922,858      9%   763,707,026    772,166,919     (8,459,893)   8,459,893    1%   765,096,990   770,458,108   (5,361,118)    5,361,118   1%
Dimensionrating:A
Lovran Orthopedic
Clinic
Gross salaries                27,991,539    27,994,000        (2,461)        2,461     0%     27,181,775     27,190,000         (8,225)      8,225    0%     27,938,759    27,500,000      438,759      438,759    2%
Other employee costs
                                                                 150          150      0%                                        (300)         300    0%                                 (259,250)      259,250    26%
(awards, early retirement)       613,150       613,000                                           984,700          985,000                                       720,750       980,000
Contribution on salaries       4,883,834     4,885,000        (1,166)        1,166     0%      4,663,749        4,670,000       (6,251)      6,251    0%      4,441,477     4,800,000    (358,523)      358,523    7%
Employee transport
                                                               1,052         1,052     0%                                        (211)         211    0%                                 (283,037)      283,037    17%
costs(from/to work)            1,541,052     1,540,000                                         1,459,789        1,460,000                                     1,416,963     1,700,000
Other material employee
                                                              (1,204)        1,204     1%                                       (2,892)      2,892    1%                                   (24,644)      24,644    7%
costs                            161,796       163,000                                           342,108          345,000                                       320,356       345,000
Capital expenditure            3,579,779     3,585,000        (5,221)        5,221     0%      3,645,305        3,650,000       (4,695)      4,695    0%      2,190,443     2,786,900    (596,457)      596,457    21%
Pharmaceuticals                                                     -            -                                                    -          -                                               -            -
Medical material              11,269,258    11,270,000          (742)          742     0%     11,668,154     11,670,000         (1,846)      1,846    0%     11,788,826    11,750,000       38,826       38,826    0%
Food                             618,337       620,000        (1,663)        1,663     0%        638,649        640,000         (1,351)      1,351    0%        672,723       670,000        2,723        2,723    0%
Energy                         1,730,626     1,730,000            626          626     0%      1,679,046      1,680,000           (954)        954    0%      1,829,422     1,940,000    (110,578)      110,578    6%
Current and investment
                                                                 941          941      0%                                       (4,878)      4,878    0%                                   350,709      350,709    11%
maintenance                    2,860,941     2,860,000                                         3,715,122      3,720,000                                       3,463,709     3,113,000
Other various material           714,331       715,000          (669)         669      0%        844,771        845,000          (229)         229    0%        677,785     1,404,000     (726,215)      726,215   52%
Postal services                  196,651       196,000            651         651      0%        196,267        192,000          4,267       4,267    2%        212,762       200,000         12,762      12,762    6%
Spare parts                      435,225       440,000        (4,775)       4,775      1%        753,684        750,000          3,684       3,684    0%        614,660     1,234,000     (619,340)      619,340   50%
Financial expenses                74,479        76,000        (1,521)       1,521      2%         57,675         57,700           (25)          25    0%         54,789        56,000        (1,211)       1,211    2%
Other expenses                 4,308,002     4,286,401         21,601      21,601      1%      3,319,436      3,320,300          (864)         864    0%      3,509,557     3,308,200       201,357      201,357    6%
Total expenditure             60,979,000    60,973,401          5,599       5,599      0%     61,150,230     61,175,000       (24,770)      24,770    0%     59,852,981    61,787,100   (1,934,119)    1,934,119    3%
Dimension rating: A




                                                                                                           42
PI-3: Aggregate Revenue Out-turn Compared to Original Approved Budget
This indicator compares actual total domestic revenue to the originally budgeted domestic revenue
estimates.

Overall rating for PI 3 is D. The overall rating D for this PI is expected, given that the hospitals usually
plan the revenue significantly higher than they actually receive from HZZO.

Table 3: Aggregate Revenue Out-turn Compared to Original Approved Budget

                                                      Original         Actual out-
Year/Hospital                                                                         % Diff.
                                                budget in HRK        turn in HRK
Ministry of Health - total budget
                                        2010                 N/a               N/a        N/a
                                        2011                 N/a               N/a        N/a
                                        2012                 N/a               N/a        N/a
Dimension rating: N/a

Sisters of Mercy Clinical Hospital Centre
                                      2010          546,283,918       763,722,525     39.80%
                                      2011          933,916,882       969,085,688      3.77%
                                      2012          949,787,633       858,292,250     -9.63%
Dimension rating: D

Dubrava Clinical Hospital
                                        2010        534,454,800       482,392,174       -10%
                                        2011        581,468,090       479,727,378       -17%
                                        2012        578,850,113       498,411,451       -14%
Dimension rating: D

Dr. Fran Mihaljevic Clinic for Infectious
Diseases
                                       2010         174,508,026       175,434,104         1%
                                       2011         197,033,000       176,221,197       -11%
                                       2012         181,085,500       181,404,209         0%
Dimension rating: D

Rijeka Clinical Hospital Centre
                                        2010        861,880,921       768,920,043       -11%
                                        2011        882,456,213       769,052,706       -13%
                                        2012        938,621,961       796,780,549       -15%
Dimension rating: D

Lovran Orthopedic Clinic
                                        2010         66,562,000         60,973,401        -8%
                                        2011         59,253,000         61,167,222         3%
                                        2012         61,777,600         59,858,788        -3%
Dimension rating: C




                                                    43
INSURED PERSONS IN REPUBLIC OF CROATIA

                                        2010             2011                   2013

Active employees                    1,493,148        1,485,324              1,471,662
Active agriculture workers             40,647           35,878                 32,205
Retired persons                     1,037,643        1,050,460              1,047,191
Family members                      1,163,716        1,151,770              1,135,747
Others                                612,860          639,163                669,681
TOTAL                               4,348,014        4,362,595              4,356,486


 1,600,000.00

 1,400,000.00                                          Active employees
 1,200,000.00
                                                       Active agriculture
 1,000,000.00                                          workers
   800,000.00                                          Retired persons

   600,000.00
                                                       Family members
   400,000.00

   200,000.00                                          Others

         0.00
                   2010      2011        2012




                                                44
        HEALTH INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS COLLECTED FROM CITIZENS

          Health contributions 15% (13%) and 3%                Contribution for health                            Total
                                                             protection and work 0.50%

            2010              2011             2012         20       2011         2012            2010             2011             2012
                                                            10

JAN       1,361,411,702    1,365,606,998    1,372,570,686   N/a    45,637,713    45,863,829    1,361,411,702    1,411,244,711    1,418,434,515

FEB       1,364,153,888    1,350,821,734    1,372,860,081   N/a    44,083,874    45,009,760    1,364,153,888    1,394,905,608    1,417,869,841

MAR       1,404,862,144    1,394,008,347    1,401,385,057   N/a    44,841,028    46,203,728    1,404,862,144    1,438,849,375    1,447,588,785

APR       1,427,034,281    1,422,770,971    1,422,406,456   N/a    47,211,717    47,519,414    1,427,034,281    1,469,982,688    1,469,925,870

MAY       1,421,048,362    1,415,878,880    1,548,851,798   N/a    46,272,394    50,096,661    1,421,048,362    1,462,151,274    1,598,948,459

JUN       1,408,236,077    1,434,165,171    1,301,763,437   N/a    46,546,603    48,265,706    1,408,236,077    1,480,711,774    1,350,029,143

JUL       1,486,666,762    1,478,296,005    1,335,400,222   N/a    49,280,180    50,471,558    1,486,666,762    1,527,576,185    1,385,871,780

AUG       1,441,524,657    1,434,972,838    1,286,665,264   N/a    46,904,453    48,705,418    1,441,524,657    1,481,877,291    1,335,370,682

SEP       1,454,284,860    1,459,015,236    1,268,434,930   N/a    47,541,432    48,029,543    1,454,284,860    1,506,556,668    1,316,464,473

OCT       1,424,676,179    1,437,710,232    1,261,879,277   N/a    47,671,621    48,026,436    1,424,676,179    1,485,681,853    1,309,905,713

NOV       1,439,824,733    1,430,629,976    1,254,910,783   N/a    46,215,840    47,001,893    1,439,824,733    1,476,845,816    1,301,912,676

DEC       1,551,909,649    1,538,169,280    1,313,517,998   N/a    48,557,398    48,660,326    1,551,909,649    1,586,726,678    1,362,178,324

Total    17,185,633,294   17,162,045,668   16,140,645,989         560,764,253   573,854,272   17,185,633,294   17,722,809,921   16,714,500,261




                                                                    45
                         Table 1 - Regional offices – scope and results of controls implemented at the level of primary health care in 2012
                       Total      Compre
                                               Targeted                                                                 Number of                                                             Number
                     number of     hensive                   Regular     Extraordinary                                                               Most frequent reasons for targeted                   Accept
    Activity                                  supervisio                                       Measure issued           measures    Cash amount                                                  of
                     supervisio   supervisi                supervision    supervision                                                               supervision (number of supervisions)                    ed
                                                  n                                                                      issued                                                              objections
                        ns           on
                                                                                         Regular findings                 2,790                   Overlapping of invoices (1014)
                                                                                         Warning                           248                    Medicinal justification of sick leave
                                                                                         Warning and damage                                       (793)
                                                                                                                          328       123,316.39    High rates of sick leaves (448)
                                                                                         compensation
                                                                                         Warning and cash fine             39        69,540.40    Charging for participation (220)
                                                                                         Warning, damage                                          Prescribing care at home (202)
                                                                                                                           8         36,041.40    Prescribing orthopedic aids (197)
                                                                                         compensation, and cash fine
Family medicine        3417          50         3367          1295           2122        Warning in advance of                                    Prescribing prescription medicines (144)      156        73
                                                                                         termination of the contract       3         13,313.06    Issuing travel orders (99)
                                                                                         and cash fine                                            Complaints from insured persons (63)
                                                                                                                                                  Working on CEZIH (50)
                                                                                         Warning in advance of                                    Index of consumption of prescription
                                                                                         termination of the contract,                             medicines (18)
                                                                                                                           1         14,077.83
                                                                                         damage compensation, and                                 Control over working hours (11)
                                                                                         cash fine                                                Non-purposeful expenditure of funds (5)
                                                                                         Regular findings                  51                     Overlapping of invoices (40)
                                                                                         Warning                            6                     Issuing travel orders (10)
  Healthcare of                                                                                                                                   Prescribing orthopedic aids (7)
   pre-school           70           0           70            35             35                                                                  Complaints from insured persons (6)            6          1
                                                                                         Warning and damage
    children                                                                                                               13        4,907.49     Prescribing prescription medicines (5)
                                                                                         compensation
                                                                                                                                                  Index of consumption of prescription
                                                                                                                                                  medicines (1)
                                                                                         Regular findings                  52                     Overlapping of invoices (26)
                                                                                         Warning                           11                     Complaints from insured persons (17)
  Activities on
                                                                                         Warning and damage                                       Charging for participation (13)
  health care of        69           4           65            28             41                                           4         4,507.11                                                    2          0
                                                                                         compensation                                             Unjustified charging for health care (2)
     women
                                                                                                                                                  Index of consumption of prescription
                                                                                         Warning and cash fine             2         5,962.40     medicines (2)
                                                                                         Regular findings                 182
                                                                                         Warning                          59
                                                                                         Warning and damage
                                                                                                                           20        5,734.79     Participation (92)
                                                                                         compensation
                                                                                                                                                  Keeping medical records (78)
                                                                                         Warning and cash fine             10        19,909.73
                                                                                                                                                  Complaints from insured persons (36)
Activity of dental                                                                       Warning, damage
                        276          23          253          148            128                                           3         12,075.09    Control over working hours (11)               17          5
   health care                                                                           compensation, and cash fine
                                                                                                                                                  Overlapping of invoices (9)
                                                                                         Warning in advance of                                    Unjustified charging for health care (4)
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                         termination of the contract                              Issuing travel orders (3)
                                                                                         Initiation of the procedure
                                                                                         for the termination of the        1
                                                                                         contract

                                                                                                        46
                   Total      Compre
                                           Targeted                  Extraordina                                     Number of                                                            Number
                 number of     hensive                   Regular                                                                                  Most frequent reasons for targeted                  Accept
   Activity                               supervisio                      ry                Measure issued           measures    Cash amount                                                 of
                 supervisio   supervisi                supervision                                                                               supervision (number of supervisions)                   ed
                                              n                      supervision                                      issued                                                             objections
                    ns           on
                                                                                   Regular findings                     13
                                                                                   Warning                               3
                                                                                   Warning and damage                                          Overlapping of invoices (15)
                                                                                                                        3          477.00
Health care at                                                                     compensation                                                Providing contracted health care (2)
                    21           0           21            8             13                                                                                                                  1          0
   home                                                                            Warning and cash fine                1          500.00      Incorrect issuance of invoices (2)
                                                                                   Warning in advance of                                       Complaints from insured persons (1)
                                                                                   termination of the contract and      1         4,743.25
                                                                                   cash fine
                                                                                   Regular findings                     1                      Staff norms (2)
 Pharmacies          3           0            3            0             3                                                                                                                   0          0
                                                                                   Warning                              2                      Control of working hours (1)
                                                                                   Regular findings                     5                      Overlapping of invoices (4)
                                                                                   Warning                              2                      Incorrect issuance of invoices (2)
 Health center       9           0            9            4             5                                                                     Complaints from insured persons               3          0
                                                                                   Warning and damage
                                                                                                                        2         7,562.78     concerning the provision of health care
                                                                                   compensation
                                                                                                                                               in emergency medicine care (1)
                                                                                   Regular findings                     7                      Keeping medical records (2)
Labor medicine       8           5            3            0             8         Warning in advance of                                       Staff norms (1)                               1          0
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                   termination of the contract
 Emergency                                                                         Regular findings                     1                      Ensuring replacements (1)
                     2           0            2            0             2                                                                                                                   0          0
  medicine                                                                         Warning                              1                      Overlapping of invoices (1)




                                                                                                       47
               Table 2 - Regional departments for supervision and control – scope and results of controls implemented at the level of primary
                                                                   health care in 2012

                       Total      Compre
                                               Targeted                  Extraordina                                   Number of                                                            Number
                     number of     hensive                   Regular                                                                                Most frequent reasons for targeted                  Accept
    Activity                                  supervisio                      ry                 Measure issued        measures    Cash amount                                                 of
                     supervisio   supervisi                supervision                                                                             supervision (number of supervisions)                   ed
                                                  n                      supervision                                    issued                                                             objections
                        ns           on
                                                                                       Regular findings                   29                     Participation ()
                                                                                                                                                 Prescribing prescription medicines ()
Family medicine         33           0           33            26            7                                                                                                                 1          0
                                                                                       Warning                            4                      Prescribing orthopedic aids ()
                                                                                                                                                 Complaints from insured persons ()
Activity of health
                         1           0            1            0             1         Regular findings                   1                      Complaints from insured persons ()            0          0
 care for women
                                                                                       Regular findings                   27
                                                                                       Warning                            13
                                                                                                                                                 Participation ()
                                                                                       Warning and damage
                                                                                                                          6         7,116.77     Ensuring replacements (1)
Activity of dental                                                                     compensation
                        48           22          26            36            12                                                                  Issuance of referrals ()                      2          1
   health care                                                                         Warning, damage compensation,
                                                                                                                          1         1,030.00     Complaints from insured persons ()
                                                                                       and cash fine
                                                                                                                                                 Prescribing orthopedic aids ()
                                                                                       Warning in advance of
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                       termination of the contract
                                                                                       Regular findings                   6
                                                                                                                                                 Providing home care (2)
                                                                                       Warning                            5
 Health care at                                                                                                                                  Non-purposeful expenditure of funds (1)
                        14           10           4            10            4         Warning and damage                                                                                      4          0
    home                                                                                                                  1          225.00      Overlapping of invoices (1)
                                                                                       compensation
                                                                                       Warning and cash fine              2         5,691.90
                                                                                       Regular findings                   8
                                                                                       Warning                            7
                                                                                       Warning and damage
                                                                                                                          1           46.87
                                                                                       compensation
                                                                                                                                                 Issuance of replacement medicines (2)
   Pharmacies           21           18           3            17            4         Warning and cash fine              4         28,281.86                                                  1          0
                                                                                                                                                 Staff norms (1)
                                                                                       Warning in advance of
                                                                                       termination of the contract,
                                                                                                                          1         66,693.22
                                                                                       damage compensation, and cash
                                                                                       fine
   Laboratory                                                                          Regular findings                   2                      Complaints from insured persons (2)
                         5           1            4            0             5                                                                                                                 1          0
   diagnostics                                                                         Warning                            3                      Non-purposeful expenditure of funds (2)
   Emergency                                                                           Regular findings                   1
                         2           1            1            1             1                                                                   Complaints from insured persons (1)           0          0
    medicine                                                                           Warning                            1




                                                                                                          48
                   Total      Compre
                                           Targeted                  Extraordina                            Number of                                                            Number
                 number of     hensive                   Regular                                                                         Most frequent reasons for targeted                  Accept
   Activity                               supervisio                      ry               Measure issued   measures    Cash amount                                                 of
                 supervisio   supervisi                supervision                                                                      supervision (number of supervisions)                   ed
                                              n                      supervision                             issued                                                             objections
                    ns           on
                                                                                   Regular findings            2
                                                                                   Warning                     3
                                                                                                                                      Overlapping of invoices (2)
 Health center      10           6            4            8             2         Warning and damage                                                                               1          1
                                                                                                               2          502.42      Non-purposeful expenditure of funds (2)
                                                                                   compensation
                                                                                   Warning and cash fine       3         72,981.20
                                                                                   Regular findings            3
Labor medicine       4           4            0            4             0                                                                                                          0          0
                                                                                   Warning                     1




                                                                                                     49
                  Table 3 - Regional departments for supervision and control – scope and results of controls implemented with suppliers of
                                                             orthopedic and other aids in 2012

                     Total      Compre
                                             Targeted                  Extraordina                            Number of                                                           Number
                   number of     hensive                   Regular                                                                         Most frequent reasons for targeted                 Accept
   Activity                                 supervisio                      ry               Measure issued   measures    Cash amount                                                of
                   supervisio   supervisi                supervision                                                                      supervision (number of supervisions)                  ed
                                                n                      supervision                             issued                                                            objections
                      ns           on
                                                                                     Regular findings            5
 Suppliers of                                                                        Warning                     3                      Complaints from insured persons (3)
                       9           1            8            1             8                                                                                                         0          0
orthopedic aids                                                                      Warning and damage                                 Incorrectly issued invoice (3)
                                                                                                                 1         2,220.00
                                                                                     compensation




                                                                                                      50
                            Table 4 - Regional office – scope and results of supervisions implemented at the level of secondary health care and at
                                                                  the level of health institutes in 2012

                      Total      Compre
                                              Targeted                  Extraordina                             Number of                                                             Number
                    number of     hensive                   Regular                                                                          Most frequent reasons for targeted                   Accept
    Activity                                 supervisio                      ry                Measure issued   measures    Cash amount                                                  of
                    supervisio   supervisi                supervision                                                                       supervision (number of supervisions)                    ed
                                                 n                      supervision                              issued                                                              objections
                       ns           on
                                                                                      Regular findings             25                     Overlapping of invoices (48)
                                                                                      Warning                      31                     Issuance of other invoices (3)
General hospitals      59           0           59            20            39                                                                                                           1          0
                                                                                      Warning and damage                                  Complaints from insured persons (4)
                                                                                                                   3         8,756.39
                                                                                      compensation                                        Incorrect charging for participation (1)
                                                                                      Regular findings              2                     Overlapping of invoices (2)
Special hospitals       4           0            4            2             2                                                                                                            0          0
                                                                                      Warning                       2                     Complaints from insured persons (2)
    Polyclinics         1           1            0            0             1         Warning                       1                     Complaints from insured persons (1)            0          0
   Contractual                                                                        Regular findings             30
       clinics                                                                        Warning                       9
    performing                                                                        Warning and damage
   outpatient –                                                                                                    2         2.464.30
                                                                                      compensation
    specialist –                                                                                                                          Overlapping of invoices (20)
  consultative         44           0           44            0             44                                                            Complaints from insured persons (15)           3          2
    health care                                                                                                                           Incorrect issuance of invoices (6)
  (inclusive of                                                                       Warning and cash fine        3         16.958.34
     clinics in
    contractual
   institutions)
  Public health
                        9           0            9            8             1         Regular findings             9                      Overlapping of invoices (8)                    0          0
      institutes
 Institutions for
 health care and
rehabilitation –
                                                                                                                                          Overlapping of invoices (1)
     activity of        2           0            2            0             2         Regular findings             2
                                                                                                                                          Complaints from insured persons (1)
physical therapy
    in patients’
       homes




                                                                                                         51
                             Table 5 - Regional departments for supervision and control - scope and results of supervisions implemented
                                           at the level of secondary health care and at the level of health institutes in 2012

                       Total      Compre
                                               Targeted                  Extraordina                                         Number of                                                              Number
                     number of     hensive                   Regular                                                                                       Most frequent reasons for targeted                   Accept
    Activity                                  supervisio                      ry                Measure issued               measures    Cash amount                                                   of
                     supervisio   supervisi                supervision                                                                                    supervision (number of supervisions)                    ed
                                                  n                      supervision                                          issued                                                               objections
                        ns           on
                                                                                       Regular findings                         36                      Overlapping of invoices (74)
Clinical hospital                                                                      Warning                                  35                      Complaints from insured persons (12)
                        94           0           94            28            66                                                                                                                        1          0
     center                                                                            Warning and damage                                               Non-purposeful expenditure of funds (1)
                                                                                                                                23       1,689,920.33
                                                                                       compensation                                                     Unjustified issuance of DTP invoices (1)
                                                                                       Regular findings                         18
                                                                                       Warning                                   5                      Overlapping of invoices (35)
Clinical hospitals      48           0           48            28            20                                                                                                                        0          0
                                                                                       Warning and damage                                               Complaints from insured persons (7)
                                                                                                                                25       304,400.65
                                                                                       compensation
                                                                                       Regular findings                         15
                                                                                       Warning                                   2                      Overlapping of invoices (34)
     Clinics            36           0           36            25            11                                                                                                                        0          0
                                                                                       Warning and damage                                               Complaints from insured persons (2)
                                                                                                                                19       200,607.02
                                                                                       compensation
                                                                                       Regular findings                         1
                                                                                                                                                        Issuance of DTS invoice (2)
                                                                                       Warning                                  7
General hospitals       10           5            5            5             5                                                                          Complaints from insured persons (2)            5          1
                                                                                       Warning and damage
                                                                                                                                2        154,622.09     Overlapping of invoices (1)
                                                                                       compensation
                                                                                       Regular findings                         1
                                                                                                                                                        Ensuring necessary therapy (2)
                                                                                       Warning                                  7
Special hospitals        9           5            4            3             6                                                                          Overlapping of invoices (2)                    3          1
                                                                                       Warning and damage
                                                                                                                                1         7,960.00      Complaints from insured persons (1)
                                                                                       compensation
                                                                                       Warning                                  1
   Health spa            2           2            0            2             0         Initiation of the procedure for the                                                                             1          0
                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                       termination of the contract
                                                                                       Regular findings                         5                       Recommending medicines in
                                                                                       Warning                                  4                       contravention with the guidelines from
   Polyclinics          10           5            5            4             6                                                                          the Drug List of the CHIF (2)                  2          0
                                                                                       Initiation of the procedure for the
                                                                                                                                1                       Staff norms (1)
                                                                                       termination of the contract
                                                                                                                                                        Complaints from insured persons (1)




                                                                                                            52
                      Total      Compre
                                              Targeted                  Extraordina                                         Number of                                                           Number
                    number of     hensive                   Regular                                                                                      Most frequent reasons for targeted                 Accept
    Activity                                 supervisio                      ry                Measure issued               measures    Cash amount                                                of
                    supervisio   supervisi                supervision                                                                                   supervision (number of supervisions)                  ed
                                                 n                      supervision                                          issued                                                            objections
                       ns           on
                                                                                      Regular findings                         10
  Contractual                                                                         Warning                                  11
    clinics                                                                           Warning and damage
                                                                                                                               7         2,305.07
  performing                                                                          compensation
 outpatient –                                                                         Warning and cash fine                    2         12,544.63
  specialist –                                                                        Warning in advance of                                           Complaints from insured persons (12)
                       33           13          20            16            17                                                 1                                                                   6          0
 consultative                                                                         termination of the contract                                     Overlapping of invoices (8)
  health care                                                                         Warning in advance of
 (inclusive of                                                                        termination of the contract and          1         3,232.16
special clinics                                                                       cash fine
health centers)                                                                       Initiation of the procedure for the
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                      termination of the contract
  Institutions /                                                                      Warning                                  2
private practices
    providing
                        3           1            2            0             3                                                                         Overlapping of invoices (82)                 1          0
physical therapy                                                                      Warning and cash fine                    1         2,020.00
   at patients’
      homes
 Public Health                                                                        Warning                                  1
                        3           2            1            0             3                                                                                                                      2          0
     Institute                                                                        Warning and cash fine                    2         55,296.01




                                                                                                           53
54
No.              Subject of Procurement                  Number of Number of Estimated cost Actual cost in        Savings        Savings in %    Re-tendering   Number and nature          Comments
                                                           items    hospitals in HRK without HRK without                                                          of complaints /
                                                                                   VAT         VAT as per the                                                       Comments
                                                                                                 Framework
                                                                                                 Agreement
                                                                   Sector Independent Service for Public Procurement at the Ministry of Health
      Cardiac X-ray systems with the delivery,                                                                                                                                        procurement process in
                                                                                                                                                                2 complaints to the
      installation, servicing and maintenance for a          4          3         43,000,000.00        -                                                                              progress
                                                                                                                                                                documentation
      period of six years.
      Surgery equipment                                      2          1                                                                                                             procurement process in
                                                                                  14,800,000.00        -
      Surgery tables                                         19         3                                                                                                             progress
                                                                                                                                                                                      predmet nabave
                                                                        1
      Medical and laboratory equipment for tissue                                                                                                                                     podijeljen u 11. grupa
                                                                                   2,302,400.00        -
      banks and blood products                                                                                                                                                        procurement process in
                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                      progress
                                                                                                                                                                1 complaint to the    procurement process in
      Brachytherapy devices                                  3          3         14,000,000.00        -
                                                                                                                                                                documentation         progress
      CT devices with a minimum of 128 layers per                                                                                                               1 complaint to the    procurement process in
                                                             3          3         23,600,000.00        -
      rotation                                                                                                                                                  documentation         progress
                                                                                                                                                                                      procurement process in
      Equipment for radiation of blood supplements           1          1          2,190,400.00    2,185,000.00        5,400.00      0.2%            Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                      progress
      X-ray devices for breaking up kidney stones -
                                                                                                                                                                1 complaint to the
      lithotriptora with the servicing and maintenance       2          2         14,600,000.00    7,798,100.00     6,801,900.00    46.6%
                                                                                                                                                                documentation
      for a period of six years.
                                                                                                                                                                                      previous procurement
      Operating microscope for ENT and head and
                                                                                                                                                                                      procedure cancelled
      neck surgery with the servicing and                    1          1            850,000.00      847,970.00        2,030.00      0.2%            Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                      with Decision of the
      maintenance for a period of six years.
                                                                                                                                                                                      client
                                                                                                                                                                4 complaints to the   previous procurement
                                                                                                                    3,180,313.00                                contract award        procedure for 2 groups
      Ultrasound equipment, servicing and
                                                             50         38        50,486,400.00   47,306,087.00                      6.3%             -         decision              cancelled with Decision
      maintenance for a period of six years
                                                                                                                                                                1 complaint to the    of the client
                                                                                                                                                                documentation
                                                                                                                                                                                      previous procurement
      Ultrasound devices for hips checked with the                                                                                                              1 complaint to the
                                                                                                                                                                                      procedure cancelled
      servicing and maintenance of fully operational         8          7          3,840,000.00    2,183,640.00     1,656,360.00    43.1%                       contract award
                                                                                                                                                                                      with Decision of the
      for a period of six years.                                                                                                                                decision
                                                                                                                                                                                      client
                                                                                                                                                                                      previous procurement
      Integrated operating theater with the servicing                                                                                                                                 procedure cancelled
                                                             1          1          2,300,000.00    2,299,692.85          307.15      0.0%            Yes
      and maintenance for a period of 6 years.                                                                                                                                        with Decision of the
                                                                                                                                                                                      client
                                                                                                                                                                1 complaint to the
      ECMO devices for life support functions with                                                                                                              documentation
      the delivery, installation, servicing and              35         23        30,928,500.00   29,523,659.00                      4.5%                       1 complaint to the
      maintenance for a period of six years.                                                                        1,404,841.00                                contract award
                                                                                                                                                                decision
                                                                                                                                                                1 complaint to the
                                                                                                                                                                documentation
      ET / CT devices with landscaping, servicing
                                                             1          1         30,894,308.94   24,175,600.00                     21.7%                       2 complaints to the
      and maintenance for a period of six years.
                                                                                                                    6,718,708.94                                contract award
                                                                                                                                                                decision

                                                                                                       55
                                                                                                                                                          previous procurement
      Linear accelerator with landscaping, servicing                                                                                                      procedure cancelled
                                                          1    1     28,455,284.55    24,188,400.00    4,266,884.55           Yes
      and maintenance for a period of 6 years                                                                                                             with Decision of the
                                                                                                                      15.0%                               client
      SPECT / CT devices with landscaping,
                                                          1    1      8,536,585.00     6,957,200.00    1,579,385.00   18.5%
      servicing and maintenance
      Polivalente digital X-ray equipment for
      radiography and fluoroscopy with a C-shaped                                                                                   1 complaint to the
      frame and a table for the patient with the          1    1      6,356,169.10     4,927,900.00    1,428,269.10   22.5%         contract award
      servicing and maintenance for a period of 6                                                                                   decision
      years
      NEURO BI PLANE digital subtraction                                                                                            1 complaint to the
      angiography with the servicing and                  1    1     15,864,000.00    13,500,000.00    2,364,000.00   14.9%   Yes   contract award
      maintenance for a period of 6 years                                                                                           decision
                                                                                                                                    1 complaint to the
      X-ray devices for ERCP with the servicing and
                                                          1    1      6,800,000.00     5,108,300.00    1,691,700.00   24.9%         contract award
      maintenance for a period of six years.
                                                                                                                                    decision
      Digital device for panoramic dental imaging
                                                          3    3      2,400,000.00     1,127,249.60    1,272,750.40   53.0%
      (ortopan)

      Monoplanarni X-ray systems for cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                    2 complaints to the
      diagnostics and interventions with either a floor
                                                          2    2     24,390,244.00    19,885,100.00    4,505,144.00   18.5%         contract award
      or ceiling C stand, and servicing and
                                                                                                                                    decision
      maintenance for a period of six years.

                                                                                                                                                          procurement process in
      Anesthesia devices                                  19   3      9,200,000.00
                                                                                                                                                          progress
                                                                                                                                                          procurement process in
      Endoscopic devices                                  28   2      4,800,000.00
                                                                                                                                                          progress
                                                                                                                                                          procurement procedure
      Medical and laboratory equipment for                                                                                                                for 2 groups cancelled
                                                          23   12     2,456,800.00     2,238,693.00     218,107.00    8.9%
      thetransfusion medicine departments                                                                                                                 with Decision of the
                                                                                                                                                          client
                                                                                                                                                          previous procurement
      Medical +4 C refrigerator for storing blood                                                                                                         procedure cancelled
                                                          12   6       504,000.00       300,762.00      203,238.00    40.3%   Yes
      products for transfusion departments                                                                                                                with Decision of the
                                                                                                                                                          client
                                                                                                                                                          previous procurement
      freezer for quick freezing of plasma at -40C for                                                                                                    procedure cancelled
                                                          2    2       640,000.00       284,858.00      355,142.00    55.5%   Yes
      the transfusion departments                                                                                                                         with Decision of the
                                                                                                                                                          client
Total (committed)                                                   232,492,691.59   194,838,211.45   37,654,480.14   16.2%
Total (uncommitted - in progress)                                   111,702,400.00
                                    Grand total                     344,195,091.59                                             7    21




                                                                                           56
