                                   89332
              Ethiopia
   Second Urban Local Government
Development Program (ULGDP II) as a
Program-for-Results (PforR) Operation




     Technical Assessment Report




                          February 20, 2014


                                           i
                                                               Table of Contents
     List of Abbreviations ............................................................................................................................... iii
     Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ VI
A.         INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................. 1
B.         TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT ........................................................................................................... 1
     I.     Program Description ........................................................................................................................... 6
     II.        Description and Assessment of Program Strategic Relevance and Technical Soundness .............. 18
           a.     Strategic Relevance...................................................................................................................... 18
           b.     Program Technical Soundness .................................................................................................... 21
           c.     Institutional Arrangements .......................................................................................................... 25
     III.       Description and Assessment of Program Expenditure Framework ............................................... 30
     IV. Description and Assessment of Program Results Framework and M&E....................................... 32
     V. Program Economic Evaluation ........................................................................................................ 35
     VI. Inputs to Program Action Plan ....................................................................................................... 40
     VII. Technical Risk rating .................................................................................................................... 42
     VIII. Bank Inputs to the Program Implementation Support Plan ......................................................... 42
Annexes ...................................................................................................................................................... 45
     Annex 1: Disbursement against the Performance on the DLIs-Disbursement Linked Indicator Matrix 45
     Annex 2: Result Framework ................................................................................................................... 53
     Annex 3: ULGDP Performance-Based Grant Indicative Planning Figures (IPFs) ................................. 56
     Annex 4: ULGDP – Investment Menu for the Performance-Based and CB Grants ............................... 58
     Annex 5: MUDHCO – Organizational Structure of Ministry ................................................................. 62
     Annex 6: MUDHCO – Overview of the Main Institutional Arrangements ............................................ 65
     Annex 7: Minimum Conditions and Performance Measures .................................................................. 67
     Annex 8: ULG staffing positions ............................................................................................................ 85
     Annex 9: ULGDP II- Capacity Building Support –Design .................................................................... 87




                                                                                                                                                               ii
                                 List of Abbreviations


AACG    Addis Ababa City Government
AF      Additional Finance
ARAP    Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
BOFED   Bureau of Finance and Economic Development (Regional)
BTIUD   Bureau of Trade, Industry and Urban Development (Regional)
CB      Capacity Building
CBDSD   Capacity Building for Decentralized Service Delivery Project
CD      Capacity Development
CIP     Capital Investment Plan
CSA     Central Statistics Agency
DDCA    Dire Dawa City Administration
DRS     Developing Regional States
EC      Ethiopian Calendar
ECPI    Ethiopian Cities Prosperity Initiative

EFY     Ethiopia fiscal year
EMP     Environmental management plan
EOI     Expression of Interest
ECPI    Ethiopian Cities Prosperity Initiative
ERCA    Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority
ESMF    Environmental and Social Management Framework
ETB     Ethiopian birr
GC      Gregorian calendar
GIZ     German Society for International Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
        Zusammenarbeit)
ICB     International Competitive Bidding
ICR     Implementation Completion Report
IDA     International Development Association
IPA     Independent Procurement Audit


                                                                                            iii
IFR      Interim Financial Report
IGFTS    Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer System
IMF      International Monetary Fund
LG       Local governments
MC       Minimum (access) Conditions
MOFED    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (Federal)
MTR      Midterm review
MUDHCo   Ministry of Urban Development, Housing and Construction (Federal)
NBE      National Bank of Ethiopia
O&M      Operations and maintenance
OFED     Office of Finance and Economic Development (city level)
APA      Annual Performance Assessments
CB       Capacity Building
FY       Fiscal Year
OM       Operational Manual for ULGDP
PBG      Performance-Based Grant
PBGS     Performance-Based Grant System
PBTS     Performance-Based Transfer System
PM       Performance Measures
PPA      Participation and Performance Agreement
PSCAP    Public Sector Capacity Building Program Support Program
QCBS     Quality and Cost Based Selection
RAP      Resettlement Action Plan
REOI     Request for Expressions of Interest
REP      Revenue Enhancement Plan (AACG)
REPA     Regional Environmental Protection Agency
RG       Regional Government
RPF      Resettlement Policy Framework
SME      Small and Medium Size Enterprises
SNNPR    Southern Nations, Nationalities, and People’s Region
SOE      Statement of Expenditure


                                                                             iv
TA      Technical Assistance
TOR     Terms of Reference
UGCBB   Urban Governance and Capacity Building Bureau (Federal)
UGDP    Urban Governance and Decentralization Program
ULG     Urban Local Government
ULGDP   Urban Local Government Development Project
UNCDF   United Nations Capital Development Fund
USD     United States Dollar
WB      World Bank




                                                                  v
Executive Summary

The second Urban Local Government Development Program (ULGDP II) is designed as Program for
Results (PforR), which scales up the ongoing ULGDP (2008/09-2013/14) – a performance-based grant
(PBG) program, with financing from the World Bank and Government of Ethiopia (GoE), in the form of
contributions from the regions and participating urban local governments (ULGs). The GoE has
expressed a strong wish and commitment to scale up the program to cover 44 major cities under its
second phase, as part of its urban development vision and strategy as outlined in the Growth and
Transformation Plan (GTP) for 2009/10-2014/15, the Urban Development Policy (2005), the Fiscal
Decentralization Policy (2004) and the Ethiopian Cities Prosperity Initiative (ECPI): “Building Green
Resilient and Well Governed Cities 2013/14-2015?.

The second phase of ULGDP (ULGDP II, the Program) will be based on the lessons learnt from the first
phase, which was successful in getting funds out to the local (city) level for investments in core urban
infrastructure and services, delivery of numerous infrastructure investments, and in enhancing the
capacity of the participating cities in planning, budgeting, financial management, procurement,
accountability and social and environmental systems management. The Program will also address the
challenges identified in the first phase such as the timing of the annual performance assessments (APAs),
the need to involve and strengthen the regional governments, and the need to supplement the supply
driven capacity building support with a more demand-driven approach, ensuring that cities can respond
to the capacity weaknesses identified and the incentives provided in the performance-based allocations,
the need to strengthen own source revenue mobilization, and the need to strengthen the intra-
governmental coordination, monitoring, evaluation and oversight in this area. It will also further
strengthen the incentives of all actors in the Program through the result-based budget allocations.

ULGDP II will enhance the institutional performance of participating ULGs 1 in developing and
sustaining urban infrastructure and services, through provision of three interlinked and mutually
strengthening tools: (i) Performance-based investment grants, (ii) objective and neutral annual
performance assessments, linked to the size of allocations and (iii) comprehensive capacity building
support to the cities and to the regions to enhance their capacity in supporting ULGs as well as support
to the implementing agency. The Ministry of Urban Development, Housing and Construction (MUDHCo,
the Ministry) will be the agency in charge of the Program, as under ULGDP. The Ministry will be
supported in areas of capacity building framework for regions, monitoring, reporting and project
management and the Program also encompass capacity building to the Ministry to perform its core role
related with the Program objectives.

This technical assessment report is structured in the following way: First, follows a brief overview of the
country and sector context, followed by the description of the ongoing program. It then introduces the
proposed PforR and reviews the Program’s strategic relevance, technical soundness and assesses the
expenditure framework, results framework and the M&E system and capacity. It then reviews the
Program’s economic rationale, expected impacts and associated technical risks. The Program action
plan is presented to mitigate those risks and finally the assessment encloses the implementation support
plan.




1
    Also referred to as “cities?.

                                                                                                        VI
     Second Urban Local Government Development Program
              (ULGDP II) - Technical Assessment

A.        INTRODUCTION
1.      This technical assessment has been prepared for the proposed Second Urban Local Government
Development Program (ULGDP-II) as a Program-for-Results (PforR) operation, in accordance with
Operational Policy/ Bank Procedures (OP/BP 9.00), Program-for-Results Financing.

2.      The technical assessment is carried out within the limited scope of the proposed ULGDP-II
Program, and provides an assessment and a summary of the main issues, which are relevant for the
successful implementation of the Program. The support is based on previous experiences from Bank
operations with support to ULGs in Ethiopia, and the assessment is based on the review of experiences
with implementation of the first ULGDP in the period from 2008/09-2013/14, including the results from
the Midterm Review in 20112, and other studies, see below.

Box 1. Analytical work which underpins this analysis
The analysis in this report draws upon a large body of analytical work conducted on the ULGDP and the urban
sector in Ethiopia to date. These include: (i) the annual ULGDP independent performance assessments of the
performance in 2008/09 (EFY2001), 2009/10 (EFY2002), 2010/11 (EFY2003) and 2011/12 (EFY2004); (ii)
evaluation of municipal service delivery of cities participating in ULGDP commissioned by the ministry and
undertaken independently; (iii) annual reports of related programs; (iv) ULG audit reports; (v) value for the money
reports supported by GIZ (2011); (vi) field data collected by SuDCA consultants in connection with the Program’s
fiduciary systems assessment; (vii) and a large number of monitoring reports and data from the ULGDP data base.
In addition to this existing body of knowledge, a separate detailed study was undertaken which collected detailed
field-level data from a sample of 12 ULGs under the “Analysis of urban Local Government Fiscal Position in
Ethiopia? non-lending technical assistance activity3.


B.        TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT
Country and Sector Context for the Program

3.      Ethiopia is a large and diverse country. It is located in the Horn of Africa and is a land-locked
country with an area of 1.1 million square kilometers—about the size of Bolivia. Its bio-physical
environment includes a variety of contrasting ecosystems, with significant differences in climate, soil
properties, vegetation types, agricultural potential, biodiversity and water resources. Ethiopia is a country
of many nations, nationalities and peoples, with a total population of 91.7 million (2012). 4 Only 17
percent of the population lives in urban centers, the great majority of them in Addis Ababa. At a current
annual growth rate of 2.6 percent, Ethiopia’s population is estimated to reach 130 million by 2025, and is
projected by the UN to be among the world’s top ten, by 2050. Ethiopia is vulnerable to terms of trade

2
  Note that additional funding was added to this project in 2011, based on the successful and fast implementation rate, see Project
Paper on an Proposed Additional Credit in the amount of SDR 94.7 Million (USD 150 Million equivalent) to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the Urban Local Government Development Project, June 2011, World Bank.
3
  Dege Consult (www.dege.dk) in cooperation with Urban Institute and SuDCA, named Ethiopian Local Government Revenue
Study (ELGRS) in this assessment.
4
     Source: United Nations. According to the Ethiopian Central Statistical Agency, the population is 82.6 million .

                                                                                                                                  1
shocks from international food and fuel prices, and to large domestic weather-related shocks as the
2011/12 East Africa drought demonstrated.

4.      Ethiopia has experienced strong economic growth over the past decade. Economic growth
averaged 10.7 percent per year in 2003/04 to 2011/12 compared to the regional average of 5.4 percent.
Growth reflected a mix of factors, including agricultural modernization, the development of new export
sectors, strong global commodity demand, and government-led development investments. Private
consumption and public investment have driven demand side growth, with the latter assuming an
increasingly important role in recent years. On the supply side, growth was driven by an expansion of the
services and agricultural sectors, while the role of the industrial sector was relatively modest. More
recently annual growth rates have declined slightly, but still remain at high single-digit levels. Growth in
the export of goods has also moderated in recent years and a decline was observed in 2012/13 for the first
time since 2008/09. There have been bouts of high inflation in recent years and, while inflation is
currently much lower, keeping it down remains a major objective for monetary policy.

5.      Ethiopia is one of the world's poorest countries, but has made substantial progress on social
and human development over the past decade. The country’s per capita income of US$370 is
substantially lower than the regional average of US$1,257 and among the ten lowest worldwide. 5
Ethiopia is ranked 173 out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) of the United
Nations Development Program (UNDP). However, high economic growth has helped reduce poverty, in
both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, 2.5 million people have been lifted out of poverty, and the share
of the population below the poverty line has fallen from 38.7 percent in 2004/05 to 29.6 percent in
2010/11 (using a poverty line of US$0.6/day). However, because of high population growth the absolute
number of poor (about 25 million) has remained unchanged over the past fifteen years. Ethiopia is among
the countries that have made the fastest progress on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
HDI ranking over the past decade. It is on track to achieve the MDGs related to gender parity in
education, child mortality, HIV/AIDS, and malaria. Good progress has been achieved in universal
primary education, although the MDG target may not be met. The reduction of maternal mortality
remains a key challenge.

6.       The Government of Ethiopia is currently implementing its ambitious Growth and
Transformation Plan (GTP) 2010/11–2014/15, which sets a long-term goal of becoming a middle-
income country by 2023, with growth rates of at least 11.2 percent per annum during the plan period. To
achieve the GTP goals and objectives, the government has followed a “developmental state? model with a
strong role for the government in many aspects of the economy. It has prioritized key sectors such as
industry and agriculture, as drivers of sustained economic growth and job creation. The GTP also
reaffirms the government’s commitment to human development. Development partners have programs
that are broadly aligned with GTP priorities.


7.       Ethiopia’s constitution creates a highly
decentralized,     federal    structure.    Formally
promulgated in 1995 following the end of the
military junta -the Derg-, the constitution’s
decentralization framework presents a fundamental
shift from the highly centralized system under the
Derg. The federal structure takes into consideration
the rich ethno-linguistic and multi-cultural diversity
of Ethiopian nations, nationalities and peoples. The
5
    Gross National Income, World Bank Atlas Method.

                                                                                                          2
constitution recognizes and assigns powers, functions and revenues between the federal government and
the nine member states of the federation 6 . These entities are generally referred to as ‘regional
governments (RG)’. In addition, two cities—Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa—are chartered by federal
proclamation (law) as state-level city7 governments.

8.        Although the federal constitution formally establishes two government levels, in practice,
Ethiopia has three main government levels: Federal, regional, and local government 8 . Each regional
   Institutional structure of the public sector in Ethiopia     government (RG) can create its own local
                                                                government structure and while there are slight
                                                                variations in the sub-regional structures among
                                                                RGs, the most prevalent local government level
                                                                is formed by elected woredas or district-level
                                                                governments. Regional states are typically
                                                                subdivided into administrative zones, which are
                                                                deconcentrated territorial levels (see figure).
                                                                Woredas are generally semi-autonomous local
                                                                government entities, which have a separate
                                                                legal status as corporate bodies with their own
                                                                political leadership (council) and their own
                                                                budget accounts. The woreda council members
    Dark blue indicates government jurisdictions with their own
                                                                are directly elected to represent each kebele
       budget sources; grey indicates de-concentrated entities.
                                                                (ward) in the district. In practice, the
                                                                terminology used to designate              local
governments varies: some use the term woreda strictly to refer to rural districts, whereas others consider
district-level urban units also to be woredas.

9.      RGs have the power to create urban local governments (ULG) either at the woreda, or at the sub-
woreda level, while the general practice is to establish them at woreda-level. There are 84 ULGs in
Ethiopia with populations of over 20,000 (excl. Addis Ababa),- Addis Ababa as the primate city with a
population of over 3 million9. ULGs are managed by city administrations and have a long list of mandates
and responsibilities, which include both the woreda-level functions, which are concurrent state functions,
as well as city affairs of delivering services and providing urban infrastructure.

10.      A unique feature of the expenditure assignments in Ethiopia, which has important implications on
the delivery of infrastructure and services to citizens, is the distinction between “state? and “municipal?
functions. State functions include most social services such as education and health, among others, and
municipal functions comprise most infrastructure and other services such as urban transport, urban roads,
solid waste management and abattoirs. In urban areas, both functions are administered by ULGs. State
functions are delegated from RGs to ULGs, whereas municipal functions are considered to be the
exclusive functions of ULGs. This conceptual distinction has important funding implications, which
directly affect service and infrastructure delivery: ULGs generally receive transfers in the form of block
grants/allocations from RGs in order to fund state functions. However, they are expected to fully fund
their municipal functions from municipal revenues.

6
  These nine regional governments are Tigray, Afar, Amhara, Oromia, Somalia, Benishangul Gumuz, the State of the
Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples (SNNP), Gambela and Harar.
7
  As each regional government in Ethiopia is authorized to issue city proclamations as they see fit, there is no formal
common definition of what constitutes a city. Therefore, the words “city? and “ULGs? are used interchangeably
throughout this document.
8
    The constitution refers to “member states?.
9
    Addis’ population is 10 times larger than Dire Dawa, the second largest city in the country.

                                                                                                                      3
11.     To meet these municipal functions, ULGs are largely enabled to set their own local tax rates
within the context of regional law and raise revenues. However, as discussed in more detail in the
Strategic Relevance section below, these revenues are simply not sufficient to meet the rapidly growing
municipal functions. The rapid growth in municipal functions is associated with the rapid urbanization in
the country: Ethiopia is one of the most populous countries in the World10 and is urbanizing rapidly at
about 4.1 percent per year11. The UN estimates that Ethiopia’s urban population will expand from 17% in
2013 to 19.0 % in 2020, reaching 23% in 2030. As an indication of rapid urban growth, the capital city,
Addis Ababa, more than doubled its population in 23 years, from 1.4 million in 1984 to 3.1 million in
2012.

12.      Given the consistent increase in the number of Ethiopians living in cities on the one hand and the
lack of municipal revenues to meet the growing financing needs on the other, significant gaps emerge in
access to basic services and infrastructure in cities. This prevents cities from maximizing the potential
productivity and agglomeration effects and limits their ability to contribute to economic growth even
further than their current level. As shown in the table below, an independent urban infrastructure study
conducted in 201312 indicated the significant gaps in services and infrastructure in essential core urban
services and infrastructure water supply, roads and sanitation in Addis and 18 other cities, which include
Ethiopia’s largest urban areas.

Table 1: Level of access to urban services and infrastructure in 19 ULGs
                       Service/Infrastructure                          Level of service Provision/Coverage
                        Water supply coverage                                           59.1%
                       Sewerage and sanitation                                          57.3%
          Solid waste Disposal collected of estimated waste                             52.0%
                Liquid Waste Disposal collection ratio                                   1.5%
  Paved Road (Surfaced with Asphalt or cobblestone) of total roads                      22.8%
                   Roads with Pedestrian Walkways                                         8%

13.      The GoE is fully aware of the importance of cities for the country’s growth and prioritizes urban
as an important sector in overall economic growth. Government’s effort to anchor urban in its core policy
and strategy notes started with the issuance of its first Urban Development Policy Note in 2005, continued
with its recognition of the urbanization agenda in the second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and later
in the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) for 2010/11-2014/15. GTP is a national medium term
strategy policy document, which articulates of the overarching national development goals and the
accompanying implementation strategy for the country. Most recently, the government has further
elaborated the importance of urban governance under MUDHCo’s new Initiative: “Ethiopian Cities
Prosperity Initiative (ECPI): Building Green, Resilient and Well Governed Cities 2013/14-2015?, which
aims to provide strategic guidance to city governance and management and align urban governance with
overall national policies. Collectively, these policy measures mark a robust focus on urban-based
industrialization, complemented by a growing service sector, and a focus on urban centers to stimulate
overall development.

14.     The World Bank and the international development community have been supporting the
decentralized service delivery framework and policy of GoE and its focus on and support to urbanization.
The Bank has been supporting the government’s efforts to build capacity across the country’s urban local
governments to enable them to effectively meet their important responsibilities. This partnership has been

10
   With an official population of 86.6 million, Ethiopia is currently the 14th most populous country in the world.
11
   World Bank Development Indicators (2012 figures), based on official estimates.
12
   “Evaluation of Municipal Service Delivery of cities participating in ULGDP for EFY 2004?, SuDCA Development
Consultants, August 2013.

                                                                                                                     4
ongoing through a series of projects, starting with the Capacity Building for Decentralized Service
Delivery project (2003) and later the Public Sector Capacity Building program (2004).

15.      In this context, the government introduced its Urban Local Government Development program
(ULGDP) in 2008, henceforth the government’s program. ULGDP provides grants to 18 urban local
governments (ULGs) and Addis Ababa, based on their performance against a range of key urban
institutional areas such as participatory budgeting, fiduciary management, social and environmental
systems management, among others. The local governments, who receive funds from the program based
on their performance, use these funds on urban infrastructure such as urban roads, solid waste
management, drainage, water supply and others.

16.      ULGDP, the government program, is jointly funded by the government and the World Bank. Of
the total US$ 416 million program budget envelope, GoE provides 28% (US$ 116 million) and the World
Bank provides 72% (US$ 300 million). Half the government contribution comes from regional
governments and the other half comes from cities themselves. The program budget envelope, at the onset
in 2008, was US$208 million which comprised of US$58 million of government own sources and
US$150 IDA financing. As a result of program’s successful implementation and results, the program
budget was doubled in 2011 through an additional US$208 million (US$58 million government and
US$150 IDA funds). During additional financing in 2011, the program scope was adjusted to include
capacity building for an additional set of 18 ULGs, in anticipation of including these ULGs in the fiscal
transfer scheme in the future.

17.     GoE’s ULGDP is one of the key tools in implementing of its overall development strategy
discussed above as framed under the GTP and ECPI. The strategies, and the program, which is their key
implementation tool, collectively mark an important shift in focus from rural-based agricultural growth
which has been the focus of development in Ethiopia, to a more urban-based industrialization,
complemented by a growing service sector, and a focus on the urban growth centers to stimulate the
overall developed in a phased manner. The geographic scope of ULGDP has mostly comprised the
country’s most populous 18 urban centers and its capital, Addis. This scope marks the first phase of the
approach and strategy described above, and the government intends to ultimately expand the geographic
scope to cover all 85 cities in Ethiopia with a population of more than 20,000 people. Various
development partners, such as the French Development Agency and the European Investment Bank, have
expressed preliminary interest in supporting the government’s efforts in this respect.

18.      Consistently with its planned phased approach, the GoE wishes, after satisfactory track record of
program implementation since 2008, to expand the program, using its own funding and World Bank
financing through the use of the Program for Results (PforR) modality. The proposed PforR Program,
named the second ULGDP (ULGDP II), will add 26 new ULGs to the geographic scope of the current 18
(for a total of 44 ULGs), and the 9 regional governments (RGs). It will maintain the result/performance-
based disbursement modality established under ULGDP to ULGs and expand this modality to its
financing of key results at the RG and the federal government levels. This expansion marks the second
phase in the GoE’s intension to roll out performance-based fiscal transfer modality to all 85 ULGs in the
country with more than 20,000 habitants. The Program will be based on successful experiences and
lessons learnt of the first phase under ULGDP (2008-2013). It will target, particularly at the ULG level,
the fiscal and capacity building gaps identified, in areas relevant for urban development.




                                                                                                        5
     I.   Program Description

The government program, ULGDP

19.       The ongoing program – the ULGDP- has a total budget envelope of US$ 416 million (US$ 300
million IDA, US$ 116 million GoE) and has the following three main elements:
      i. Performance based grants (PBG) to 18 ULGs and Addis for urban infrastructure investments
             ($403 million);
     ii. Capacity building to (US$7.5 million)
         This covered 36 ULGs (the 18 PBG recipient ULGs plus another set of 18 ULGs included in
             the program at additional financing in 2011 as described above in paragraph 16)
         Implementing federal ministry, the Ministry of Urban Development, Housing and Construction
             (MUDHCO) to strengthen their capacity to support and guide the cities through the regions;
    iii. Implementation support to support, MUDHCo ($5.5 million)13.

20.      As mentioned above, the ULGDP was preceded by a series of Bank supported interventions,
which aimed to build capacity at urban local governments 14 . Based on local government capacity
enhanced through these projects, the ULGDP was introduced as a performance-based programmatic fiscal
transfer to urban local governments in 2008. The overall goal of the government program is to support
improved performance in the planning, delivery, and sustained provision of urban services and
infrastructure by local governments. It aims to fulfill this goal by providing grants to urban local
governments based on their performance across a range of areas including fiduciary management,
management of environmental and social systems, budgeting practices, governance, transparency and
participation, among others. The program funds are disbursed against institutional and implementation
performance and the size of the ULGs (number of inhabitants) and are earmarked for expenditure on local
urban infrastructure.

21.      All ULGDP funds are allocated according to a simple population-based formula. The actual
disbursement from these allocations to each local government is determined by the performance of that
local government, as measured in the annual local government performance, and takes into account the
population amount in the said local government. A simple average of US$ 16 per capita per annum has
been disbursed using IDA funds over the life of the program (2008/09-2013/14) 15 . These funds are
complemented by 20% matching funding from the ULGs and 20% from the regional governments.
Depending on the performance of ULGs in each program year, the specific per capita amount disbursed
for that year changes. For instance, in the most recent assessment year, the program disbursed a total of
US$ 68 million IDA funds to 17 ULGs, which passed the minimum set of conditions to qualify for the
grant for that year. The total amount, divided by the total population by these ULGs, indicate an average
US$ 26.4 per capita per annum disbursement for this year. The disbursement to each ULG in this year

13
   Part of these funds was utilized for technical consultants who supported ULGs in procurement, engineering, environment and
social systems management. Additionally, these funds were used by MUDHCo to procure consultancy services for annual
performance assessment, environment and social audits, among other items.
14
   The government and the Bank have been working in partnership since the early 2000s to help Ethiopia’s urban local
governments effectively meet their responsibilities. The partnership has been through a series of projects, starting with the
Capacity Building for Decentralized Service Delivery project (2003) and the Public Sector Capacity Building program (2004).
These projects also supported the establishment of an accredited master’s degree program in urban management at the Ethiopia
Civil Service College. To data more than 2000 students have graduated from this program, and the great majority of them are
working in the administrations of ULGs.
15
   This amount is calculated by dividing the total funding disbursed over the life of the program to 18 ULGs by the population in
these local governments: A total of US$ 286,902,532 IDA funding has been disbursed to date as performance based grant under
ULGDP. US$20 million of this amount has been disbursed to Addis (in two program years) as explained in detail below. The
US$16 per capita is calculated by dividing the total IDA funding to the 18 program ULGs (except Addis) by the population in
these local governments (US$ 266,902,532/ 2,782,971/6 years = US$ 16).

                                                                                                                               6
varied between the highest amount of US$ 7.9 million to Mekele, and the lowest amount of US$ 1.6
million to Axum.

22.      Disbursement of the allocations is made after ULGs undergo an annual assessment. The
assessment is carried out by an independent private firm, procured by the government. The performance
of local governments is measured in the areas of financial management, participatory planning,
investment, operation and maintenance of infrastructure, and transparency and accountability in
operations. Under ULGDP, ULGs need to perform a certain level in order to access the program funds.
They cannot access the ULGDP funds if they fail to meet certain conditions, or perform below 50 percent
in the overall assessment. This is necessary to ensure that the funds are used effectively, efficiently, and
with integrity. Those ULGs, which fulfill this requirement, receive their full allocation. If they perform
above the expected target score, they are rewarded by an amount equal to their allocation plus a 20
percent acceleration. Through this system, the program was able to accelerate the use of funds compared
to the original targets.

ULGDP’s achievements and lessons learned

23.    Throughout the six year implementation period (starting in 2008/09, currently under
implementation), the program has recorded a number of tangible achievements in the following key areas:

           i.   Institutional improvements at the ULG level;
          ii.   Wider impact on the urban and economic development in line with the GoE’s urban
                development policy;
         iii.   Physical urban infrastructure investments.

24.     First, the program has made achievements in terms of ULG institutional capacity in areas such as
citizen participation in local government budgeting and project execution. Citizens are increasingly
actively involved in the planning process, with a doubling of the number of citizen groups taken part in
the annual planning process from 226 citizen groups in 2008/09 to 521 in 2012/13. All program cities
have increased the involvement of citizens by more than 85% from the baseline in 2008/09 as of 2012/13.

25.     The second area of institutional improvement pertains to budgeting and the production and use of
key local government planning documents. At the program’s onset in 2008/09, none of the ULGs had
urban development plans, rolling capital investment plans (CIP) or assets management plans. As of
2012/13, all 18 program ULGs produce timely annual plans, comprehensive 3-years rolling CIPs and
asset management plans, including budgeting for maintenance and operations, and related procurement
plans. Majority of program ULGs (12) are also able to establish proper links between all these core
planning and budgeting instruments and ensure consistency across the planning documents.
Improvements are needed in the remaining (6) ULGs to ensure robustness and consistency of the figures
across the various plans.

26.      Third, the level of overall local government transparency has increased. While at the program
onset in 2008/09 there was hardly a culture of making local government budgets public or sharing other
information pertaining to local governments, all program ULGs now disseminate information to citizens,
and 12 ULGs achieved highest score on the program’s transparency indicators by making public all core
documents for the citizens which include plans, budgets, bid evaluations and physical progress on
infrastructure investments.




                                                                                                          7
27.      Fourth, ULGDP has supported management and incentives around own source revenues (OSR)16.
All ULGs are now able to produce revenue enhancement plans and the focus on OSR has increased with
improved collection, which has doubled from 2008/09 to 2012/13. The aggregate nominal OSR amounts
of all program ULGs has increased by 135% over the period. In inflation adjusted real terms, however,
aggregate OSR has been stable over the five years, with 11 ULGs recording a net increase while the
remaining ULGs have recorded stable or slightly lower OSRs. There is, therefore, a need to continue
focusing on improvements in this area, particularly through stronger involvement of the regional
government tier, which regulates the local government OSR legal and regulatory framework, and through
strengthening of the performance measures on OSR and stronger targeting on the municipal revenues17.

28.     Fifth, financial management has improved over the implementation period, indicated by number
of ULGs, which can produce financial reports, which increased from zero in 2008/09 to all program
ULGs in 2012/13. In the most recent program annual assessment, 14 ULGs received the top score with all
reports submitted on time. The reason why four other ULGs did not get top score was only because they
missed one of the annual submission deadlines, for one quarter. A similar track record is observed on
financial audit status: At the program onset, nearly all ULGs had long backlog of audit reports, many of
them with adverse audit opinion. As of 2012/13, 18 out of the 19 program ULGs had cleared the audit
backlog of the last six years, with one ULG clearing up its backlog of five years. Importantly, whereas 6
ULGs had adverse audit opinions as recently as 2009/10, none of them had adverse audit opinion in the
most recent audit round, with all ULGs obtaining qualified audit opinions.

29.     In terms of wider impact on the urban and economic development, ULGDP has enhanced
financing for urban infrastructure by ULGs by providing financial reward to the institutional
improvements recorded above. By providing an average of US$16 per capita per annum additional
financing to 18 ULGs, the program has more than doubled the amounts available for urban capital
investments in these local governments. A rough estimate of the average funds available for urban
investments countrywide -excluding funding from ULGDP- indicates that the spending has been in the
tune of US$11.0 per urban resident per annum for the entire country, excluding Addis18. The bulk of this
amount comes from ULG own source revenues (US$8.7 per urban resident excluding Addis) and the
remaining US$2.3 is regional spending and investments by woredas. In the 18 ULGDP ULGs (excluding
Addis), per capital own source revenue in 2011/12 was on average US$12.9. Thus, the ULGDP IDA
funding (average 16 US$ per capita) augmented the discretionary funding in program ULGs by
approximately 124% or 149%, if the amounts from the regional co-funding (US$ 3.2 on average) are
factored in.19

30.     Physical urban infrastructure investments have been achieved as a result of the program’s design,
which mandates ULGs to invest these enhanced funds in areas with high rate of economic return, such as
roads, water and sanitation. To date, 33% of ULGDP funds have been invested in cobblestone roads, 15%
on drainage and 10% on gravel roads, with the remaining 43% on a range of other urban infrastructure
investments. It is estimated that the urban investment projects funded through ULGDP have created
312,460 jobs and that these are targeting areas of high unemployment. Importantly, a large number of
small and micro enterprises have been involved in project execution, contributing to future local
economic development. Of particular note among urban infrastructure investments is the use of funds for
cobblestone streets and drainage systems. To date, 670 kilometers of roads, 588 kilometers of drainage
16
   The net increase in actual OSR in real terms has been constrained by the legal framework and the lack of sufficient support
from the regions, including lack of consultations on the changes/setting of tax rates/tariffs.
17
   The existing performance measures are focusing only on revenue enhancement planning and achievement of planned targets.
18
   This figure goes up to US$16.7 per capita if Addis is included, where the OSR from cities were estimated at US$ 11.2 and the
expenditures by regions and woredas at US$ 5.5 per capita.
19
   Figures based on the recent study – Ethiopian Local Government Revenue Study (abbreviated: “ELGRS?) conducted by Dege
Consult, Urban Institute and SUDCA, Component 2a Final Report, November 2013.

                                                                                                                                  8
system, 171 latrines and 110 community water points have been constructed, with 29,000 people given
access to improved water sources. As a result of the roads built by program funds, particularly
cobblestone, mobility for residents has increased, flooding has diminished, property values and small
enterprises have increased. These changes are transforming city centers into lively and welcoming places
in which to live and work.


Program’s challenges

31.      The ULGDP is not without challenges. The chief shortcoming of the system has been the delay in
the procurement of the independent annual performance assessment (APA) by the government,
specifically by the Ministry of Urban Development, Housing and Construction (MUDHCo). Since the
findings of the assessment determine the amount of program funds to be allocated to local governments,
the delay in the procurement of the assessment has caused significant challenges with aligning the
allocation with the budgeting cycle and the regional and city council approval of the overall budget
including ULGDP funding on time (i.e. June of each year). Additionally, while the performance
orientation of the program has been a major strength, some of the indicators used to measure
performance, and determine disbursements have, at times, been complex for the assessors to determine20
and/or not been sufficiently targeted at core development objectives of the program. There is, therefore, a
need to carry out the performance assessment on time, sync the grant cycle with local government
budgeting period (ensure that results are ready prior to the start of the ULG planning and budgeting
process), streamline and sharpen the performance measures to eliminate subjectivity and to provide a
stronger focus.

32.     Secondly, differently than the 18 ULGs, the program has faced a challenge in leveraging the
intended institutional performance of Addis. The primary reason is that while the level of financial
incentive the program has offered has been attractive in these 18 ULGs, it has remained too low for
Addis. Due to this factor, Addis has recorded satisfactory performance only twice over the
implementation period, each time with relatively low scores (score of 51 over 100 in 2008/09 and 61 over
100 in 2011/12).

33.      Thirdly, while capacity in the 18 program local governments has increased, there is need for
further improvements particularly in the areas of (i) municipal planning and budgeting – in ensuring the
quality of and consistency among local government budgeting and planning tools such as CIP, revenue
enhancement plans and budgets, (ii) OSR enhancement, (iii) social and environmental systems
management and (iv) procurement.

34.     Fourthly, while the program fund transfers are captured in the national public financial
management system at the federal level and the expenditure of funds are tracked, it is often done by using
an excel based system, which runs parallel to the national public financial management system, IBEX.
This makes it challenging to centrally track the use of funds at the decentralized level. Therefore, there is
a need to further integrate program funds expenditures at the regional and ULG levels in IBEX, with an
accompanying coding system to capture main local government expenditures.

35.     Finally, there is a need for a stronger involvement of the regions in capacity building of ULGs
and supporting and monitoring their core mandates such as municipal revenues, financial audit and
compliance with the national environmental and social safeguards regulations, and to strengthen the entire
capacity building support to ULGs from the Program in the light of the expansion of the Program and the
end of other CB programs such as the previous PSCAP.
20
     In the most recent assessment, more than 70 data collection points were applied.

                                                                                                           9
36.      In sum, the government program has made tangible progress in enhancing the institutional
capacity of urban local governments for service delivery, while a number of areas including the
administration of the performance assessments, refinement of performance measures, capacity at the local
level, reporting structure of program expenditures and a more direct involvement of regional governments
require continued focus and improvement. These are reflected in the design of ULGDP II.

Proposed ULGDP II, the PforR Program

37.     In this context, the government wishes to continue the program’s support to the 18 ULGs and
expand the geographic coverage to include 26 new ULGs. The main policy reason for the government’s
decision to scale up the program comes from its goal of rolling out the performance based fiscal transfer
instrument as the main vehicle for promoting institutional and infrastructure results to all the country’s 85
ULGs over time, in a phased matter. The 18 ULGs under the program represent the first phase of the
implementation of this policy, while the 44 ULGs (along with the new 26) under the proposed expansion
represent phase two. Ultimately, the government wishes to include all 85 ULGs in the country as part of
the program. These 26 ULGs represent the next tier of important cities in the country with the highest
populations, following the top 18 already included, and they had been receiving capacity support21 to help
them respond to the performance incentives.

38.     In addition to increasing geographic coverage to a total of 44 ULGs, the government also wishes
to include the country’s nine regional governments (RG) in the proposed second phase. Regional
governments in Ethiopia have a legislative mandate to backstop and support ULGs in carrying out core
local government functions. They also monitor the compliance of ULGs with various fiduciary, social and
environmental systems management rules and regulations. The regional audit offices (ORAG), for
example, are tasked with carrying out external financial audits of local government in their jurisdictions,
while the regional environmental protection agencies (REPA) are mandated with ensuring compliance at
the ULG level with environmental and social regulations. To date, only four RGs have been involved in
ULGDP and their involvement has been limited to (i) transferring program funds which they receive from
the federal government to ULGs and (ii) providing matching contribution (20% of the annual IDA
amount) for program financing to the ULGs in their constituency, as described above on paragraph 14.
The government, in the proposed second phase, wishes to deepen the involvement of RGs and include
technical areas to be leveraged.

39.         Thus, the Program’s boundaries will be defined as follows:

       i.     Program duration: July 2014 through December 2019;
      ii.     Program budget envelope: US$ 556.53 million22;
     iii.     Main expenditure items;
               i.  Performance-based grants to 44 ULGs for infrastructure investments as listed under
                   Program investment menu - US$ 499.53 million23;
              ii.  Capacity building and ULG support by regional governments – US$ 30.00 million;
             iii.  Federal support and capacity building Program administration – US$ 27.00 million.

40.       The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the institutional performance of
participating urban local governments in developing and sustaining urban infrastructure and services. The

21
   18 of the 26 ULGs have been supported under ULGDP and 8 under a separate GIZ program under close cooperation with the
ULGDP.
22
   This financing framework will comprise US$176.53 million GoE resources and US$ 380.00 million IDA funds.
23
   This is made up of US$ 176.53 million GoE and US$ 323.00 million IDA funds.

                                                                                                                       10
PDO for ULGDP II is a slightly refined version of that of ULGDP. The refinement has been made to
reflect the changes brought under PforR. Key results of the institutional performance improvements will
be (i) enhanced participation of citizens in ULG planning and budgeting, (ii) efficient fiduciary
management and procurement, (iii) increased amount of own source revenues at the ULG level; (iv)
improved infrastructure, service delivery and O&M systems, (v) strengthened accountability and
oversight systems and improvements on environmental and social safeguards.

41.     Similar to ULGDP, the Program financing framework will comprise IDA and GoE funds. Under
ULGDP II, however, there will be a differentiated approach to the contribution from ULGs. While the 18
ULGDP ULGs will continue to provide a higher level additional to the IDA financing for the performance
based fiscal transfer element, the new 26 ULGs will be required to match at lower levels in line with their
financial resources. This nuance reflects the realistic analysis of the budget position of the new ULGs and
indicates how much they can contribute from their own source revenues. The funding contribution rates
of ULGs to the Program will range from 30% of the IDA funding for existing 18 ULGs (increase from the
current level of 20% under ULGDP) to 20% for the 22 new ULGs in the four ULGDP regions and 10%
for 4 new ULGs in the emerging DRS. These will be minimum requirements, which will be monitored by
the independent assessment annually. If, in any year, a ULG exceeds these minimum levels, and matches
IDA amount at a higher rate, than that will be reflected as a performance enhancement and will be
rewarded under the follow year’s performance-based grant cycle. The contribution of regional
governments will continue to be 30% of the IDA funding amount in the existing regions and 20% in the
DRS regions. Dira Dawa and Harar will contribute with 50% of the IDA funding amount, each.

42.      The Program will maintain the existing design features of ULGDP such as the performance
orientation and the measurement of progress and results through independent annual and performance
assessments (APA). The APA will assess (i) a set of minimum conditions (MCs) which each ULG will be
required to fulfill each year of the Program and (ii) a list of performance measures (PMs) which will
determine the ULG’s progress each year. MCs will function like green and red lights and the PMs will
determine the ULG’s score and the actual disbursement.

43.      In order to keep the system simple and to ensure a strong link between performance, absorption
capacity and allocation, the system will be based on a common set of minimum conditions and
performance measures. However to ensure that new ULGs have sufficient capacity to be enrolled in the
full system, they will be introduced in the phase manner where only the MCs will apply in the first fiscal
year and the related allocations, as explained in further detail in paragraph 50, below. Prior to the first
allocation and in the first year of the program, the 26 new ULGs will receive a substantial capacity
building and technical assistance from mobile teams, from training courses at the ECSU and from the
supply driven capacity building support, as explained in detail in Annex 8.

44.     ULGDP II will also provide improvements to the challenges discussed above including the timing
of the APA alignment of the grant cycle more closely with local budgeting cycle24; streamlining and
sharpening the indictors used in APA to strengthen the focus on the key results areas25; continuing to
build the capacity of ULGs and the inclusion of local government expenditures in IBEX. ULGDP II will
ensure full alignment of the APA with the ULG budgeting process and the integration of ULG
expenditures in the national budgeting and accounting system.
24
   Timely APAs will be supported by DLI 9.
25
   An example of this is within the area of municipal revenue mobilization where the previous APA only focused on the planning
of the revenues (state and municipal) and achievement of planned targets. The new APA will strengthen these performance
measures through focusing on the quality of these plans, actual results made in revenue mobilization (focusing on municipal
revenues) and contribution by the ULGs to their urban investments from these collected OSR (rewarding matching contribution
to the PB grant investments). These initiatives will strengthen accountability and longer term sustainability of the Program, and
will be further supported through a specific DLI focusing on the regional support to the ULGs within this pertinent area.

                                                                                                                              11
45.      The scope of ULGDP II will not include Addis. As indicated above, the institutional,
infrastructure and financial needs of Addis are distinctly different than all the other ULGs in Ethiopia.
Therefore, a possible Addis-specific project with the goal of responding to the capital city’s specific
institutional and infrastructure needs is currently being discussed between GoE and the World Bank.

46.      Importantly, under ULGDP II, financing for the regional governments and federal government
entities, including the implementing ministry, MUDHCO, will no longer be input-based as ULGDP, but
will also be results based. As detailed in the disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), which target these
two levels of government, Program funds will be disbursed to these entities only after the verification of
the results for which they are responsible.

47.     ULGDP II is expected to run for a period of five years – from 2014/15 (Ethiopian FY2007) to
2018/19 (EFY2011) with the first disbursement year 2014/15 (EFY 2007). As explained above, the focus
of the performance grant to ULGs will be the country’s most populated 44 cities of the total 85 ULGs
(except Addis Ababa) with a total population of 4,348,853 26 , which is about 26% of the total urban
population. The Program also covers all nine regions in the country.

48.    Like under ULGDP, the ULGDP II expenditure framework will comprise three following
major items.

       i. Performance based funding for 44 ULGs’ urban infrastructure investments US$ 499.53 million
          (of which US$ 176.53 is from contributions from regions and cities and US$ 323.00 is from the
          IDA funding);
      ii. Capacity building and ULG support by regional governments (US$ 30.00 million);
     iii. Federal support and capacity building Program administration (US$ 27.00 million).

Performance Grants to ULGs

49.      As shown in detail in the table below, performance-based grants (PBG) to ULGs will be the
biggest item of program expenditure, and are expected to total US$ 499.53 million, including the
contributions from the regions and the ULGs (US$176.53). As under ULGDP, these funds will be
allocated using a simple formula based on population size and the performance of the ULGs.
Disbursements will flow through the regular treasury system, similar to the current ULGDP, but with a
clear timing and in two annual tranches.

50.    The Program will provide capital discretionary financing a simple per capita per annum average
of US$ 14.85 through IDA funds. When disaggregated, the simple average for the new 26 ULGs will be
US$13.38 and US$15.69 for the 18 ULGs currently participating in ULGDP (see table below for details).
When the financing from the ULGs and RGs are taken into account, which are expected to total
US$176.53 million, the per capita per annum amount will be US$24.88 and US$19.58 for the current 18
and new 26 ULGs, respectively.




26
  The most recent official national census dates back to 2007. The official Central Statistics Agency (CSA) has provided an
estimate to this in 2013. As agreed with GoE, the Program uses these figures.

                                                                                                                              12
    ULGDP II detailed performance based fiscal transfer amounts over the life of Program – 5 years
                Population        IDA          2015/16       Total IDA     Average     GoE Funding27       Total         IDA+
                  (CSA         allocation    (EFY 2008)      allocation      per                         IDA+ GoE         GoE
                  2013)       2014/15 (For    onwards          during       capita                                        per
                                Program         (For 4      Program life     per                                        capita
                                year # 1)       years)      (EFY 2007-     annum                                          per
                               EFY 2007                      EFY 2011)       IDA                                        annum
    Current       2,782,971    $43,653,775   $43,653,775    $218,268,873     $15.69      $127,965,958    $346,234,831    $24.88
    18 ULGs
    New 26        1,565,882     $6,481,211   $24,562,477    $104,731,127     $13.38       $48,565,356    $153,296,483    $19.58
    ULGs
    Total for     4,348,853    $51,134,995   $68,216,251    $323,000,000     $14.85      $176,531,315    $499,531,315    $22.97
    44 ULGs


51. The size of this amount has been determined as a function of various factors: International good practice
    from an expanding number of countries with performance-based grant allocations and considerations on
    the costs of investments, expenditure needs and current level of investments. Experiences from e.g.
    Uganda, Tanzania, Ghana, Nepal and Bangladesh show that in order for a performance-based grant
    function to work well, the size of the transfer needs to be adequate to create response from LGs and their
    constituents28 . In other words, the potential financing should be attractive enough to bring about the
    institutional change sought at the local government level. Specifically in the Ethiopian urban context
    where there are significant urban infrastructure gaps, and costs of urban investments, the annual allocation
    needs to be adequate to fund urban investments in order for the LGs to respond to the incentive
    mechanism, within their absorptive capacity constraints. In the context of this Program, a band around
    approximately US$13-16 per capita per annum has been determined to be the optimal level by a
    comprehensive review of local government fiscal and revenue position by the study mentioned above in
    box 1, which has included extensive field-work across sample Program ULGs29.

    52.      The system of allocations takes into the fact that the 26 new ULGs have not been part of a
    performance-based grant system before and the larger capacity gaps in these ULGs. Therefore, the PBG
    element of the Program will be introduced gradually. In Program year 1, the 18 current ULGDP cities will
    be measured against Program’s minimum conditions and performance measures. The new 26 c ities,
    however, will only be subject to minimum conditions in this year. From Program year two onwards, all
    44 ULGs will be measured against all minimum conditions and performance indicators and will get
    access to similar amount of average funding per capita. This will mean that allocation to the new 26
    ULGs will start from a lower level in Program year 1, with an increase later on in tandem with the
    capacity building activities (see table above for the differentiated amounts for the new 26 ULGs vs
    existing 18 ULGs in year 1). This will create the per capita amounts of US$15.69 and US$13.38 for the
    existing and new ULGs, respectively, over the life of the Program. This will mean that in aggregate terms,
    the per capital allocation of IDA funds to existing 18 ULGs under ULGDP II will be slightly lower than
    the average allocation to these ULGs under ULGDP, which is US$16. The US$0.31 difference has been
    assessed to be negligible and it is expected that the Program will continue to leverage performance and
    results. The phased introduction of the performance system, while capacity is built, and the allocations
    against performance determined in the APA, will ensure that allocations are provided to ULGs with
    sufficient capacity to handle the discretionary funds.

    53.    This formula and the resulting per capita amounts will broadly maintain the level of discretionary
    spending provided to 18 ULGs under ULGDP. In terms of its impact on the development budget of the 26

    27
       As explained above, funding will be provided by regional governments and cities with various levels depending on the location
    and time for enrollment in the ULGDP.
    28
       UNCDF: Performance-Based Grants- Concept and International Experience, 2010 for a review of the experiences from 15
    countries in Africa, Asia and the Pacific.
    29
       Dege Consult, Urban Institute and SuDCA Development Consultants, Analysis of Urban Local Government Fiscal Position in
    Ethiopia, November 2013 (ELGRS).

                                                                                                                                  13
new ULGs, the US$13.38 average per capita per annum allocation to these new ULGDP local
governments will come in addition to the funding available for investments from existing sources of
revenues for capital investments. OSR and the actual capital expenditure of sample of new ULGs in
2011/12 (EFY 2004) were per capita US$5.87 and US$7.07, respectively30.

54.      In terms of the total ULG allocations, the Program’s first year allocates a simple average of US$
1.1 million to ULGs, with a range of US$ 108,583 allocation to the smallest ULG and US$4,495,993
allocation to the largest Program ULG (see Annex 3 for exact figures per ULG). When the Program
reaches full cycle starting in year 2, the simple average amount will rise to US$ 1.6 million, with a range
of approximately US$ 411,507 to the smallest ULG and approximately US$ 4,495,993 to the largest
Program ULG. As the Program funds will be based on actual performance, the actual grant disbursement
from these allocations will be determined by the annual performance of ULGs.

55.     The allocations are based on estimated targets for ULGs’ performance. If they achieve more that
these annual targets (as determined in the annual performance assessments), the allocations can be
accelerated and the funds in the program utilized earlier than the five-year program period. In this case, it
is expected that additional funding may be mobilized.

56.     The basis to determine these allocations will be the annual performance assessments (APA). The
ministry will procure an independence private firm to conduct the annual assessment, as under ULGDP to
ensure independence of results. Because the Program will leverage institutional strengthening of ULGs
for sustainable provision of urban services, the assessments will focus on measuring ULG capacity
improvements in planning, budgeting, assets management, fiduciary, environmental and social systems
management, revenue generation, good governance and transparency areas (see Annex 6 for a detailed list
of the performance areas, and the section below on DLIs and verification protocols for more information
on how the APA results will be verified).

57.     Similar to ULGDP, once ULGs receive Program funds, they will be mandated to use these to only
finance core infrastructure investments –spelled out in detail in Program’s investment menu (see Annex
4) – such as roads, water supply, sanitation, solid waste, greenery, street lighting, etc. Compliance with
the investment menu will be a minimum condition and be verified by APA each Program year. If a ULG
has not invested Program funds in full compliance with the investment menu, it will be sanctioned in the
following year.

58.     ULGs will be required to prepare the project in a participatory manner and use the planning tools
developed under ULGDP, the assets management system, capital investment plans, annual plans and
budgets. Participatory approach and proper planning and budgeting will be promoted through the annual
assessments.

Capacity building support

59.     Under ULGDP II, a structured and systematic approach will be adopted for CB activities and
focuses on all three government levels – federal, regional and local. Firstly, CB activities for all levels
throughout the program period will be supported by dedicated federal and regional mobile teams. In
addition, CB support will be tailored to the needs of federal, regional and local levels: (i) for ULGs, both
supply and demand side interventions will be provided to raise their general capacity and enable them to
respond to the performance incentive mechanism; (ii) regions will be supported to strengthen their urban
governance and management roles and in turn, provide CB support to ULGs under their charge; and (iii)


30
     Based on data collected under the ELGRS, Dege Consult, UI and SuDCA, November 2013.

                                                                                                          14
for the federal level, CB support will aim to strengthen their capacity building coordination, oversight and
backstopping functions in serving the regional and local governments.

60.      In terms of the demand-driven CB support, all ULGs will be allowed to spend up to 5 % of the
investment grants on CB, supported within a defined menu of activities, see Annex on Investment Menu.
The supply driven CB for the 44 ULGs will focus on the distinctly different needs of Program ULGs,
with a more comprehensive support to the newly enrolled ULGs. The 18 ULGs have benefitted from
capacity building through CBDSD, PSCAP, ULGDP and GIZ for almost a decade and the 4 well
established regions, have a higher capacity and several cities to support under the coming program.
Therefore, in addition to the general CB from the program, the new 26 ULGs will be provided with a 8-
modules CB support at the ECSU in the first half year of the program, covering core areas such as
planning, budgeting, financial management, procurement, etc.

61.     Technical assistance from the federal/regional government will be organized differently for the
new DRS regions, Diwa Dira and Harar, with CB delivered directly from the federal mobile team
comprising experts in multi-sectoral core areas of urban development and the established 4 regions, with
multiple ULGs to support – Amhara (10 ULGs), Oromia (11 ULGs), SNNPR (9 ULGs) and Tigray (8
ULGs). In those established areas, regional mobile capacity buildings teams will provide the supply
driven CB support to ULGs, with backstop from MUDHCo, see Annex 8 for further details on the CB
design.

Capacity Building to ULGs

62.      Assessment of capacity building activities under the ULGDP shows that current ULG capacity
building activities largely focus on backstopping support from the federal MUDHCO contracted team
(engineers, procurement and M&E experts) and training –formal training in particular. Under ULGDP II,
this type of supply-driven support will be provided to the ULGs by the regions progressively overtime to
align the actual practice with the functional mandates of regional governments, which is to provide
support ULGs. This supply-driven CB support will be supplemented with the opportunity for ULG for
more demand-driven activities through use of up to 5 % of the PB grants on CB activities within a defined
allowed investment menu to address the gaps and weaknesses identified during the APA. Using a
combination of supply and demand-driven CB support reflects global good practice, which shows that
such approach helps to ensure that ULGs address their unique needs and build their ability to plan for and
procure capacity building services, while the higher tiers of government ensure the core areas of urban
management are addressed. To ensure that the demand-driven CB funds are planned for and utilized
properly by ULGs, the Program, through the federal and regional teams as well as backstopping from the
centre ensures that ULGs conduct proper planning of their capacity building activities, are reporting on
these, and use certified service providers. The CB support will be applied and follow-up in the areas
measured in the APA, including planning, budgeting, revenue mobilization, assets management,
procurement, PFM, accountability and environmental and social safeguards. The demand-driven CB
support, funding from the performance-based grants can also be used for equipment, installations related
with the focal areas of the Program.

Capacity Building to RGs

63.     In line with the increased responsibility of RGs under the Program, support to the RGs will be
increased to help raise capacity to backstop ULGs. Through RG focused DLIs, they will be incentivized
and support the various technical aspects of ULG management and capacity building support. RGs will be
required to develop CB plans for the planned support to ULGs. Implementation of these plans will be part
of the DLI verification process. The support of mobile teams from the federal level to support this will
continue with the transfer of responsibilities to the regions over time. For the four most developed

                                                                                                         15
regions/regions with many ULGDP ULGs – Amhara (10), Tigray (8), Oromia (11) and SNRP (9 ULGs),
those regions will be in charge of regional mobile capacity building teams to support the ULGs directly
from the regional level.

64.      The main focus of capacity building architecture is to enhance urban governance and
management to achieve better service delivery. Due to the cross-cutting nature of the subject, CB will aim
to strengthen the governments’ capacity in a variety of subject matters, such as participat ory planning,
budgeting, revenue mobilization, financial management, procurement, infrastructure asset management,
contract management and execution, urban planning, environmental and social safeguards, audit, ethics,
fraud & corruption, monitoring & evaluation among others. The intention is both to strengthen the human
capital capabilities as well as systems improvements in these related areas (such as IT system, accounting
system etc.). The APA, integral to the ULGDP II, will provide a comprehensive, regular check on the
capacity improvement and achievement or identify gaps and weaknesses to be improved upon in these
areas (such as e.g. procurement and financial management) for each ULG.

65.   The CB activities will be carried out in two phases considering the transition between ULGDP
and ULGDP II and the key activities are captured in the table below:

Table: Main Capacity Building Activities in Each Phase

 Phase 1 (Nov 2013 – Dec 2014)                             Phase 2 (Aug 2014 – Dec 2019)
  1. Federal mobile team                                    1. Expanded federal mobile team and
  2. Two technical consultant teams with CB support            functions
     for ULGs (phased out by end of period)                 2. Four new regional mobile teams
  3. CB support to ULGs under program funded by             3. New urban management course for ULGs
     GIZ (phased out by end of period)                      4. Demand-driven CB for ULGs

66.    Further details on the overall design of capacity building activities under ULGDP II are included
in Annex 8.

Choice of instrument

67.      Choice and justification of instrument - the Program will be financed through the Bank’s PforR
instrument. There are three primary reasons for this. First, the ULGDP II is the extension of the current
Government program and forms a core part of the existing intergovernmental fiscal architecture. The
program will continue on a permanent basis, as an ongoing fiscal program leveraging GoE resources.
Second, the basic goal of the ULGDP II is to leverage the institutional performance of the local
governments it will target in an enhanced manner, while ensuring that expanded local urban infrastructure
is developed. Because of the direct relationship between the local government institutional results, and the
Program disbursements to federal and then to local governments, the PforR instrument allows for a
directly incentive-driven approach to achieve the PDO. Through the use of DLIs targeted specifically at
federal and at the regional government actions required to optimize the administration and execution of
local governments, ULGDP II ensures that incentives of the federal, regional and local levels of
government are effectively aligned around the goals of the Program. Finally, the Program will use,
improve and integrate GoE and local government systems, including public financial management, social
and environmental systems management and procurement systems.




                                                                                                         16
Program’s Disbursement Linked Indicators

68.     All Program funds will be provided through disbursement-linked indicators (DLI). The first
set of DLIs (1 through 3) will aim to strengthen institutions and delivery of infrastructure and services by
ULGs and will be supported by US$ 323 million from IDA funds over the Program implementation
period. These three DLIs will target ULGs. Each of these DLIs will represent a composite index of
different minimum conditions and performance measures:

         DLI 1: ULGs have achieved Program Minimum Conditions (MCs) in the annual performance
          assessments 31;
         DLI2: ULGs have strengthened Institutional performance as scored in the annual performance
          assessments;
         DLI 3: ULGs have delivered infrastructure, maintenance and supported job creation as per their
          annual plans, as scored in the annual performance assessments, and ensured that value for the
          money audits are conducted.

69.     These three DLIs in particular build on ULGDP performance assessment system and will aim to
ensure that;
             a. Basic fiduciary, project planning and execution, and environmental and social
                management conditions are in place such that local governments can absorb the Program
                funding;
             b. ULGs continue to strengthen their institutions of urban management;
             c. ULGs use program funds effectively in creating infrastructure and delivering services,
                achieve the targets in infrastructure delivery, maintenance and development and to
                promote the GoE’s strategy on urban development at the city level.

70.     The disbursement system for DLI 1, 2 and 3 is flexible towards actual performance of ULGs. It is
particularly important to note that if Program ULGs perform better (or poorer) that expected (as set out in
the disbursement related targets in the DLI matrix), disbursements will be adjusted accordingly. This
means that if Program ULGDs perform higher than expected they will receive higher than expected
disbursements. If this continues throughout the Program, then additional financing will be needed.

71.      The second set of DLIs (4 through 9) will target strengthening of regional and federal government
capacity so that they can properly fulfill their respective roles towards ULGs. These DLIs (with allocation
in the tune of US$ 57.0 million) will leverage, and disburse according to results achieved by (i) RGs in
providing support to ULGs, and (ii) MUDHCO in strengthening the capacity of and backstopping regions
and the regional support to ULGs as well as annual assessment and audits:

         DLI 4: Regional government capacity building and support teams in place and support urban
          service delivery;
         DLI 5: Regional Government Audit Agencies (ORAG) carry out ULG audits on time. This
          addressed a very important area of the program and timely audits is crucial for reduction of
          fiduciary risks as well as for the performance assessments:
         DLI 6: Regional environmental protection agencies (REPA) review of ULG safeguards on
          environmental and social management compliance in a timely fashion;
         DLI 7: Regional Revenue Authorities’ support to ULG revenue mobilization, - indicated through
          annual consultative meetings on municipal OSR, and up-dated tariff/tax proclamations in order to
          address and support the longer-term sustainability of the investments;

31
  It should be noted that ULGs will have to comply with the MCs to get access to the allocations from DLIs II and III as well, as
the MCs are the basic safeguards for handling of larger discretionary funds.

                                                                                                                              17
        DLI 8: Completion of annual MUDCHo capacity building activities for program ULGs, RGs and
         the Ministry. This promotes that MUDHCo strengthens its capacity to service ULGs and provide
         CB support to regions to enable them to provide support to cities, addressing the action plan
         outlined for the program;
        DLI 9: Timely launch and completion of Program Annual Performance Assessments
         (APA)/independent Procurement Audits (IPAs) and Value for the Money (VfM)32. MUDHCo
         ensures timely completion of the independent annual performance assessment, and VFM audits,
         and establish body for approval and complaints handling – an area which is core for the result-
         based budget allocations.

72.     Collectively the DLIs address the PDO. Performance against the first three DLIs is core to the
performance of the ULGs under the ULGDP design and overall disbursement from the Bank under the
Program. DLIs 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 are intended to leverage the roles to be played by MUDHCo and
regional governments in strengthening the capacity of ULGs for urban development generally, and
specifically for the delivery of Program results. These DLIs are designed to address the challenges and
bottlenecks experiences in the implementation of the current ULG and will provide incentives to address
the core issues on timely audit, social and environmental reviews/audits, revenue mobilization support to
ULGs and strengthening of the entire system and procedures for capacity building.

73.      The independent verification of results to trigger disbursement is key to Program. As per the
current ULGDP, MUDHCo will recruit an independent firm to verify Program results on a timely manner
to provide the basis for disbursements of funds under the Program to the participating ULGs – which is a
specific DLI for the ministry. To mitigate the risk of subjective assessment by the assessment firm, the
assessment results will be shared simultaneously with the World Bank and the government, and will
undergo a quality assurance by MUDHCO (under a technical sub-committee established), and reviewed
by the World Bank. Annexes 1 and 2 provide a detailed overview of the DLIs and links with
disbursements. The Bank will retain a right to make the final decision whether a DLI has been achieved
or not. In addition, the Bank will undertake regular independent quality assurance of the APAs to ensure
continued robustness.

 II.     Description and Assessment of Program Strategic Relevance and
         Technical Soundness

     a. Strategic Relevance

74.      Ethiopia is urbanization rapidly – with its urban population having doubled in 35 years, from
8.5% in 1967 to 17.4% in 2012. In addition, the rapid rates of urbanization are expected to continue. The
UN expects the rate of urban growth to average 3.57 per cent per annum between 2010 and 2015 placing
Ethiopia among the fastest urbanizing countries in SSA. According to UN’s medium variant projection,
the urban population is expected to reach 23 per cent in 2030. This is an opportunity for the country, as
urbanization will be the key to Ethiopia’s transition to a middle-income country, as it will help provide
the ground for the transformation of the country’s economy. Timmer and Akkus (2008) find that rapid
urbanization is a necessary condition for structural change. Financing and sustaining effective
urbanization will be crucial to sustaining the high rates of economic growth Ethiopia has been recording
for the past decade. Ethiopia needs to shift its focus to building its urban economy, not only because this
will be the source of growing competitiveness, but also because of its impact on the macroeconomic
environment, livelihood improvement and poverty reduction.
32
  The VfM audit will be introduced from the third assessment and will review the cost effectiveness of the ULG investments
made, the benefits and targets achieved in a standardized manner with an agreed and standardized TOR. The results will fit in the
performance indicators under the DLI 3 (and the results will be integrated in the results from the APAs).

                                                                                                                              18
75.     However, there are serious challenges to effective urbanization, and this limits the country’s
overall economic growth. These limitations broadly comprise; (i) infrastructure and service delivery gaps
and urban administrations institutional capacity weaknesses, as indicated above in the country and sector
context section; (ii) an increasing urban population and higher demand for the already limited services
and infrastructure, and (iii) a significant fiscal gap to help ULGs overcome these challenges. The fiscal
gap is due mainly to the inadequacy of the current fiscal system in Ethiopia to meet the financing needs of
these fast growing ULGs. As explained above in the Context section, within the fiscal system, ULGs
receive recurrent support from regions through block grants to meet their mandate to carry out the state
functions which have been delegated to them from the regional governments and some financing for core
public sector employee salaries. In addition to these resources, there is almost no support for capital
investments. In most cases, ULGs have to meet the infrastructure investment financing through their own
source revenues, see table below which presents the financing sources for urban development in the
country.

 Urban development spending at different government levels, 2011/12 (EFY 2004)
                                        Urban           Total Public    Urban dev. as
                                 development               Spending        % of total             Urban dev. as pct
                                (ETB million)         (ETB million)                              of total urban dev.
 Federal                                    232.7                52,893.8                 0.4                     4.5
 F/R Unassigned Capital                     223.7                15,532.2                 1.4                     4.4
 Regional (Bureau)                          869.6                28,534.2                 3.0                    17.0
 Woreda Level                               658.3                27,456.5                 2.4                    12.8
 Municipal (OSR)                           3,148.1                3,148.1               100.0                    61.3
 TOTAL                                       5.132.3              127,564.8                 3.7                  100.0
 Source: Based on data from IBEX/MOFED. As consolidated budget accounts only report on spending from
 treasury sources (i.e., federal/state revenues and block grants) and external sources (international grants and
 loans), but exclude local expenditures funded from municipal own source revenues. In order to get a view that is
 as comprehensive as possible, it is assumed that municipal own sources are fully spent on urban development.
 Caution should be used in interpreting these data, as there is sometimes inconsistencies in categorization and/or
 coding of the underlying budget data, which makes it difficult to consistently isolate urban development spending.

76.     Analysis of ULG fiscal position confirms this fiscal gap: Study of 12 sample ULGs shows that
even with future improvement in revenue mobilization at current growth levels, ULGs will need
substantive support in order to achieve the GoE urban development objectives: Revenues of these ULGs
vary within a board range of ETB 27 (US$ 1.5) and ETB 400 (US$ 22.2) per capita. At the national level,
as indicated in the table below, all municipal revenue constitutes only about 3% of total public revenues
in the country33. The most significant revenue assignments are at the federal and regional levels. Given
the specific figures in the sample ULGs and the aggregate national picture, the current system of relying
on ULG own source revenues to meet most, if not all, ULG institutional and infrastructure/service
delivery mandates is not feasible. Without additional funding, ULGs will operate at a sub-optimal level
and not fulfill their roles as economic growth engines for the country.




33
     Dege Consult, UI and SuDCA, ELGRS, Component 2a, November 2013.

                                                                                                                    19
Revenue profile for Ethiopia (actual revenue collections, 2011/12, EFY 2004
                                                                                                 ETB (million)                    Percent
Consolidated (Fed / Regional) Revenue                                                                 102,863.7                       97.0
o/w Federally Collected Revenues                                                                        85,879.7                      81.0
o/w Regionally Collected Revenues                                                                       16,983.9                      16.0
o/w Collected at Bureau Level                                                                            3,910.2                       3.7
o/w Collected at Woreda Level                                                                           13,073.7                      12.3
Municipal Revenue                                                                                        3,148.1                       3.0
Total Public Revenues (excluding Grants)                                                              106,011.7                     100.0
Source: MOFED/IBEX

77.     ULGDP II is intended to address these in the context of the overall evolution of the government’s
program and the intergovernmental fiscal system in Ethiopia. The Program rationale is to address the
current urban infrastructure gaps and strengthen the institutions of both the ULGs involved in service
delivery and the regions and the MUDHCO for support for urban management and improved urban
services. The Program will be an important continuation of the improvement of infrastructure and
services in the 18 cities currently participating in the program, through performance based capital grants,
as well as an important kick-start on urban development in the new 26 ULGs. The Program will address
urban poverty through the provision of employment opportunities during civil works activities in the
ULGs, improved infrastructure important for private growth, markets opportunities and improvement of
service in core areas of importance for urban development. It will also catalyze enhanced contributions
from the regional and city level for core infrastructure and services.

78.     To address the fiscal gap, the IDA contribution to the Program will significantly increase the
resources for urban infrastructure and service delivery. The contribution of IDA to the annual
performance grant of the Program, which will be around on average US$ 64.6 million p.a. (US$ 323
million /5 years) or 1,214,480,000 ETB constitutes about 24 % of the estimated spending on urban
development.34

79.      Importantly, the institutional focus and goals of the Program whereby resources to ULGs will be
made available only as a result of proven enhancements in their institutional performance address the core
issues facing the urban system. This approach is appropriate in the current policy environment where GoE
is significantly enhancing its focus on and support to ULG management and service delivery.

80.      There is a strong case for public funding for the Program. The types of public goods supported by
the program would never be provided at a sufficient level without the ULG interventions. Private
financing for key urban service delivery and infrastructure services, through public-private partnership
(PPP) schemes, is an important option to consider and will play a role. However PPPs are limited in
nature – they cannot be used for all urban services or infrastructure-, they require significant local
government institutional capacity to formulate, contract out, properly supervise implementation and
mitigate various risks of failure by the private companies contracted – which currently does not exist in
the majority of local governments; and they can only be implemented in national environments where the
overall legal and regulatory framework is conducive and friendly towards PPPs. Given these limitations,


34
  Ibid, ELGRS, Component 2a, Table 4.5 As is the case with all reports generated by IBEX, we should be cautious in
interpreting these data. For instance, it is possible (in fact, it is likely) that inconsistencies in the coding of the underlying budget
data allows to identify some—but not all—urban development spending. (Exchange rate: 1 US$ =18.8 Birr to US$ is applied in
this case).

                                                                                                                                       20
among others, in the targeted 44 ULGs in the Program, public financing is assessed to be the optimal
decision.

81.      The proposed Program will contribute directly to the GoE’s Growth and Transformation Plan
(GTP), especially the pillar on enhancing expansion and quality of infrastructure development, enhancing
expansion and quality of social development (e.g. through creation of services and employment
opportunities) and building capacity and deepening good governance and the new ECPI, where the
performance measures in the APA is designed in a manner closely related with the objectives of the new
strategy. Urban development is a major tool for ensuring that there are efficient growth centers for the
country-wide development and creation of employment opportunities through investments in
infrastructure and the benefits of this afterwards for private development in other sectors. The labor-
intensive investments funded under the ULGDP, and promotion of the activities of micro and small
enterprise development through involvement in the execution of Program infrastructure investments, are
key priorities. The focus on improved OSR in the incentive system and CB support elements are also
important in providing a strong, consistent and buoyant ULG revenue base and improved future levels of
infrastructure investments. Finally, the Program will provide strong incentives for ULGs to focus on
improved service delivery and urban infrastructure through incentives for matching funding for urban
investments, improved maintenance of the constructed infrastructure and performance measures on
provision of service standards/citizens’ charter and achievement of these.

82.      Given the importance of urbanization and the role of ULGs for Ethiopia’s overall economic
growth on the one hand, and the current fiscal gap which prevents ULGs from fulfilling this role on the
other, the Program is assessed to be strategically relevant. In addition to helping reduce the fiscal gap by
raising local government institutional capacity, the Program is also fully aligned with the GoE’s policy
priorities.

83.      The World Bank, as a global development institution, can, together with its partners, be an
effective broker of knowledge and play a catalytic role as facilitator for the urban reform process in
Ethiopia. The Bank is particularly well positioned to assist the GoE with the evolution of its urban
infrastructure finance and management system, due to the long standing partnership in the urban sphere
(see paragraphs 14 and 15), its regional -particularly through the design and implementation of urban
focused PBGs in Tanzania, Uganda and Ghana, among other eastern and southern African countries- and
international experience on similar programs and their potential to provide long-term financing as
required.

       b. Program Technical Soundness

84.     The technical design of ULGDP II draws heavily from the extensive experiences of Bank – GoE
partnership in the urban sector, most recently the ULGDP. The four annual performance assessments of
the ULGs supported by the program, a program midterm review in 2011, as well as a number of specific
technical design studies, including a comprehensive LG revenue enhancement study 35 and a recent
benchmarking study of urban service delivery needs and coverage36are among the body of knowledge
produced to determine the technical elements of the Program.

85.     The proposed design and the activities to be implemented under the proposed ULGDP will
contribute to the realization of the Program results and development objective. Experiences from the first
phase of the program and from other similar projects in relevant countries with the similar modalities
have proved that the types of activities to be implemented using the Program funds at the ULG, regional

35
     Dege Consult, Urban Institute and SuDCA Development Consultants: ELGRS, Component 2a Report, November 2013.
36
     SUDCA, August 2013.

                                                                                                                   21
and at the MUDHCO levels are highly likely to produce results of improved coverage and quality of core
urban services and of strengthening of the institutional capacity of the participating ULGs, regions and the
federal agencies involved.

86.     The Program aims to strengthen relevant stakeholder incentives to contribute to Program
objectives, through the application of the following elements embedded in its design:
     Use of enhanced government systems to strengthen capacity at both the federal, regional at city
        level (the participating ULGs) for urban development 37 , within flow of funds, financial
        management and operations;
     Focus on ULGs as the main implementing bodies - The ULGs will be responsible for the
        implementation of the Program activities at their level. The Program therefore provides an
        opportunity for the participating ULGs to improve their capacity – thus contributing to the
        achievement of the Program objective;
     Place natural incentives through focus on performance – although each ULG will be given a
        tentative allocation (also referred to as indicative planning figure (IPFs) for the duration of the
        Program period, the actual amount of funds they receive will be based on them meeting and
        maintaining the minimum condition throughout the Program period and their performance
        outcomes. The performance assessment system is at the core of Program design since it will be
        the main driver for ULG capacity building and is directly linked to the Program results and
        disbursements. The assessment tool, which is based on the experiences from the current ULGDP
        and from other relevant cases in different countries, has been refined during preparation, and will
        be reviewed during implementation, if necessary. By the end of the Program most ULGs are
        likely to receive less or more than their tentative allocations, or IPFs, depending on their results.
        The annual performance assessment has therefore adequate inbuilt sanctions and incentives
        mechanisms;
     Get the focus areas right. The incentives will support core urban management areas of such as
        proper planning and budgeting, revenue mobilization, asset management planning, procurement
        and PFM, as well as strengthening of good governance and accountability;
     Provide a flexible capacity building to allow ULGs to respond to the incentive mechanism. All
        participating ULGs will benefit from municipal capacity building, to prepare them to receive the
        significant performance grants during the next assessment and ensure improved capacity for all
        ULGs by end of Program period;
     Strengthen the links between investments, incentives and capacity building support, whereby the
        CB support and support is applied in a targeted manner to address identified gaps in the annual
        performance assessments;
     Support the incentives of federal and regional level for backstopping support, CB, oversight and
        performance of roles vis-à-vis the ULGs through result-oriented allocations.
     Introduce the PBG element gradually for the new ULGs, with a smaller grant funding in the first
        year linked with compliance with MCs;
     Strengthen longer-term sustainability of the investments made and the entire ULG funding system
        by strengthening of the focus on improved municipal revenue mobilization through introduction
        of strong incentives for improved ULG own source revenues and strengthening of the
        backstopping support and guidance from the regional and federal level of government;

37
  ULGDP has developed a number of guidelines issues by MUDHCo, including for Assets Management, PFM, Capital
investment planning, the program operational manual etc, which with slight up-date and refinement, will be used for the second
phase as well.

                                                                                                                             22
       Strengthen the oversight, audit and safeguard procedures at all tiers of government, and address
        the few bottlenecks identified in the first ULGDP.

87.     Program design builds on the experience of ULGDP, and addresses the challenges of ULGDP
raised in the earlier section of this work. These include ensuring that the annual assessments are
undertaken on time, strengthening the capacity building support (supply and demand side), taking Addis
out of the Program scope to ensure the unique circumstances of the primate city are addressed properly
under a possible Addis specific project, and the expansion of the incentives to support at all tiers of
governance (especially the involvement of the regional governments). In addition, the design of the
Program has benefitted from the knowledge and experiences of internal and external experts and the
experiences from performance-based grant systems from various countries. An increasing number of
countries have introduced performance-based fiscal transfers to local governments, and most recently
linked to PforR operations with focus on urban investments, such as Uganda and Tanzania.

Box: Implementation lesson learnt thus far of the Tanzania Urban Local Government Strengthening ULGSP
PforR

The design of this Program incorporates key lessons learnt of the one-year implementation track record of the
Tanzania ULGSP PforR. The overall design of ULGSP is similar to ULGDP II. Under ULGSP, the objective is to
improve institutional performance for urban service delivery in 18 local governments across Tanzania. Similar to
ULGSP, the Tanzania Program links disbursements to the achievement of verified results in key areas of urban
management and service provision, municipalities can use the funds to prepare and build basic urban infrastructure.
The Tanzania Program also includes capacity building support to local governments to help them achieve the
performance targets. Experience in the first year of implementation shows that the Program is on track with: (i)
independent performance assessment mechanism functioning well, (ii) the first round of performance-based
disbursements already made on schedule, (iii) new opportunities introduced for training and to strengthen the
community of practices between municipalities, and (iv) the first phase of municipal investments already under
construction. Three lessons learnt of from the implementation of the Tanzania PforR, which have been incorporated
into the design of this operation, are: (i) that a randomized field-based quality assurance review of the independent
assessment by the Bank is critical for good governance and to verify the accuracy of the independent assessment - a
desk top review is not sufficient; (ii) given that the quality assurance review can be a sensitive process, there is
benefit in utilizing members outside of the core Bank task team for the quality assurance review and obtain a fresh
perspective and (iii) ensuring that all performance based indicators are unambiguous and designed in a way that is
not subject to interpretation.

88.      Furthermore, to ensure the sustainability of investments created by using Program funds and of
the existing stock, each ULG will be supported in undertaking assets management, capital investment
planning, operational and maintenance planning, and revenue enhancement planning. The support to
improvement of OSR will include the update of revenue data base by source and revenue targets, billing,
collection, enforcement, complain resolution, and information, communication and capacity building
systems.

89.      The basic features of the current assessment system have been refined to enhance ULG capacity
in OSR generation, management of fiduciary, social and environmental systems, project implementation,
operations and maintenance. Minimum conditions, comprising requirements in planning, PFM, social and
environmental systems management and procurement must be achieved and maintained by participating
ULGs throughout the Program and are put in place to ensure minimum capacity of the ULGs to handle
the Program funds in full compliance with Program’s fiduciary and safeguards requirements. If ULGs do
not comply with the minimum conditions, they will not get access to the funds from DLIs I, II and III, but
will be supported through the capacity building activities. In addition to the minimum conditions, a set of
performance measures target urban institutional performance in core areas such as planning, budgeting,
PFM, OSR, procurement, assets management and governance as well as infrastructure delivery. These


                                                                                                                  23
measures are detailed in a transparent performance assessment manual (as part of the Program
Operational Manual/guidelines), prepared by the government for the Program. The performance results
approval and verification protocol process will be formalized through systems and procedures for
approval, complaint handling and publication and the assessments will be conducted in due time to fit
with the ULGs budgeting and planning cycle, which will be supported through federal incentives for
timely completion. The performance assessments will continue to be outsourced to a private, neutral and
objective company to ensure that results are objectively measured, credible and that the general credibility
of the entire system is maintained.

90.     The Program will maintain the systems and procedures developed under ULGDP with the
following refinement and improvements:

How ULGDP II incorporates lessons learnt from ULGDP in its design
Area                    Lessons learned                             Action taken
Annual performance      Important to ensure that results fit with   This will be ensured with a clear time-plan and
assessment cycle        the ULG planning and budgeting              linked with the DLI on timeliness of the APA
synchronized with       process                                     and VFM audits. This will be monitored and
ULG planning and                                                    disbursed against a DLI (currently, DLI 9).
budgeting cycle.
Performance             Although there were a limited number        The system will be simplified, with the number
measures sharpened      of performance measures under               of measures reduced; and with clear description
and targeted            ULGDP, the system of registration,          of how these are measured in the APA manual,
                        data collection was very                    which is annexed to the Program operation
                        comprehensive with more than 70 data        manual. The new indicators focus on results,
                        collection points.                          such as delivery of infrastructure targets, value
                                                                    for money and actual improvements in the ULGs
                                                                    sustainability, such as increase in own source
                                                                    revenues38. Second, the system of approval of
                                                                    results will be formalized with the technical
                                                                    program committee and the Steering Committee
                                                                    under the leadership of MUDCo.
System of               Performance-based grant allocations         The current static system, where ULGs are
performance             incentivises performance, but can be        grouped into (1) non-access, (2) static allocation
incentives              strengthened through a system where         and (3) accelerated allocation (+ 20 percent) will
strengthened            every incremental improvement is            be improved and the system of performance will
                        rewarded.                                   be fully integrated with the allocation formula
                                                                    on a continuous scale where incentives are kept
                                                                    on all levels of performance, on a scale between
                                                                    0–100, and where every point has an impact on
                                                                    the allocation.
Focus on municipal      State revenues have improved faster         Strengthening of the incentives to improve
own source revenue      than municipal revenues, and not all        municipal core revenue mobilization (though the
improvement and         ULGs managed to improve the real            MCs and PMs in the annual assessment system),
longer term             value of the collected municipal            and strengthening of the environment for this

38
   An example on how performance measures in the coming Program have been strengthened is within the area of
ULG own source (OSR) mobilization. Whereas the current APA system focus on availability of revenue
enhancement plans and achieved targets (state and municipal), the future system will add assessment of the actual
results – i.e. improved OSRs, improved use of these sources on municipal capital investments (reward of matching
funding), and focusing on the core important municipal revenue sources, instead of the total of state/municipal
revenues. Second, the OSR is supported through measures to incentivise the regional efforts to create a conducive
environment for ULG OSR mobilization. Finally, the capacity building and guidance to ULGs on OSR will be
strengthened from the regional and federal levels.

                                                                                                                      24
Area                    Lessons learned                             Action taken
sustainability          revenues.                                   through improved dialogue between regions and
strengthened                                                        municipalities and through strengthening of the
                                                                    CB support to ULGs within this area.
Capacity building       Mostly supply driven, with one federal      Supply side capacity building will be
support strengthened    team under ULGDP.                           strengthened and supplemented with a demand
                                                                    driven element. As well, regional governments
                                                                    will be strong involved in the capacity building
                                                                    support, especially in the 4 regions where many
                                                                    ULGs are involved. This will also be supported
                                                                    by DLIs for the regional and federal CB support
                                                                    to ULGs.
Involvement of the      The ULGDP has proved the                    Regions will be technically involved and
regions in core areas   importance of the regions in the            incentivized to take active part in the CB
of importance for       support of cities                           support, facilitation of cities OSR, social and
Program objectives                                                  environmental safeguards, audits, and
                                                                    backstopping support as well as mentoring and
                                                                    monitoring. Supported by regional-government
                                                                    specific DLIs (DLIs 4,5,6 and 7).
The importance of       ULGDP has improved the coverage             This will be further strengthened in the ULGDP
timely audit            and timeliness of audit of cities’ final    II through a specific DLI focusing on timeliness
                        accounts                                    of the audit (DLI 5), and through strengthening
                                                                    of the minimum conditions to focus on audit
                                                                    results.
Flow of funds and       ULGDP has proved the importance of          A more simple, timely and predictable system of
reporting improved      timely and up-front grant allocations       disbursements of grants will be introduced with
                        and disbursements to ULGs to ensure         bi-annual equal installments and improved
                        that absorption and utilization of grants   classification of the expenditures to track actual
                        is strengthened                             use of funds.




91.      Based on the above, the technical design of the Program will contribute to the overall goal of
efficiently producing results and reaching the Program’s objectives. The Program technical design reflects
international good practice in the overall urban sector and specifically in technical standards and typology
of Program activities. Furthermore, the design ensures, to the extent possible, that the incentives are in
place for Program stakeholders to effectively contribute to the Program’s success. Therefore, the Program
is assessed to be technically sound.




    c. Institutional Arrangements

92.     The institutional arrangements will be based on the experiences from the current ULGDP, with
clear division of tasks and responsibilities between involved parties, as per the GoE structure and
consistent with existing legal provisions, regulations and guidelines. An additional enhancement under
the Program to the institutional arrangements established under ULGDP, as discussed earlier, will be the
technical involvement of the regional governments in implementation, see Annex 5 for a diagram of the
main agencies involved.




                                                                                                                    25
Federal level
93.    At the federal level,
           i.  MUDHCo will have the following main tasks:
                       Capacity building architecture of the Program, including direct support to
                        regional and urban local governments;
                       Establishment and operation of the federal mobile teams as described in the
                        annex on capacity building;
                       Monitoring and backstopping support of the regional mobile teams;
                       Program management, including the procurement and management of the annual
                        performance assessment and value for the money audits;
                       Monitoring and evaluation;
                       Program reporting, including the mid-year year and annual program reports.
                       Backstopping and guidance on issues such as ULG planning, assets management,
                        service delivery standards, and own source revenue mobilization (standard
                        proclamations, guidelines, best practices, etc.).
                       Accounting for the use of ULGDP II funds to the MoFED.

            ii.   MoFED will have the responsibility for transfer of funds, financial management,
                  including reporting and compilation of federal fiscal reports;
           iii.   The Office of the Auditor General (OFAG) will be in charge of the annual Program audit,
                  which will include all Program entities (44 ULGs, 9 RGs and MUDHCo) to ensure that
                  Program resources are budgeted for and disbursed according to the Program’s
                  expenditure framework, and that Program accounts are audited as per statutory
                  requirements;
           iv.    Support to FEAC to strengthen their role in the Program.

94.     As per the current ULGDP, MUDHCo will have the overall responsibility for accounting the
ULGDP II funds to MoFED. Day-to-day coordination of the Program will be handled by the Urban
Governance and Capacity Building Bureau (UGCBB) as per current practice (see Annex VII for
organizational structure of MUDHCo) and the diagram with an overview of the main institutional
arrangements. The division of tasks will be clearly outlined in the ULGDP-II Program Operational
Manual, which is currently being updated to be ready for the start of the second phase.

95.      As explained above in the capacity building section and in the annex on capacity building,
MUDHCo will also be responsible for the capacity building architecture, the federal capacity building
team, backstopping of the regional teams, and of the Program and management of the annual performance
assessments/value for the money audits. The technical focus of the capacity building support will
primarily be the gaps identified at the Program’s annual performance assessment. The results of the
ministry’s capacity building support to RGs and ULGs will be annually measured through a distinct DLI
(see the DLI section on this for further details).

96.      MUDHCo will be responsible for overall Program reporting. It will consolidate and analyze the
field data submitted by regions and ULGs and update the Program’s results framework twice a year. It
will also produce and submit to the World Bank a midyear and an annual Program report, with
information on the following:

97.    The midyear will cover the following issues:

                 Summary of aggregate Program expenditures and Program infrastructure delivered by
                  ULGs.

                                                                                                      26
               Execution of the MUDHCo capacity building plan.
               Summary of aggregate capacity building activities undertaken by ULGs and regional
                governments.
               Summary of aggregate environmental and social performance reports from each ULG,
                including information on grievances.
               Summary of progress against Program’s performance indicators.

98.     The annual Program report will include all the above, plus:

               Summary of the assessment results, including the performance of Program ULGs and the
                disbursed amounts.
               Summary of aggregate information on procurement grievances.
               Summary of aggregate information on fraud and corruption issues.



99.     MUDHCO has been implementing the current program in a satisfactory way and is to be
commended for the program’s achievements highlighted above. Importantly, however, there staffing gaps
in the ministry, where 73% of positions in UGCBB and 64% of positions in the program management
department are filled. The ministry is also implementing other operations in the country, in addition to the
ULGDP, with similar degrees of high capacity and staffing demands. The significant geographic and
technical scale up of the ULGDP under the proposed PforR, and the existing staffing gaps, if
unaddressed, bring considerable risk to the achievement of the operation’s development objective.
Therefore there is a serious need to fill the personnel gaps and further strengthen capacity of UGCBB.
The specific actions on this area are detailed in the Program Action Plan below, and the strengthening of
the federal capacity through the mobile teams to provide support to regions and ULGs.

100.    As per ULGDP, MoFED will be responsible for handling the flow of funds to the regions and
Program ULGs. It will also prepare semi-annual and annual financial reports. The flow of funds will be
simplified compared to the existing system, with two tranches per year, based on results of annual
performance assessments.

Regional level
101.   At the regional government level,
           i.  Regional government Bureaus of Trade, Industry and Urban Development (BTIUD) will
               be the core coordinating office. They will be responsible for the following:
                       Capacity building of the ULGs in their jurisdiction;
                       Consolidation of progress reports from ULGs;
                       Oversight functions and backstopping support on various tasks related with the
                        Program.
          ii.  Regional audit offices (ORAG) will conduct, either directly or through delegated
               authority, the external audit of ULG audits;
         iii.  Regional environmental protection agencies (REPA) will ensure compliance at the ULG
               level with the environmental regulations;
         iv.   Bureaus of Finance and Economic Development (BOFED) will manage flow of funds at
               this level, and consolidate the fiscal reporting from the ULGs for onward submission to
               the federal level;
          v.   Regional revenue authorities (RRAs) will provide support and guidance to cities within
               urban revenue mobilization;


                                                                                                         27
           vi.      Capacity building support to the ULGs, especially organized by the 4 regions Amhara,
                    Tigray, Oromia and SNNPR where there is a stronger capacity available, and where there
                    are several ULGs enrolled, where regional mobile teams will be established to support
                    ULGs.

102.     The track record of RG support to ULGs to date has been mixed. While some regions have been
executing their capacity building and oversight mandates vis-à-vis the ULGs in a satisfactory and even
sometimes proactive manner, other RGs have not performed as well, exemplified by delayed external
audits, or lack of response to ULG request for the approval of bringing flexibility to tariff and tax
structures. Given this mixed track record and the increase, under ULGDP II, in the technical role to be
played by RGs, particularly their role for supporting the enhancement of ULG capacity, and the addition
of four more RGs who did not participate in the ULGDP, collectively increase the risk at this tier of
government against the achievement of Program PDO. It should be underlined, however, that the four
new RGs (Afar, Benishangul Gumz, Gambella and Somali) will only have one Program ULG each in
their jurisdiction, with a total population of 284,093, which constitutes 6.5% of the total population in 44
ULGs. Therefore, the addition of new four RGs to the Program is expected to add a marginal risk to the
overall risk at the regional government level. The four regions will be supported by the Federal Mobile
team, which will also provide support to Diwa Dawa and Harar. The Program design takes these risks into
account and mitigates them, to the extent possible, through (i) DLIs which target results at the RG level
and Federal level CB and backstopping support, and (ii) Program action plan elements which target this
tier of government.

ULG level
103.     At the ULG level, the mayor’s office will be responsible for the overall performance of the ULG,
and based on a signed Program participation agreement, the tasks will be clearly defined in areas of
matching funding, compliance with MCs, performance criteria, accountability requirements and
operations. The project selection and approval will be done at the city council level after involvement of
citizens in the process of identification and prioritization and the established appraisal committees with
heads of departments, chaired by the mayor or the city manager. ULGs will also ensure compliance with
all financial management, procurement and environmental and social safeguards and regulations. If key
parts of these areas are not complied with as stated in the Program’s minimum conditions, no Program
funds will flow under DLIs 1, 2 and 3.

104.    Analysis of the current staffing positions at the ULG level shows that they are substantially filled,
in most of core areas of importance for the operations of the ULGDP, although there are some gaps to be
addressed39. Based on data from 27 ULGs, staffing at OFEDs is 82% filled, with an average staffing
number of 39. 84% of core financial management and procurement positions are filled, with an average
number of 22 staff. Audit and inspection roles are 85% filled, with an average number of 5 staff. In
budgeting and planning, a review of data from 15 ULGs shows gaps with 64% of the positions filled, at

39
   Analysis based on a review of the following: 1) Field data collected on required vs filled staff positions for ULGDP II IFA; 2)
review of the general situation in the 12 sample ULGs as part of the review under the Ethiopian LG Revenue Enhancement
Study; 3) review of previous studies, e.g. supported by GTZ on the baseline for the coming ULGDP CB/Technical Assistance
support and the Worda and City Benchmarking studies. It should be noted that the ELGRS did not collect quantitative data on
staffing positions, but the interviews and meetings with the 12 ULGs confirmed the situation, reflected in the quantitative figures
presented here and the challenges with staff turn-over and shortage of engineers/technical staff. Second, prior to the start of the
ULGDP technical assistance for the preparation of cities for ULGDP II, a review was undertaken of the strengths and weaknesses
of the cities in areas of PFM, procurement, environmental safeguards, internal audit, etc. (GIZ supported, un-dated documents),
which has benefitted the assessment as well). Also, the Woreda Benchmarking Study WCBS V 2013: Results of the supply-side
evaluation of local government in Ethiopia Draft report as of June, 1st 2013 Alexander Wegener:
https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/7492328/WCBS V Supply Side Report.pdf provides important information about the
staffing situation and challenges at the city and woreda levels.


                                                                                                                               28
an average of 4 positions filled. For 19 ULGs where data is available, the average number of
engineers/similar positions is 7. In terms of educational level, the average number of staff with BA/Bsc or
higher education is 15 positions but with a great variation from 3 (Motta) - 44 (Hawassa). The 26 new
ULGs have a lower number of filled positions (77 % are filled (31 staff) against 86% (47 staff) for the 18
existing ULGs, and less capacity in the various core positions, see Annex 7, and the summary table
below:

Table: Summary of staffing positions required and filled

City          Required     Actual       Position filled     Position filled    Position Filled   Position       Position Filled -      Staff
              OFED         OFED         (average, %)        Finance/           Audit /           Filled         Technical      Staff   with
              positions    filled (#)                       Procurement        Inspection        Budget &       (engineers etc.) (#)   BA/Bcs
              (#)                                           (%)                (%)               Planning                              (filled)
                                                                                                 (%)                                   (#)
All sample       50           39             82 %                84%                85%             64 %                 7                 15


ULGDP            57           47              86%                88%                86%              89%                 8                17
Non-             42           31              77%                79%                85%              61%                 5                12
ULGDP
No. in the     N= 27        N = 27           N= 27               N=26              N=26             N=15               N =19            N= 27
sample

Source: Data based on collected data from 27 ULGs by SuDCA for the ULGDP IFA preparatory work and processed for by the Technical
Assistance. For some positions, only data from a lower “N? is available. For the technical staff, data is not available on the official required
positions.

105.     Given the substantial increase in the funds which will be made available to the new 26 ULGDP
ULGs under the Program, having key staff, particularly in these new ULGs, becomes critical to ensure
that the funds are used in the appropriate fiduciary, budgeting, planning, consultation and other Program
framework and rules. The design of Program will mitigate this risk by making core staffing a Program
minimum condition. It is the agreed with the ministry that the Program ULGs should have the following
requisite staff by Program effectiveness; (i) city administrator, who is also the main coordinator of the
ULGDP II operations, or another dedicated officer (ii) finance officer, (iii) 2 procurement officers, (iv)
municipal engineer, (v) physical/urban planner, (vi) environmental and social systems management
officers.

Coordination arrangements
106.     A program coordination committee (Steering Committee) will be established with representatives
from MUDHCo and MOFED to ensure strong coordination of issues on planning, allocations, flow of
funds, compilation of data and approval of the results from the annual performance assessments (APAs).
A Program technical sub-committee (PTC) comprising key technical staff of MUDHCo and MOFED will
be formed under this committee, which will, among other things, review the results of the APA and
provide quality assurance of the results, as well as handling of complaints in a streamlined manner. The
PTC will meet quarterly and also carry out periodic evaluation of program implementation against
objectives and provide technical guidance with support from the World Bank. It will bring policy issues
to the larger and higher-level coordination committee and ensure that the Program is implemented in line
with the Program Operation Manual.

Fraud and Corruption
107.     Fraud and corruption during Program implementation that may affect achievement of results will
be addressed by strengthening the implementation of existing fraud and corruption policies and measures
available at the ULGs level. The detailed discussions of fraud and corruption within the country context,
and mitigating safeguards are included in the IFA, and the program design contains a number of core
initiatives to address the risks of this, such as especially the: i) minimum access conditions for the PB-

                                                                                                                                            29
grants, which also encompasses a grievance/complaint mechanism; and conditions for financial
management; ii) performance measures on core areas of importance for F&C such as participation,
financial management, procurement, accountability and transparency, iii) procurement audits (first as
covered by the APA, and from the 3rd assessment as conducted separately by the PPRA, with results
which impact on the level of funding for each ULG; value-for-the-money audits (from the 3rd APA), and
iv) comprehensive CB support from the federal and regional level, including team members in the TA
support with expertise on participation, accountability and ethics.

108.     The Program has high levels of ownership at all levels of government (federal, regional and
local). The coordinating ministry (MUDHCo) has been the lead entity in the implementation of ULGDP.
The project management aspect of ULGDP has been consistently rated satisfactory – with the challenge
of the timeliness of APA. The ministry, particularly the minister, is the main driver of the policy to scale
up ULGDP. Regional and local governments of ULGDP also have a strong commitment to the Program,
indicated by their past performance of signing participation agreements annually and having contributed a
significant amount of their own revenues as counterpart funding to match the IDA funds. The new 26
urban local governments are equally committed to the Program and have expressed strong wish to be
included over the various rounds of discussions during preparation.

III.     Description and Assessment of Program Expenditure Framework

109.     The expenditure framework of the Program will be a total of US$ 556.53 million. US$ 499.53
million will constitute the performance-based allocations for investments and will go directly to Program
ULGs for investments specified under the investment menu (Annex 4). US$ 30 million will be for the
results for which the regional governments will deliver (of which US$ 13 million are related with capacity
building support to the ULGs) and finally US$ 27 million will support and leverage MUDHCO activities
and results directly linked to the execution of the performance-based grants especially for capacity
building at federal, regional and ULG levels as well as for program management, especially the
APAs/VfM audits. The table below provides the overview of the main elements in the program
expenditure framework.

Program expenditure framework (US$, million)

Classification                                        FY2015        FY2016      FY2017      FY2018      FY2019         Total
                                                      (EFY            (EFY        (EFY        (EFY        (EFY
                                                      2007)           2008)       2009)       2010)       2011)
Performance based -fiscal transfers to 44 ULGs         78.7340     105.2041     105.20      105.20      105.20     499.53
(DLIs 1, 2 and 3 which measure Program
minimum conditions and performance measures)
    Of which from regions and cities*                   28.60       36.98        36.98          36.98   36.98      176.53
         Of which from regions only                     13.13       18.22        18.22          18.22   18.22       86.01
         Of which from cities only                      15.47       18.76        18.76          18.76   18.76       90.52
Capacity building and ULG support by regional            5.20        5.20         7.20           5.20    7.20       30.00
governments (linked to DLIs 4, 5, 6 and 7)
Federal support and capacity building Program           5.40         5.40        5.40           5.40     5.40          27.00
administration (DLIs 8 and 9)
Total                                                   89.33      115.80       117.80      115.80      117,80     556.53


40
     Comprised of US$50.13 million IDA and 28.60 US$ million GoE funds from regions and ULGs.
41
     Comprised of US$68.22 million IDA and US$ 36.98 million GoE funds from regions and ULGs.

                                                                                                                  30
* Regions and cities contribute to the performance based transfers in the following manner: Amhara, Oromiya,
SNNPR, and Tigray: 30% funding in addition to IDA funded grants, DRS regions: 20%. Existing 18 ULGDP ULGs:
30%, new cities in the DRS regions 10% and other new cities: 20%. Harar and Diwa Dawa contribute 50% in
addition to the IDA funded grants.

110.     Expenditure performance under ULGDP has been satisfactory, with no major expenditure
performance issues throughout implementation since 2008. Due to satisfactory implementation and higher
than expected disbursements, additional IDA and counterpart funding were added to the Program in 2011.
It is expected, albeit with some potential delays in the final completion, that all funds from the current
ULGDP will have been exhausted by June 2014, as the ULG commitments are above the available
funding from the ULGDP grants whereby ULGs will have to contribute more from OSRs and/or other
sources. The new system of disbursement linked allocations linked directly with the results of the APAs,
advanced timing of the APAs, and higher reliance on GoE systems and procedures, is expected to further
enhance the current implementation and absorption rates.

111.    The simple population based allocation formula of the ULGDP, which is adjusted according to
the performance of the ULG as determined in the APAs will be maintained. The disbursement model will
build on and further refine the current system, and be based on the relative performance of ULGs, where
every point will count in the calculations of the disbursement amounts, and will ensure that each ULG is
compared with the average performance, and rewarded if above this average. The current static system,
where ULGs are grouped into 1) non-access, 2) static allocation and 3) accelerated allocation (+ 20%)
will thus be improved and fully integrated with the allocation formula on a continuous scale where
incentives are kept on all levels of performance, on a scale between 0-100.

112.     Disbursements of Program funds from IDA to government will be in one tranche, and from
government to ULGs in two predictable tranches per annum, based on the results from the DLIs linked to
the assessment results42 (flows to ULGs will be in the beginning of July and January of each year). The
annual disbursement amount will be predictable as determined in the APAs. Program funding will be
predictable and in full sync with local government budgeting cycle. To ensure predictability, ULGDP
indicative planning figures (see Annex 3) will be shared with ULGs and RGs the entire period, although
actual annual disbursements will be based on performance assessment results and compliance with the
DLIs. Like the current ULGDP, the Program funds will be protected from any budget cuts. Cities will be
informed about their actual disbursement for the following year in Nov./Dec. of each year (preliminary
figures, and in January after the results of the final audit reports have been incorporated), immediately
after the assessment exercise, so as to give the ULGs ample time for their planning and budgeting process
which is completed in May of each year.

113.     The current ULGDP is included in the national budget and it is proclaimed at the federal level
under revenue and expenditures for MUDHCo. To ensure that the reporting of the Program expenditures
are integrated into the national PFM system codes will be established in the charts of accounts for regions
and cities. This will bring greater ease in accounting for expenditure from the Program, consolidating
aggregate ULG figures and strengthening the use of the national PFM system, IBEX. Ethiopia has a well-
developed budget classification and charts of accounts, which the Program will make use of, and few
additional codes will be established for the main expenditure items in the GoE’s Charts of Accounts .

114.    Program grants (performance-based capital grants and capacity building funds) are to be seen as
specific purpose grants in the GoE Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy, 2004 and will target specific
outcomes in terms institutional improvements and infrastructure and service delivery, although these are

42
     Instead of the current systems of fund requests and replenishments, based on actual use of funds.

                                                                                                         31
not sector specific, but multi-sectoral reflecting the needs for urban development across sectors. It will
promote the future roll out of support to ULGs as a genuine part of the intergovernmental fiscal
framework.

115.    As explained in detail above in Performance Grants to ULGs section, ULGDP PBG grant will
have indicative allocations -– see Annex 3 for detailed amounts per each Program ULG. The actual
annual disbursement to a given local government will depend on that local government’s performance as
determined by the annual performance assessments. The graph below shows the typical range of per
capita disbursement depending on the performance of a ULG against the average performance (in this
example set as 60 points on a scale from 0-100), and the allocation is the first year 2014/15 with an
average of US$ 15.69 per capita (for the existing ULGDP ULGs), and with examples of what average
performance scores on the three ULG performance-related DLIs will result in. New 26 Program ULGs
will only get access to the DLI I, the MC linked allocations in the first Program year, to ensure that they
gradually build up the capacity to handle and absorb funds. The allocation will range between non-
compliance (US$ 0), compliance with the MCs (only US$4.14 US per capita), and top performance
US$22.83 per capita in 2014/15. The system is designed in manner in which every point has an impact on
the allocation. An average size ULG with a relatively small increase in average performance, e.g. on 3
point from 60 to 63 points due to improvement in the level of own source revenues collected for the
2014/15 assessment (all other ULGs equal) will receive an extra per capita allocation on 0.40 USD (3.55
%) or a significant amount: US$39,535 US.

Range of annual per capita allocation for a typical ULG depending on performance on the minimum
conditions and performance measures in the assessment for EFY 2007 (2014/15)


                     25

                     20

                     15

                     10

                      5

                      0




                               Allocation per capita US$ p.a. against performance



IV.     Description and Assessment of Program Results Framework and M&E
116.   The Program will be monitored, and evaluated through the use of number of M&E tools
throughout implementation including regularly reports from ULGs to MUDHCo, the Annual Performance
Assessments/independent procurement audit, Value- for-the Money Audits and Midterm Review.

117.     The Program data (revenues and expenditures), including physical investments to be financed,
will be captured using the national PFM system, IBEX. This financial reporting tool will be supplemented
by the national ULGDP M&E system managed by MUDHCO which track, among other things, progress
across ULGs towards Program’s indicators. Practice under ULGDP will be maintained where the ULGs


                                                                                                        32
collect key data and share it with MUDHCo. The ministry consolidates and analyzes the field data
submitted by ULGs and updates the Program’s results framework twice a year. As per current practice,
MUDHCO will continue to share the monitoring information and analysis with the Bank on a regular
basis. As explained above in paragraph 50, it will also use this as part of the mid-year and annual Program
report. The ministry will also develop reporting formats for the use of the capacity building funds (under
the general PB grant) for ULGs and RGs. These reports will be aggregated and included in the annual
Program report. The ministry, in addition to the regular updates of Program’s results framework, also uses
the data from the national monitoring system to commission independent reviews and a series of studies
of service delivery, benchmarking of services etc. This practice, established under ULGDP, will be
maintained under the Program.

118.    As under ULGDP, MUDHCO is also responsible for planning and supervising the
implementation of the annual performance assessment, which is the major M&E tool to verify the
performance of the ULGs. The annual assessment will be carried out by an independent firm to ensure the
objectivity of the process. The assessment will be carried out in line with the Program Operational
Manual/Performance Assessment Manual/Guidelines, which is being developed by the ministry, with its
content and quality acceptable to the Bank. The manual will provide clear definitions for each indicator as
well as guidance on the scoring. Adjustments, which might be needed to the performance indicators and
scoring, will be done throughout implementation and particularly at the mid-term review to address any
possible shortcomings or changes on the ground. The internal MUDHCo M&E system will capture key
data that will allow an assessment of the decentralization support structure, e.g. capacity of MUDHCo to
ensure timely and agreed transfers of funds to the ULGs and the institutions’ ability to provide needed
capacity development and technical assistance to the ULGs.

119.     The results of the annual audits conducted by the Office of Auditor General and the Value-for-the
Money Audits which the ministry will commission and will be included in the annual performance
assessments, will also be important tools in tracking the institutional and infrastructure performance
improvements. As well, the Program monitoring system will include and leverage the results of the
internal audit for internal control and the external audits done by (or on behalf of) the Office of the
Auditor General (OAG). Internal audit will play an important monitoring role, going beyond fiduciary
aspects and, will include adherence to the Program implementation framework as set in the operational
manual. In addition the internal auditors report to the council and their reports are generally acted upon.
Proper functioning of the ULG internal audit will be a performance indicator to promote improved
performance in this area. Finally, the annual external audit reports by the OAG are tabled to the councils
and at the regional level. Analysis of external audit shows that they generally adhere with international
standards43 and practices.

120.    MUDHCo has been monitoring and reporting on the ULGDP successfully. However, given the
increase in the scope of the Program, there will be a need to strengthen the M&E unit of the MUDHCO
with additional staff and capacity, which is included in the Program action plan. The focus areas of the
ministry’s M&E department for the Program will be (i) generation of r egular consolidated data on unit
costs, spending across sectors and types of investments, as well as benefits of these investments; (ii)
provision of support to 44 ULGs (focusing mainly on the new 26 ULGs) and RGs on the use of the
reporting formats, application of M&E information for planning and budgeting purposes etc. and related
M&E system to capture activities and impact, and (iii) production of high quality analysis regarding
trends and development within ULG own source revenues.

121.    The current ULGDP has shown ULGs capacity to provide physical and financial reports on a
regular basis (although sometimes with delays), although the quality of these reports needs improvement.

43
     See Dege Consultant, UI, and SuDCA Development Consultants: ELGRS, November 2013, Report on Component 2a.

                                                                                                                 33
There will be need for a capacity building support within this area in ULGDP II, especially to the 26 new
ULGs. M&E capacity at federal, regional and ULG level will be enhanced through training of staff in
M&E, engineering, finance and procurement so that they are able to compile timely progress reports for
monitoring the implementation progress of the various activities under the Program. The additional M&E
specialist to be recruited under the Program at the ministry will provide hands on support and mentoring
to the MUDHCO staff and to the regions in M&E issues related with urban development and the
implementation of the ULGDP.

122.    The Program PDO is to enhance institutional capacity of participating cities in developing and
sustaining urban infrastructure and services. The Program will produce enhanced institutional
performance in core areas such as: i) enhanced community participation in local government budgeting
and planning; ii) efficient fiduciary management, iii) increased amount of own source revenues, iv)
improved infrastructure, service delivery and operational and maintenance systems; iv) strengthening of
accountability and oversight systems and v) environmental and social safeguards. Program’s specific
outcomes, outputs and targets are included in the PAD. The annual performance assessment system and
the adjustment in the allocations are designed in a manner, which ensure that the allocations can be
accelerated if the average performance of the ULGs is above the expected levels. Second, each ULG has
incentives to improve performance as every point is counting in the result-based allocations.

123.     The Program DLIs pertaining to ULGs (the first 3 DLIs) capture the ULG’s performance in
relationship with the PDO. These will be measured by: (i) number of cities in compliance with the
minimum access conditions; (ii) the percentage/number of cities with strengthened performance in core
areas such as planning, PFM, procurement, OSR, safeguards and accountability; (iii) percentage of total
planned infrastructure completed by participating cities, and % planned capital investment plans actually
implemented, maintenance performance and performance in job creation against planned targets. The
federal and regional DLIs will closely monitor the federal and regional performance under the program in
areas of timely annual performance assessments, CB support, oversight and timely audit.

124.     First, the annual performance assessments will be synchronized with the ULG planning and
budgeting processes, and will be advanced so the results are ready by November of each year with final
incorporation of the results from the annual audit reports in January. Second, the M&E framework will be
strengthened to ensure comprehensive information on employment generated, number of beneficiaries,
and outputs of the investments in a manner, which can be quantified across the ULGs, and the physical
progress reporting system will be standardardized44 and computerized.

125.    Table below presents the various inter-linked tools which will be used to monitor and report on
the Program:

 Type of information                                           Means                                    Frequency
 Implementation experience,                   ULGs, regional governments, and                    Two reports a year, with
 institutional performance, physical          MUDHCo, each with responsibilities as              the content as laid out
 progress and outputs, technical aspects      described above.                                   below in paragraphs 58
 of the Program, and achievement of                                                              and 59.
 the key performance indicators.              APA                                                Annually
 Achievements of infrastructure plans         APA                                                Annually
 and targets
 Value for the money                          Value for the money audits, results to feed        Every year starting in the

44
  The existing manual system of consolidation of M&E reports will be upgraded to a computerized electronic data system, using
access, excel, or similar tools.

                                                                                                                          34
 Type of information                                         Means                                Frequency
                                           into the APA and impact on allocations          2nd year as part of the
                                                                                           third APA.
 Financial reporting (use of funds,        Annual financial statements, semiannual         Semiannually
 expenditure composition, and the like)    financial reports, internal audit reports,      Annually
                                           annual external audit reports
 Detailed review of implementation         Midterm review.                                 Once in the Program
 experience, achievement of the key                                                        (20117)
 performance indicators, and progress
 towards the PDOs.

     V.   Program Economic Evaluation
126.    Economic evaluation of performance based fiscal transfer programs internationally indicates that
the economic benefits are wide-ranging and mutually strengthening. Moreover, a number of ULGDP
specific reviews of the major investments show: (i) a high level value for the money; (ii) that the
investment are highly labor intensive/ conducive to job creation, and income-generating for local
communities; (iii) that the modalities for delivery are efficient compared to other modes of service
delivery; (iv) general high levels of economic rate of return (ERR) on investments. Finally, the review
under the recently conducted revenue enhancement study shows that ULGs have a strong ownership in
the operations, and that the incentives provided improve performance and capacity in core areas of ULG
operations and management such as procurement, revenue mobilization and assets management. The box
below summarizes some of these findings.

Key core benefits of ULGDP investments
 Coverage of significant infrastructure and service delivery gaps with more than a doubling of the resource
    available at the ULG level for urban investments;
 Significant employment creation, i.e. more than 300,000 new jobs are expected based on experiences from
    phase one;
 High economic rate of return in areas where most of the funds are utilized, and competitive costs compared to
    other modalities and investments;
 Strong support of institutional improvements, incentives and longer-term sustainability in terms of
    strengthening of core institutions, planning, PFM, procurement, and safeguard management.


127.     Analytical work45 shows strong economic benefits of ULGDP investments, with strong focus on
cobblestone road construction. The key benefits of this and other ULGDP investments include reduced
transport costs, small and micro enterprise (private sector) development, and income and job creation
activities.

128.    A specific economic analysis, with cost benefit analysis, has been undertaken for the cobblestone
investment. With and without project scenarios have been defined in order to identify the net benefits of
the investment, with cash flow discounted at 10.23 percent (a discount rate developed by MoFED as a
proxy for the opportunity cost of capital in Ethiopia, which is consistent with the 10-12 percent notional
figure used for evaluating Bank financed projects). The analysis considers the stream of costs and benefits
over a 20-year period (2015-2039). There are several other potential benefits that are not factored into the
cost-benefit analysis because of lack of reliable data. Therefore, the estimated benefits from the
cobblestone investments can be considered conservative, and it can reasonably be assumed that the actual

45
 See GIZ: “Making Good Governance Tangible, GIZ, 2011? and the Draft Report: “Assignment on Money for Investment of
ULGDP, Assessment and Evaluation Report?, Volume 1, Main Report for GIZ, 2011. See also Dege Consult, UI and SuDCA
Development Consultants, “ELGRS?, Component 2a, Part One Main Report, November, 2013 for examples of the benefits.

                                                                                                                      35
benefits will be much higher. Results of the project economic viability as measured by the NPV and ERR
and its sensitivity analysis to changes in cost and benefit streams are summarized below:

Summary of Economic Analysis
 Description                                               NPV million US$                      ERR (%)
 Base case                                                      98.7                             20%
 20% cost increase                                              72.7                              16%
 20% revenue reduction                                          52.9                              15%

129.      The NPV amounting to US$ 98.7 million and ERR of 20% indicates that cobblestone investments
are economically viable, even without considering other non-quantifiable benefits. The economic impacts
of the project for all economic agents, including the transport users as well as the residents of the Program
cities is significant. An analysis of the project sensitivity test results at 20 percent increase in cost and 20
percent reduction in benefits shows that the rate of return and the net present value remain at acceptable
levels. The internal rate of return remains higher than the 10 percent opportunity cost of capital in all
cases and NPVs are found to be positive, thus confirming the viability of the project under various
scenarios.

130.     The economic benefit of the program towards private sector development is particularly
significant. This is because a large part of ULGDP infrastructure investments, including the key
infrastructure investment, which is cobblestone road construction, are executed by local small and micro
enterprises at the ULG level, with the involvement of the local community. The box below illustration
some of the benefits within the most important investment area: cobblestone roadwork.



Box: Example of benefits from cobblestone roads

Although many benefits were obtained by the construction of a cobblestone (CS) road, the main one resonates
around the benefit related to the streamlined transport that came after its completion. Along with this is a reduction
in transportation cost for the citizens living in the cities and surrounding areas. A study commissioned by the GIZ
(2011 (1) and (2))46 provides detailed evidence of the benefits of this.

According to this study, residents of a locality in the city of Adama have enjoyed a significant reduction in
transportation cost as a result of the introduction of a cobblestone road to the vicinity. The report further indicates
that more than 7,200 people have directly benefited from this road in different ways. Taking the 4.8 average family
size, it can be concluded that more than 1500 families are benefiting from the intervention. The report is sufficiently
detailed in identifying the benefits of the road in relation to the saved cost of transport. As to this report, the
transport cost of a single trip made out of this neighborhood used to be about ETB 40 (US$ 2.25) before the
commencement of this project (people were contracting taxis to move from one place to another). However, after its
completion the cost fell down to ETB 2 (US$ 0.15) per same trip, as they started to use shared taxis. (NB: the
exchange rate during the 2005 EFY or 2012/2013 is $1= ETB 17.8 and this conversion has been used in this
example).

In a conservatively assumed case, that a family makes an unavoidable single trip per week, the annual cost of
transportation in this locality used to be (estimated) about US$ 175,500 yearly (US$ 2.25 X 1500 X 52). However,
after the construction of the cobblestone road, the high transportation cost has significantly fallen to US$11,700
(US$0.15 X 1500 X 52). The difference between the two, therefore, highlights the benefit in the form of a saved


46
     Ibid (2).

                                                                                                                    36
cost, about US$163,800 (or equivalent to ETB 2,915,607) per year, that goes to the society per annum as a direct
result of this project. If it is further assumed that the economic life of this road is 20 years, then the total benefit that
will go to the society will be around US$ 3,276,000 or ETB 58,312,145. At the time, the construction cost of 1m 2 of
cobblestone was ETB 365 (US $20.5). Hence, it took the city only ETB 5,110,000 (2000 X 7 X 365) or US$
287,000 (2000 X 7 X 20.5) to construct a 7 meter wide, 2km road to benefit the society.

The conclusion from the above figures is that the society can reap a benefit topping around ETB 50 million ($2.8
million) just from the saved transportation costs during the economic life of the road. In addition, the benefit does
not come only in the form of saved transportation cost, but also takes many other forms, some of which are
discussed below.

The second common benefit that comes with many of the ULGDP projects, particularly with cobblestone projects is
the increase in value of land and even a change in the land use as a result of better accessibility that comes with the
commencement of the project. GIZ (2011, (2)) indicates that there is a very common pattern of change in land use
that comes with the construction of a cobblestone road. Many units that used to be residential are seen changing to
commercial as a result of the projects. In addition to this, there is also a notable increase in the price of land adjacent
to the projects. This increase in price of land, on top of benefiting the owners, could go to the coffers of the city if
they revise their property tax and land lease prices commensurate with the introduction of such projects. If harnessed
properly, this has the capacity to significantly enhance the revenue of the host cities. However, experiences have
shown that there is still untapped revenue potential whereby the cities could link the investments with various taxes
related to its use.

Source: Based on VFM study commissioned by GIZ, 2011 (2).




131.     ULGDP investments are highly labor intensive and support job creation. The independent studies
financed by the GIZ, which analyzed the ULGDP investments and MUDHCo data and monitoring reports
indicate the significant impact on employment generation impact of the ULGDP investments. The
MUDHCO reports show significant full and part time jobs created by the program: A total 312,460 jobs
have been created in 19 Program cities between 2008/09 and 2012/13 as a result of the investments
initiated and funded by ULGDP, supporting the objectives to focus on job-creation in the GoE’s
development policy, the GTP, especially for the local youth and unskilled workers. It should be
underlined that most infrastructure investments have a large share of women, youth and un-skilled labor,
involved in project implementation as well, the figure below.47




47
     Based on M&E reports from MUDHCO, 2013.

                                                                                                                          37
Employment Creation by ULGDP Investments from 2008/09 – 2012/13



                      No. of Employment Created by ULGDP
                                            92,294               87502
        100,000
          80,000                  65,803
          60,000                                       47,554

          40,000                                                                        No. of Employment…
                       19,307
          20,000
               -




132.     Economic rate of return (ERR) reviewed by international institutions show the benefits of
investing in areas targeted by the ULGDP grants. First, a study undertaking by “Sanitation and Water for
All? indicates that the ERR is high, and in the range of 15-20 % for urban investment projects in Ethiopia.
Within the most important sector for ULGDP - the road sector- gravel roads have an ERR ranging from 7
to 60%, depending on the length of the road, with the highest on the shortest length of the roads, which is
typical the target of the urban ULGDP investments, exactly the types of roads to be supported by the
Program48. Furthermore, cost-effectiveness analysis for the roads sector on the basis of data collected
under the current ULGDP shows that unit costs for ULGDP projects are generally lower than non-
ULGDP projects, and that the costs of e.g. cobblestone project costs (supported under ULGDP) are much
lower than similar sized asphalt roads, but that ULGDP supported roads are creating similar benefits will
less maintenance costs and other related benefits, see table below.

Cost comparison of Coble stone roads with Asphalt roads
               City                      CS Road Cost (ETB/m2)-2003                         Asphalt Cost (ETB/m2)
             Adama                                    400-500                                        1,428.57
            Hawassa                                      320                                         1,086.31
             Mekelle                                     300                                         1,000.00
             Axum                                        320                                         1,298.70
     Source: GIZ (2011)
133.    ULGDP modality of incentive based allocations promote planning, PFM, and governance
improvements across a broad range of core areas, and has introduced a good sense of competition and
awareness across the ULGs. Compared to the baselines, there are significant improvements in areas of
audit reports, planning documents (CIP, procurement plans, revenue enhancement plans, planning and
budgeting for maintenance and operations), as well as in accountability and involvement of citizen groups

48
  Similar investment profiles from other countries show high IRR for urban investments in core infrastructure, see technical
assessments for USMID (Uganda, 2012) and ULGSP (Tanzania, 2012).

                                                                                                                               38
in local planning. The potential for improving the ULG performance in those core areas will be further
tapped with strengthening of the targeting of performance incentives under the PforR support.

134.    The exact composition of investments, which will be undertaken across Program ULGs, are not
known a priory since they will be determined, like under the first ULGDP, through a participatory
bottom-up planning process in ULGs. The experience of the current program and other similar
interventions indicate several potential benefits, which will be quantifiable after conducting post-
construction evaluation. At this stage of design, baseline data and appropriate assumptions on the stream
of benefits and costs over the life of the Program can be made to estimate quantifiable benefits for sample
category of sub-projects which will be most likely chosen by the ULGs, like the example above of the
cobblestone project and the IRR of water and sanitation projects. These results will be validated after the
post construction evaluations of the sub-projects are subjected to VFM (from September 2015), cost
effectiveness and cost benefit analyses are done. Assessment of (i) the counterfactual scenario where
Program is not introduced and the fiscal gap mentioned above continues, and (ii) the potential economic
impact of the Program discussed above, shows strong rationale for the proposed intervention.

135.    Under the counterfactual scenario without the Bank supported Program, the target ULGs would
continue to face the large urban fiscal gap explained above, where, as a result of the absence of necessary
investments in infrastructure and institutional capacity needed to keep up with rapid urbanization and the
increase in urban residents in the targeted ULGs, would hinder the economic development of Ethiopia.
This alternative route will mean that the Program ULGs will face a serious challenge in meeting their
ever- increasing residents’ expectations of delivering reliable urban services, as well as a possibl e
deterioration, and in some cases, collapse of existing infrastructure. It is evident that without the proposed
Bank supported Program, the support to ULGs under the existing intergovernmental fiscal architecture
would be severely inadequate in achieving the proposed objective in the GTP and urban policies of
increased ULGs performance in expanding urban infrastructure.

136.     To the extent possible and appropriate, the Program will promote local private sector
development. As under ULGDP, the implementation of almost all Program activities will be contracted
out to the private sector. More than 2000 MSE were involved in the construction of investment projects
from ULGDP from 2008-2011 and this is expected to expand with the proposed investment menu and
likely investments49. ULGs, as implementing agencies, will retain supervisory role and the MUDHCo, as
the main executing ministry, will retain oversight and quality assurance role for Program implementation.
These arrangements are considered adequate in terms of economy, efficiency and effectiveness in
addressing the urban development issues at hand.

137.    The investments supported under the Program are core urban public goods/services such as roads,
drainage, sanitation and solid waste management, which would not be provided without significant public
interventions. The World Bank’s expertise within support of those areas in Ethiopia and elsewhere are
comprehensive, and the experiences from ULGDP-I shows that in addition to the necessary support for
financing of these interventions, the expertise the Bank can offer in the support of the design, technical
advise, monitoring and backstopping, is highly appreciated and valuable for the GoE and the GoE’s urban
program. Experiences from value for money audits from e.g. Uganda, also show strong VfM in
investment modalities like the proposed Program. 50




49
  GIZ, 2011.
50
  E.g. the Value for Money Audit in Uganda: “Technical and Value for Money Audit of LGDP II, Synthesis Report, December
2007, Ministry of Local Government, Uganda.

                                                                                                                      39
VI.       Inputs to Program Action Plan
138.    The Program action plan (PAP) will pursue a risk-based approach and will outline the main
measures through which risks to the achievement of Program’s PDO will be mitigated. These risks are
broadly associated with the three tiers of government involved in the Program:

     Federal government. MUDHCO, as the implementing ministry, has a significant responsibility for
      ensuring the various technical elements of the Program are implemented on time, the capacity of
      ULG and RGs are strengthened sufficiently, that guidance and regulations are issued in core areas
      such as revenue mobilization, assets management and service delivery standards, and the
      achievements under and challenges facing the Program are pro-actively monitored, flagged and acted
      on. The strong track record of the ministry under the satisfactory implementation of ULGDP is a
      strong foundation. However, given the technical and geographic scale-up of the Program, the
      importance of the role of MUDHCo will significantly increase, and naturally, the risks carried by it.
      As per below, the PAP will, to the extent possible, have measures to mitigate this risk;

     RGs are the tier of government which will (i) provide capacity building, monitoring and support on
      own source revenue enhancement, and (ii) execute important functions for vis-à-vis ULGs such as
      external audit, providing the necessary financing for the Program, and environmental and social
      systems management supervision. Because these are key areas for the achievement of Program PDO,
      the importance of role to be played by RGs carries an equal amount of risk. The risk is heightened by
      the fact that four new RGs which have not thus far been involved will now be part of the Program,
      though the risk of this factor is considered to be low due to the fact that each of these new RGs have
      one Program ULG under its jurisdictions, the total of which is 6.5% of the total Program ULG
      population. The approach will be to differentiate the role of the regions in accordance with their
      capacity (four stronger and currently involved regions will have a greater role in CB support), and
      through a more focused backstopping support of the regions from the federal government
      (MUDHCo);

     ULGs will be the direct implementers of the Program and the most significant risk to the achievement
      of Program PDO will be in this tier of government. The main risk at this level will be capacity as the
      lack of sufficient capacity could manifest itself in all areas of Program implementation. An important
      positive factor in this respect is that in preparation of the Program, all 44 ULGs, as highlighted above,
      received capacity building, albeit at different levels: 18 have been receiving capacity building and
      performance based fiscal transfers under the current program, an additional 18 have been receiving
      capacity building -though limited- under the current program, and the final 8 have been served by the
      GIZ technical assistance program. Despite these efforts to raise the capacity of ULGs, gaps,
      particularly among the 26 new ULGs, highlighted throughout this assessment, bring considerable
      risk. While these risks are important, it should be remembered that these risks were prevalent,
      arguably in a more profound way, when the program was initially started in 2008. At that point, none
      of the ULGs had received performance based fiscal transfers and almost none had managed
      decentralized service delivery. Despite these, the program has been implemented in a satisfactory
      success and with tangible achievements at the ULG level. ULGDP II is being designed on this
      foundation, while taking into account the core risks at the ULG level in its technical design and PAP.

139.    These key areas, and other risks are addressed through (i) Program’s technical design and (ii)
items in the Program action plan.

140.  Program’s technical design mitigates main risks through the use of its performance measures and
DLIs:


                                                                                                            40
        A DLI, which targets MUDHCo are the main tools to minimize the risks of delayed procurement
         and completion of the APA, and the risk that the ministry fails to provide the needed capacity
         building to RGs and ULGs;
        A DLI which focuses on the regional roles in CB of ULGs and 3 DLIs focusing on core regional
         functions such as timely audits, social and environmental safeguards/audits and support to ULGs
         in OSR mobilization through consultations, guidance and up-date of tariff proclamations
         (ensuring a conducive environment) for cities’ own source revenues. These four DLIs target the
         main risk at the RG level by incentivizing RGs to provide the needed capacity building, support
         on own source revenue enhancement of ULGs, carry out ULG external audit on time and provide
         the necessary environmental and social systems management supervision and will address some
         of the bottlenecks experiences in the current program, and based on these results provides the
         result-based funding and incentives;
        Program’s minimum conditions which require that each Program ULG has the basic sufficient
         staff in order to access Program funds target the risks brought by staffing weakness;
        Program’s minimum conditions which require that each Program ULG has a complaint handling
         mechanism to ensue enhanced transparency;
        Program’s combination of supply and demand side capacity building, which targets all three tiers
         of government, with a particular focus on the 26 new ULGs aims to reduce the risk of capacity
         across the various tier of government.

141.    In addition to these key Program design elements, the following items to be included in the PAP
address other Program risks.

For MUDHCO (and MoFED) some of the core activities will be to:
    Fill the current staffing gaps at MUDHCO and provide additional staffing to ensure the scale up
      of the technical and geographic scope under the PforR is properly staffed;
    Establish the Program coordination committee/Steering Committee for ULGDP with
      representatives for MUDHCo and MOFED and with a sub-technical group (PTC) to review and
      verify APA results and address other coordination issues, by Program effectiveness;
    Produce the Performance Assessment Manual/Guidelines, and share with 44 ULGs prior to the
      launch of the first APA;
    Produce mid-year and annual program reports and convene an annual Program stakeholder
      review meeting, which will be attended by MUDHCo, RGs, ULGs, World Bank and other
      development partners;
    Establish for formal approval of performance results and complaint handling as part of the above
      Manual/Guidelines51;
    Review and fine-tune the reporting formats on physical progress reports and computerization of
      the system of compilation and consolidation, as well as of the reports to be submitted to MoFED
      to reflect the new system of flow of funds;
    Develop formats for reporting on the ULG CB support as part of the Operational Manual;
    MoFED in cooperation with MUDHCO: Establish a system of flow of funds based on half-yearly
      equal installments, and classification of the main expenditure areas of urban investments;
     Update ULGDP Operational Manual and financial management guidelines;
     Agree with OAG that if ORAGs delay ULG external audits, independent auditors, certified by
      OAG will be commissioned to carry out the necessary external audits (supported by a DLI);
     Support to MUDCHO to issue standard tax/tariff declarations on ULG revenues and other core
      guidelines such as assets management guidelines and standards on municipal service delivery.

51
  See Dege Consult, UI and SuDCA Development Consultants, ELGRS, Report Component 2b, Part One, November 2013 for
further details.

                                                                                                                41
 For RGs
     Fill staffing gaps in core positions such as procurement, M&E and engineering support;
     Sign a Program Participation Agreement (PPA) with the federal government committing to the
        Program’s rules and regulations, including the necessary financial contribution to the Program’s
        performance-based grants for ULGs;
     Ensure that the offices of the auditor general are supported and that agreements are made to cover
        all the enrolled cities on an annual basis, and to deal urgently with any backlogs in audits;
     CB plan for support to ULGs (one for each of the four regions which will have regional mobile
        teams – Amhara, Oromia, Tigray and SNNPR);
     Support to implementation of the tax declaration mentioned about and provision of a conducive
        environment of ULG revenue mobilization (dialogue on tax ceilings, support to revenue
        enhancement plans, and dialogue and consultations on taxes with ULGs);
     Support for the regions to roll out guidance, support and monitoring of service delivery standards
        for cities.
 Cross-cutting
     Ensure the objectivity of APA results by requiring the APA firm to share the first draft results
        simultaneously with MUDHCo and the World Bank;
     Agree that as part of its verification responsibility, that the World Bank can launch spot check
        audits to complement the APA if and when needed. The TOR of these assessments have to be
        accepted by the Bank, and neither party can modify results except for factual errors, and for
        disbursement purposes, the Bank will retain the right to make the final decision whether a DLI
        has been achieved or not.

VII.     Technical Risk rating
 142.     Based on the findings of assessments undertaken for the preparation of the Program, the overall
 technical risk rating is substantial. The overarching measures to mitigate these risks will be firstly the
 series of institutional enhancement activities, which will be financed by the two elements of the Program,
 and secondly the incentive mechanism under the performance-based disbursement mechanism.

VIII.    Bank Inputs to the Program Implementation Support Plan
 143.    The strategic approach for the implementation support (IS) has four objectives: to (i) monitor the
 implementation of the risk mitigation defined in the technical, fiduciary, and safeguard assessments, (ii)
 provide technical advice, as necessary, to GoE in facilitating the achievement of the PDO; (iii) monitor
 Program implementation progress and to contribute to the quality of the capacity building of stakeholders
 by providing best practices and benchmarks, and (iv) ensure compliance with the provisions of legal
 covenants.

 144.    Implementation support will focus on implementation of the Program Action Plan, providing the
 necessary World Bank value added discussed above and monitoring progress towards the achievement of
 the PDO. The Bank will be primarily responsible for;
      Monitoring and Evaluation: Review APA, verification protocol and provide technical input;
      Environmental and social: Provide the necessary training and support during implementation on
         the implementation of the program operational manual which currently being produced by the
         Government for the Program.
      Fraud and corruption: Supervise the implementation of the agreed fraud and anti-corruption
         measures under the program and provide guidance in resolving any issues identified;




                                                                                                        42
       Procurement: (i) review of procurement performance from annual performance
        assessments/independent procurement audits; and (ii) provide training and guidance on
        Procurement to MUDHCO, RGs and ULGs; and
       Financial Management: Review the financial reports and the assessment results reports as the
        basis for disbursements, audit reports, and agreement on measures to address any audit
        observation and monitoring their implementation;

145.    Most of Bank’s implementation support team members (fiduciary, environmental and social
systems, and fraud and anti-corruption), including the Task Team Leader, are based in the Ethiopia
Country Office. This will ensure timely, efficient and effective implementation support. Formal
implementation support missions and field visits will be carried out semi-annually, or as deemed
necessary.

146.    Tentative implementation support is summarized as follows:

           Area                       Skills Needed                  Estimate Staff Time Needed
Procurement support               Procurement Specialist     5 SWs

Procurement Training              Procurement Specialist     1 SW
FM training and supervision       FM Specialist              4 SWs
Task Team Leadership              TTL                        10 SWs
Financial Management,             FM Specialist              2 SWs
disbursement and reporting        Local Government           8 SWs
                                  Specialist
Technical and Procurement         Procurement Specialist     4 SWs
review of the bidding             Municipal Engineer         4 SWs
documents
Environment/Social                Environment Specialist     2 SWs
monitoring                        Social Specialist          2 SWs
Urban transport                   Urban transport            3 SWs
Fiscal flows/ fiscal              Economist                  5 SWs
decentralization/ LG
performance measurement

147.    Skill-mix needed:

               Skill                   Number of           Travel Frequency           Location
                                       Staff Weeks             (annual)
                                         (annual)
Task Team Leader                     20                4 field trips            Country Office based
Urban Specialist                     15                4 field trips            Country Office based
Procurement                          10                2 and field trips as     Country Office based
                                                       required
Financial Management Specialist      6                 2 and field trips as     Country Office based
                                                       required
Environment Specialist               4                 2 and field trips as     Country Office based
                                                       required
Social Specialist                    4                 2 and field trips as     Country Office based
                                                       required
Senior Urban Economist               5                 2 and field trips as     HQ based

                                                                                                   43
                           required
Transport specialist   4   2 and field trips as   Country office based
                           required




                                                                         44
                                                                                Annexes
Annex 1: Disbursement against the Performance on the DLIs-Disbursement Linked Indicator Matrix
Disbursement-Linked Indicator Matrix
                                             Total      As percent of    DLI Baseline                          Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                                          financing         total
                                         allocated to    financing                            Year 1           Year 2           Year 3           Year 4           Year 5
                                             DLI          amount                              FY15             FY16             FY17             FY18             FY19
     DLI 1
     ULGs have achieved Program
                                                                               0            44 ULGs          44 ULGs           44 ULGs          44 ULGs          44 ULGs
     minimum conditions in the
     annual assessment

                    Allocated amount     $90 million       23.68%                          $18 million      $18 million      $18 million      $18 million      $18 million

     DLI 2
     ULGs have strengthened
                                                                                           60 (average      65 (average      70 (average      75 (average      80 (average
     institutional performance as                                              0
                                                                                             score)           score)           score)           score)           score)
     scored in the annual
     performance assessment

                                                                                              $21.8
                    Allocated amount     $158 million      41.58%                                          $34.1 million    $34.1 million     $34.1 million    $34.1million
                                                                                             million52

     DLI 3
     ULGs have delivered
     infrastructure, maintenance and
     supported job creation as per
                                                                                           60 (average      65 (average      70 (average      75 (average      80 (average
     their annual action plans and the                                         0
                                                                                             score)           score)           score)           score)           score)
     capital investment plans, as
     scored in the annual
     performance assessment, and
     ensured value for the money

                    Allocated amount     $75 million       19.74%                         $10.3 million    $16.2 million    $16.2 million     $16.2 million    $16.2 million




52
     In the first year, the performance measures will only be applicable to the 18 ULGDP cities. The assessment of progress against performance measures of all 44 ULGs
(including the new 26 ULGs) will begin in year 2.

                                                                                                                                                                               45
     DLI 4                                                                                   Capacity
     Regional government capacity                                                            building plan
     building and support teams in                                                           of and terms
                                                                                                                                80% in place      80% in place      80% in place
     place and support urban service                                                         of reference      80 in
                                                                                  0                                             and 80 %          and 80 %          and 80 %
     delivery                                                                                for regional      place%53
                                                                                                                                execution rate    execution rate    execution rate
                                                                                             government
                                                                                             teams are
                                                                                             place.

                    Allocated amount     $13 million         3.42%                            $2.6 million      $2.6 million     $2.6 million      $2.6 million      $2.6 million

     DLI 5                                                                                   44 ULG            44 ULG           44 ULG            44 ULG            44 ULG
     ORAGs carry out ULG audits on                                               554         audits            audits           audits            audits            audits
     time                                                                                    completed         completed        completed         completed         completed

                    Allocated amount     $7 million          1.84%                            $1.4 million      $1.4 million     $1.4 million      $1.4 million      $1.4 million

     DLI 6
                                                                                                               44 ULG           44 ULG            44 ULG            44 ULG
     Regional environmental
                                                                                                               safeguards       safeguards        safeguards        safeguards
     protection agencies (REPA)                                                   0
                                                                                                               reviews/audits   reviews/audits    reviews/audits    reviews/audits
     review of ULG safeguards
                                                                                                               completed        completed         completed         completed
     compliance in a timely fashion.

                    Allocated amount     $6 million          1.58%                            $1.2 million      $1.2 million     $1.2 million      $1.2 million      $1.2 million

     DLI 7                                                                                                                      44 ULG                              44 ULG
     Regional revenue authority                                                                                                 revenue                             revenue
                                                                                  0
     support ULG revenue                                                                                                        mobilization                        mobilization
     mobilization55                                                                                                             supported                           supported

                    Allocated amount     $4 million          1.05%                                                               $2.0 million                        $2.0 million

     DLI 8                                                                                   Compre-           Capacity         Capacity          Capacity          Capacity
     Completion of annual MUDHCo                                                             hensive           building plan    building plan     building plan     building plan
     capacity building activities for                                                        annual            in place, 80%    in place, 80%     in place, 80%     in place, 80%
                                                                                  0
     Program ULGs, regional                                                                  Program           of people in     of people in      of people in      of people in
     governments and the ministry                                                            capacity          place and        place and         place and         place and
                                                                                             building plan     minimum          minimum           minimum           minimum


53
    See verification protocol and the Bank disbursement table for further details.
54
    Five of the 18 cities currently participating in the ULGDP have received audits on time (by January 7, 2014) for financial year 2012/13 ((Ethiopian fiscal year 2005).
55
    The regional revenue authorities will need time to build up the capacity within this area, and the tariff proclamations are expected to be up-dated only twice during the
program period, hence results will be measured for the third and the fifth year of the Program.


                                                                                                                                                                                     46
                                                                          in place and    60% of the      60% of the      60% of the      60% of the
                                                                          terms of        plan            plan            plan            plan
                                                                          reference       implemented     implemented     implemented     implemented
                                                                          developed

                Allocated amount   $22 million    5.79%          0         $4.4 million    $4.4 million    $4.4 million    $4.4 million   $4.4 million

  DLI 9                                                                   APA             APA             APA and         APA and         APA and
  Timely completion of Program                                            completed on    completed on    value for       value for       value for
  annual performance assessments                                 0        time            time            money           money           money
  (APA) and value for money                                                                               completed on    completed on    completed on
  audits                                                                                                  time            time            time

                Allocated amount   US$5 million   1.32%                     $1 million     $1 million      $1 million      $1 million      $1 million

                                     US$380
  Total Financing Allocated:                      100%           0        $60.7 million   $78.8 million   $80.8 million   $78.8 million   $80.8 million
                                     million




The details of the DLIs matrix, total disbursement amount for each DLI and the corresponding percentage to total disbursement (Program cost) are
presented in the table below.

Verification protocol – The above DLI will be verified by an independent firm which will be hired to conduct annual assessments of the
performances of ULGs using the verification protocol instrument (minimum conditions and performance assessment tool). In addition, the
verification will be reinforced by other technical assessment reports such as value for money audit and regular WB supervision missions. The
verification tool is presented in the table below.




                                                                                                                                                          47
Summary Protocol for Verifying Achievement of DLIs

DLI Verification Protocol Table
# DLI             Definition/                  Scalabi-     Data Source          Verification Entity                          Procedure
                  Description of                 lity
                  achievement
1 ULGs have       The indicator will be        Yes        ULG compliance     Independent private firm       MUDHCo hires a reputable private sector
  achieved        satisfied when:                         with Program       carrying out the annual        consulting/audit firm (whose terms of reference
  Program                                                 minimum            performance assessment.        will be acceptable to the Bank) to carry out the
  minimum         The annual performance                  conditions (MCs)   (Note: The terms of            independent annual performance assessment
  conditions in   assessment, using only the              assessed by        reference of the firm must     (APA) to measure the performance of each
  the annual      minimum conditions, has                 independent        be acceptable to the World     ULG against the Program’s minimum
  assessment      been completed and the                  performance        Bank)                          conditions and performance indicators.
                  disbursements to Program                assessment.
                  ULGs have been                                             Draft verification reports     APA determines whether all minimum
                  determined on this basis.                                  are submitted for review by    conditions have been met.
                                                                             the verification entity (APA
                                                                             firm) simultaneously to the    The APA firm calculates the allocation to each
                                                                             government (technical sub-     ULG as per the formula in the Bank
                                                                             committee*) and the Bank.
                                                                                                            Disbursement Table, and provides the
                                                                             Neither party can modify
                                                                                                            aggregate disbursement amount (along with the
                                                                             such reports except for
                                                                                                            full assessment report and its findings)
                                                                             factual errors.
                                                                                                            simultaneously to government and the Bank for
                                                                                                            review.
                                                                             * TSC will have
                                                                             representation from
                                                                             MUDHCo (chair), MoFED          As part of implementation support, Bank will
                                                                             and other agencies as          review the assessment results. The Bank retains
                                                                             appropriate                    the right to make the final decision whether a
                                                                                                            DLI has been achieved or not.
2 ULGs have       The indicator will be        Yes        ULG progress       Same as above (DLI 1)          Same as in DLI 1, MUDHCo hires a reputable
  strengthened    satisfied when the annual               against Program                                   private sector firm to carry out the independent
  institutional   performance assessment                  performance                                       annual performance assessment to measure the
  performance     has been completed                      measures                                          performance of each ULG against the
  as scored in    (based on the minimum                   (performance                                      Program’s performance measures. APA assigns
  the annual      conditions and                          measures)                                         a score to each ULG. The private firm will
  performance     performance indicators)                 assessed by                                       calculate the allocation to each ULG as per the
  assessment      and the allocation based                independent                                       formula in the Bank Disbursement Table, and
                  on the score of all ULGs                performance                                       provide the aggregate disbursement amount
                  has been determined.                    assessment.                                       simultaneously to the government and the
                                                                                                            Bank for review.

                                                                                                            As part of implementation support, Bank will
                                                                                                            review the assessment results. The Bank retains
                                                                                                                                                         48
                                                                                                                  the right to make the final decision whether a
                                                                                                                  DLI has been achieved or not.


3 ULGs have         Achievement under this         Yes          ULG progress        For Program years 1 and 2,    Similar to DLIs 1 and 2 above, in Program
  delivered         indicator for the first two                 against Program     same as above (DLIs 1 and     years 1 and 2, this DLI will also be measured
  infrastructure,   Program years will be                       performance         2).                           through the annual assessment and therefore
  maintenance       measured on the basis of                    measures assessed                                 the same process will apply. For these two
  and supported     actual delivery of                          by independent      Starting in Program year 3,   years, as in DLIs 1 and 2, MUDHCo hires a
  job creation      infrastructure against                      performance         in addition to the above, a   reputable private sector firm to carry out the
  as per their      targets laid out in the plan                assessment and      private firm, which will be   independent annual performance assessment to
  annual action     for the former year using                   performance as      contracted, will verify the   measure the performance of each ULG against
  plans and the     Program funds,                              assessed by the     value for money aspects.      the Program’s performance measures. APA
  capital           maintenance performance                     independent value   The private firm, which       assigns a score to each ULG. The private firm
  investment        and performance in job-                     for money audits    will carry out the APA will   will calculate the allocation to each ULG as per
  plans, as         creation. Starting in                       (which will start   include the findings on the   the formula in the Bank Disbursement Table,
  scored in the     Program year three the                      in year 3 of the    value for money audits to     and provide the aggregate disbursement
  annual            achievement of the DLI                      Program)            the overall data.             amount simultaneously to government and the
  performance       will also include the                                                                         Bank for review. As part of implementation
  assessment,       outcome of the value for                                                                      support, Bank will review the assessment
  and ensured       money audits.                                                                                 results. The Bank retains the right to make the
  value for the                                                                                                   final decision whether a DLI has been achieved
  money                                                                                                           or not.

                                                                                                                  Starting in Program year 3, in addition to the
                                                                                                                  above, MUDHCo hires a reputable private
                                                                                                                  sector firm to carry out the value for money
                                                                                                                  audits to measure the quality of infrastructure
                                                                                                                  built by using Program funds. The result of this
                                                                                                                  will be shared with the firm, which will carry
                                                                                                                  out the APA. Then, as under DLIs 1 and 2, the
                                                                                                                  private firm will calculate the allocation to
                                                                                                                  each ULG as per the formula in the Bank
                                                                                                                  Disbursement Table, taking into account the
                                                                                                                  findings of the value for money audits, and
                                                                                                                  provide the aggregate disbursement amount
                                                                                                                  simultaneously to government and the Bank for
                                                                                                                  review. As part of implementation support,
                                                                                                                  Bank will review the assessment results. The
                                                                                                                  Bank retains the right to make the final
                                                                                                                  decision whether a DLI has been achieved or
                                                                                                                  not.
4 Regional          Achievement of the DLI         Yes          Regional            Same as above (DLIs 1,2       In Program year 1, the annual performance
  government        will be determined on the      (allocatio   government          and 3)                        assessment will check that the capacity
                                                                                                                                                               49
   capacity        basis of execution of         n per       performance                                      building plan and TOR for regional
   building and    capacity building             region,     against capacity                                 government teams are in place.
   support teams   activities specified in the   which is    plan, assessed by
   in place and    regional government           calibrate   independent                                      In Program’s second disbursement year (FY
   support urban   capacity building plan of     d)          performance                                      2015/16), the annual performance assessment
   service         the four regional support                 assessment.                                      (conducted in 2014) will verify that the
   delivery        teams to be established                                                                        (i)      regional government teams are in
                   which will have 10 staff                                                                                place and are operating, and
                   in each team.                                                                                  (ii)     regional governments have
                                                                                                                           adopted service delivery
                                                                                                                           standards (as issued by
                                                                                                                           MUDHCo*) and issued those for
                                                                                                                           the cities, and provided guidance
                                                                                                                           in implementation (reports).

                                                                                                              In Program’s third disbursement (FY2016/17)
                                                                                                              onwards: The annual performance assessment
                                                                                                              will verify that the
                                                                                                                   (i)      regional government has
                                                                                                                            developed Capacity building plan
                                                                                                                            for the ongoing FY
                                                                                                                   (ii)     regional government teams are in
                                                                                                                            place
                                                                                                                   (iii)    capacity building plans for the
                                                                                                                            previous year have been executed
                                                                                                                   (iv)     regional governments have
                                                                                                                            adopted service delivery
                                                                                                                            standards (as issued by
                                                                                                                            MUDHCo*) and issued those for
                                                                                                                            the cities, and provided guidance
                                                                                                                            in implementation (reports).

                                                                                                              * This condition is only valid if MUDHCo has
                                                                                                              issued the service delivery standards to the
                                                                                                              regions.
5 Regional         This indicator will be        Yes         Annual              Same as above (DLIs 1,2, 3   The reputable private sector consulting/audit
  government       fulfilled when the                        performance         and 4)                       firm (whose terms of reference will be
  audit agencies   regional audit entities, or               assessment                                       acceptable to the Bank) which will be hired by
  (ORAG)           their delegated agencies,                                                                  MUDHCo to carry out the independent annual
  carry out        which includes certified                                                                   performance assessment, will verify the results
  ULG audits       private audit firms, carry                                                                 against this indicator, following the same
  on time          out and complete the                                                                       process as in the DLIs above.
                   financial audits of ULGs
                   in their jurisdictions by

                                                                                                                                                           50
                   January 7 of each year.
6 REPAs            This indicator will be        Yes   Annual                Same as above (DLIs 1,2,   The reputable private sector consulting/audit
  review of        fulfilled when the                  performance           3, 4 and 5)                firm (whose terms of reference will be
  ULG              regional environmental              assessment                                       acceptable to the Bank) which will be hired by
  safeguards       protection agencies have                                                             MUDHCo to carry out the independent annual
  compliance in    carried out the safeguards                                                           performance assessment, will verify the results
  a timely         reviews/audits of ULGs in                                                            against this indicator, following the same
  fashion.         their jurisdictions before                                                           process as in the DLIs above.
                   the start of the annual
                   performance assessment
                   in each year.
7 Regional         This indicator will be        Yes   Annual                Same as above (DLIs 1,2,   The reputable private sector consulting/audit
  Revenue          fulfilled when                      performance           3, 4, 5 and 6)             firm (whose terms of reference will be
  Authorities      RRA/BOFEDs have                     assessment                                       acceptable to the Bank) which will be hired by
  (RRAs)           conducted consultations                                                              MUDHCo to carry out the independent annual
  support ULG      with the ULGs on tax                                                                 performance assessment, will verify the results
  revenue          rates and bands, with                                                                against this indicator, following the same
  mobilization     review of revenue                                                                    process as in the DLIs above. The APA will
                   enhancement plans and                                                                review whether there have been consultations,
                   have updated the tariff                                                              documented with minutes, in the previous
                   proclamations for the                                                                financial year. The assessments will be
                   ULGs                                                                                 conducted as part of the third and the fifth
                                                                                                        APA, and regions will have to: i) complete the
                                                                                                        consultations, ii) reviewed the REPs with the
                                                                                                        ULGs, and iii) up-dated the tariff
                                                                                                        proclamations prior to each of these APAs (all
                                                                                                        3 issues will have to be achieved in the
                                                                                                        previous financial year in order to fulfill the
                                                                                                        conditions for the DLI).
8 Completion       Achievement of this DLI       Yes   Comprehensive         MUDHCo provides            MUDHCo will put in place an annual plan to
  of annual        will be determined on the           annual Program        information and            build capacity of ULGs, regional governments
  MUDHCo           basis of execution of               capacity building     documentation to the       and the ministry. Among other things, the plan
  capacity         activities specified in the         plan, which will      World Bank, which          will specify the activity, its objective, the
  building         MUDHCo capacity                     include TOR of        verifies.                  resources assigned and the implementation
  activities for   building plan for the               capacity building,                               timeline. The template for the plan will be
  Program          federal, regional and               and details of                                   included in the Program operations manual.
  ULGs,            urban local governments.            activities planned,                              60 days prior to the beginning of the
  regional                                             and staffing                                     forthcoming fiscal year, MUDHCo will submit
  governments                                          positions.                                       the plan to the World Bank, which will verify
  and the                                                                                               that the plan is in the agreed format and is
  ministry.                                                                                             satisfactory.

                                                                                                        Within 30 days of the beginning of the fiscal
                                                                                                        year, MUDHCo will submit a report of the
                                                                                                                                                        51
                                                                                                      implementation of the annual capacity building
                                                                                                      plan for the previous year to the World Bank.
                                                                                                      World Bank will verify the extent to which the
                                                                                                      plan has been executed and determine the DLI
                                                                                                      amount to be disbursed.

                                                                                                      In the first Program year, the plan will include
                                                                                                      guideline/framework on municipal service
                                                                                                      delivery standards, job creation measurement,
                                                                                                      and land development and supply
                                                                                                      In the second release (FY 2015/16): The
                                                                                                      assessment will include the ECSU course
                                                                                                      delivered for 26 ULGs which will have been
                                                                                                      implemented before the end of FY 2014/15.

9 Timely          Achievement of this DLI      Yes   Documentation       MUDHCo provides              World Bank will review the compliance of the
  completion of   will be determined on the          showing that the    information and              timeliness of the APA and later of the value for
  Program         basis of completion of             APA, and later in   documentation to the         money, with the following timeline;
  annual          APA by June 2014 in the            the Program, the    World Bank, which
  performance     first Program year, and            value for moneys    verifies. The Bank will      APA
  assessments     then by November with              have been           have the right to join the   For Program year one: completed by June
  (APA) and       incorporation of the audit         launched and        APA and/or value for         2014.
  Value for the   results in January of each         completed on        money audits in the field,   For subsequent Program years; APA to be
  Money           year thereafter, by                time.               as part of its               completed by November of the same year with
  Audits (value   MUDHCo. Starting in                                    implementation support.      incorporation of audit results in January prior
  for money)      year three of the Program,                                                          to the FY for which the results will impact.
                  MUDHCo will also
                  launch the value for                                                                Value for money
                  money audits, by August                                                             Starting on August 2015 to be completed by
                  of each year to feed into                                                           November 2015 and the same timeline
                  the APA cycle.                                                                      thereafter for each year.




                                                                                                                                                    52
        Annex 2: Result Framework
Program Development Objective: Enhance institutional capacity of participating ULGs in developing and sustaining urban infrastructure and services.

     PDO Level Results                         Unit of   Base-                           Target Values                              Frequency     Data Source/      Responsibility
        Indicators                             Meas-      line                                                                                     Method-            for Data




                                  Core
                                                ure                                                                                                  ology           Collection




                                         DLI
                                                         FY14
                                                                   FY1556        FY16         FY17         FY18         FY19

1. Score in the APA for                  2     Number     0          60           65           70            75           80       Annually     APA               APA firm collects
institutional performance of                                                                                                                                      the basic data on
participating ULGs, averaged                                                                                                                                      performance.
across all cities.57                                                                                                                                              The MUDHCo
                                                                                                                                                                  and the Bank
                                                                                                                                                                  verify the index.

2. Score in the APA for                  3     Number     0          60           65           70            75           80       Annually     APA               See above.
achievement of urban
infrastructure targets by ULGs,
averaged across all cities.

Intermediate Results Area 1: Institutional Performance

1. ULGs that achieve an                  2     Number     0         10            18           24            30           36       Annually     APA               Firm collects the
increase of own source                                                                                                                                            data and the
municipal revenue of at least                                                                                                                                     MUDHCo and
10% over the previous year                                                                                                                                        the Bank review
under ULGDP II.58                                                                                                                                                 and confirm.

2. ULGs with timely audit559.            8     Number     5         18            32           38            44           44       Annually     APA               Same as above.



3. ULGs with clean                       2     Number     0          5            8            12            16           20       Annually     APA               Same as above.
(unqualified) audit under


        56
             Fiscal 2015 is taken as year zero.
        57
             In the areas of planning and budgeting, assets management, public financial management, procurement, own source revenue, accountability and transparency, environment
        and social safeguards, land management, and urban planning. The performance of ULGs ranges between 0–100. The percentage reflects the score.
        58
             The increase is measured in nominal figures.
        59
             Five of the 18 cities currently participating in the ULGDP have received audits on time (by January 7, 2014) for financial year 2012/13 ((Ethiopian fiscal year 2005).
                                                                                                                                                                                53
     PDO Level Results                        Unit of    Base-                               Target Values                               Frequency   Data Source/      Responsibility
        Indicators                            Meas-       line                                                                                        Method-            for Data




                                 Core
                                               ure                                                                                                      ology           Collection




                                        DLI
                                                         FY14
                                                                    FY1556         FY16          FY17          FY18          FY19

ULGDP II.

Intermediate Results Area 2: Infrastructure and Maintenance

1. Direct Program                √      na    Number      0       2.85 million   3 million    4.4 million    4.4 million   4.4 million   Annually    Census and       MUDHCo
beneficiaries under the                                                                                                                              APA
ULGDP II

1.a. Of which female             √            Percent     0       50%            50%          50%            50%           50%           Annually    Census and       MUDHCo
                                                                                                                                                     APA

2. People in participating       √      3     Number      0       1 million      2 million    3 million      4 million     4.2 million   Annually    Census and       MUDHCo
urban local governments                                                                                                                              APA
provided with access to all-
season roads within a 500
meter range provided under
the ULGDP II60

3. Urban cobblestone roads              3     Kilo-       0           120           270          420            570           730        Annually    APA              Firm collects the
built or rehabilitated under                  meters                                                                                                                  data and the
ULGDP II                                                                                                                                                              MUDHCo and
                                                                                                                                                                      the Bank review
                                                                                                                                                                      and confirm.

4. Urban gravel roads built or          3     Kilo-       0             15          45            75            105           135        Annually    APA              Same as above.
rehabilitated under ULGDP II                  meters

5. Serviced land for industry,          2     Hectares    0           300           680          1,060         1,440         1,820       Annually    APA              Same as above.
MSEs, and housing.


6. New controlled or sanitary           3     Number      0             0            2              5              9           13        Annually    APA              Same as above.
landfills supported under the
project under the ULGDP II




        60
             Numbers are indicative only, because the number of kilometers of roads to be constructed with Program funds will not be known until ULGs prepare and execute their CIPs.
                                                                                                                                                                                    54
     PDO Level Results                        Unit of    Base-                   Target Values                 Frequency   Data Source/    Responsibility
        Indicators                            Meas-       line                                                              Method-          for Data




                                 Core
                                               ure                                                                            ology         Collection




                                        DLI
                                                         FY14
                                                                 FY1556   FY16       FY17        FY18   FY19

7. Public parks and greenery            3     Hectares    0        5       15         25          40     55    Annually    APA            Same as above.
under the ULGDP II

8. ULGs that execute at least           3     Number      0        9       22         30          35     40    Annually    APA            Same as above.
80 percent of their O&M
budget under the ULGDP II.

Intermediate Results Area 3: Capacity Building

1. ULGs that implement at                     Number      0       9       22          30          35     40    Annually    APA            Same as above.
least 80% of the budget
presented in the annual
capacity building plans.

2. Regions that implement at            4     Number      0       0        3          4           4      4     Annually    APA            Same as above.
least 80% of the budget
presented in the annual
capacity building plans.

3. MUDHCo utilizes the                  8     Percent     0      60%      80%        95%         95%    95%    Annually    APA            Same as above.
budget presented in the annual
capacity building plans.




                                                                                                                                                      55
Annex 3: ULGDP Performance-Based Grant Indicative Planning Figures (IPFs)
Table 1: Overview of the Performance-Based Grants for the entire period




                                                                            56
Table 2: Overview of the Performance-Based Grant and Funding Sources for the entire Program
Period




                                                                                          57
Annex 4: ULGDP – Investment Menu for the Performance-Based and CB Grants

List of Eligible Investments under ULGDP II

Infrastructure/Service       Type
Roads                        Expenditure group 1.
                               Cobblestone, gravel and red ash roads

                             Expenditure group 2.

                               Rehabilitation of roads
                               Bridges, fords and culverts
                               Pedestrian walkways
                               Street lighting, etc.
                             Roads, which require significant resettlement of people (more than 200
                             people), will not be eligible with funding from the ULGDP II PB grants.
Integrated multiple          Expenditure group 3.
infrastructure and land          Servicing of land with utilities (water supply, electricity,
services (residential,              telecommunications, roads and drains (within existing right of way),
micro and small                     solid and liquid waste collection and disposal, and other core urban
enterprises, industrial             infrastructure).
zones)
Sanitation (liquid waste)    Expenditure group 4.
                               Sewer reticulation systems (no large canals (note*)
                               Wastewater treatment ponds
                               Sludge ponds
                               Community soak away pit and septic tanks
                               Community latrines: dry pit, ventilated improved pit, ecosan,
                                 composting
                               Vacuum trucks, vacuum handcarts, and the like.
Solid waste management       Expenditure group 5.
                               Collection trucks and other collection equipment, collection bins,
                                 transfer stations, collection points
                               Landfills (of the size of maximum 10 hectares and minimum design
                                 criteria as per the SWM Manual)
                               Biogas and composting plants
                               Landfill site equipment including compaction vehicles, etc.
Water supply (schemes to     Expenditure group 6.
be financed under the          Spring catchments and gravity distribution system
program will follow the        River intake (run of river/dam), treatment works and pressure
policies and principles of       distribution
those of the Ministry of       Wells with submersible pumps, treatment works, and pressure
Water and Irrigation and         distribution
                               Rehabilitation or expansion of existing system, communal standpipes,
Energy MWIE)
                                 etc.
Urban drainage               Expenditure group 7.

                                                                                                   58
                           Drainage systems
                           Flood control systems, etc.
Built facilities         Expenditure group 8.
                           Urban markets with associated services (water supply, drainage, access
                              roads, and the like)
                           Development of production and market centers for small businesses
                           Slaughter houses (abattoirs), with by-products and processing facilities.
Urban parks and greenery Expenditure group 9.
                              Support to urban parks and greenery development projects for
                                 beautification.
Consultancy services for Expenditure group 10.
design and contract           For studies relating to preliminary and detailed design, contract
management                       documentation and supervision relating to the above infrastructure
                                 and services, and the like.
Capacity Building        Expenditure group 11.
Support** (see below)    Up to 5 % of investment grants can be utilized on CB support, see menu for
                         CB support below.
*Note: Sewer reticulation systems canals (primary canal) shall not exceed a diameter of 1000mm and
shall not exceed 10 km.

The investment menu for the CB support is as follows:

 Training, seminar, and
                                Short- term local training and related operating expenses
 conferences
                                Selected short- term training (up-to duration of 3 months)
                                Peer to peer support across ULGs
                                Study tours as planned by the ULGs and approved by the Ministry
                                (study tours will have to be approved)
                                Seminars/Conferences/Workshops/Meetings Expenses
                                Training Materials
                                Hire of Venue /Hotel Accommodation
                                Refreshments
 Technical assistance and     Consultancy fees and related operating expenses
 organizational               Printed Material & Stationery
 development, system
 development etc.


 Equipment                  Equipment related with the capacity building support (not vehicles and buildings)
                            including:

                                Server (computing)
                                Networking and ICT equipment and software
                                Computers and accessories
                                Printer, photocopy machine, scanner
                                Binding machine
                                Air conditioner/ fan
                                Filling cabinet/ shelf
Notes on CB investment menu:

1. Total costs should not to exceed 5 percent of total performance-based grant received.
                                                                                                            59
2. Compliance with the capacity building activities menu will be a minimum condition for access to the
performance grant.

Current maintenance and operational costs, including salaries, should not be funded by the ULGDP
grant. Other ULG sources, including OSR should be used for these expenditures. The performance
system will promote planning and actual provision for this to ensure longer-term sustainability.

Investments, which according to the WB Operational Manual for Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)
are classified in Category A are explicitly excluded from the Program. These “…are projects which are
likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented.
These impacts may affect and area broader than the sites or facilities subject to physical works?.
Category A projects are not supported by PforR operations and ULGs cannot use the ULGDP II grants
for these types investments.

The investment menu above explicitly excludes possible high-risk activities and Category “A?
types of activities. The infrastructure investments that will be supported by the ULGDP II will remain at
the municipal level and the procedures for preparing sub-projects projects will, as per current practice,
include criteria to screen for significant negative impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on
the environment and/or affected people.

While the scope and scale of works under the Program are not expected to cause significant adverse
environment and social impacts, the current EIA procedures in Ethiopia require that all investments are
screened for negative impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on the environment and/or
affected people. In addition to screening for significant negative impacts, the following works will
be ineligible for financing under the ULGDP II:

       Road works outside of existing rights-of-way;
       Works involving physical relocation of more than 200 people;
       New landfills that are larger than 10 hectares, or new landfill plans for ULGs, which have no
        system for upstream waste collection, segregation, transportation; and treatment and disposal of
        leachates. ULGs, in the design of sanitary landfills, will be required to demonstrate a system of
        waste segregation; collection; transportation; and treatment before they can start landfill
        constructions;
       Activities that would significantly convert natural habitats or significantly alter potentially
        important biodiversity and/or cultural resource areas.

The infrastructure investments implemented by urban local governments are likely to deliver significant
social benefits, provided that they are planned in an inclusive manner, and they are designed to ensure a
distribution of benefits to vulnerable groups including the old, youth, women, and the poorest. Social
benefits cannot be guaranteed, and there is a requirement to ensure that projects are planned, constructed
and operated in a manner, which maximizes benefits. In particular, this should take cognizance of the
vulnerable groups as mentioned above, and ensure their participation in ongoing consultation throughout
the design and implementation of ULGDP. In some cases, there may be risks of the permanent or
economic displacement of people, requiring a carefully planned and implemented RAP. The potential
environmental and social benefits of urban infrastructural projects depend on the nature and location of
the project, though they are likely to be limited in scale.


                                                                                                         60
An assessment of potential effects of the types of investments eligible for financing in the context of
ULGDP II indicate that most adverse social impacts and risks are associated with the construction phase,
as well as the possibility of land acquisition, resettlement, and livelihood impacts. Potential adverse
environmental impacts include air pollution from dust and exhaust; nuisances such as noise, traffic
interruptions, and blocking access paths; water and soil pollution from the accidental spillage of fuels or
other materials associated with construction works, as well as solid and liquid wastes from construction
sites and occupational health and safety issues at worker campsites; traffic interruptions and accidents;
and accidental damage to infrastructure such as electric, wastewater, and water facilities.

These types of impacts, however, are generally site-specific and temporary. Experience from
implementation of ULGDP indicates that short-term construction impacts for the most part can be
prevented or mitigated with standard operational procedures and good construction management
practices that could be adopted to be followed consistently by all ULGs. Technical Manuals prepared by
ULGDP have been adopted by the MUDHCO, which are standard part of environmental management
plans included in bidding documents for contractors.

Each ULG can use, up to 5% of its performance based grant, for capacity building activities. Point of the
departure for these activities will be the results of the annual performance assessments, which will
indicate areas of improvement for ULG performance. Generally, these funds can be used for technical
consultant work, backstopping support, advisory support, training, minor equipment and contract staff in
areas where there is need to fill in the gaps identified in the APAs. The ULGs will be required to
develop a CB plan for the use of funds, applying the standard format elaborated in the Operational
Manual, and will have to report on the utilization and progress in CB activities. Items such as vehicles
and administration building are not part of this provision. As explicitly stated in the Operational Manual,
should a ULG be in doubt about the eligibility of an investment, they will contact MUDHCO to ensure
that the expenditure complies with Program expenditure framework.




                                                                                                        61
Annex 5: MUDHCO – Organizational Structure of Ministry
                                                             Minister

                                                                                               Audit Department




                   State Minister                                                                          State Minister (Urban
                (Construction Sector)                                                                      Development Sector)


     Construction Industry                                                        Urban Plan, Beatification &                  Federal Integrated Urban
  Development & Regulatory                                                            Sanitation Bureau                        Land Information Project
            Bureau                                                                                                                      Office
                                                                                  Land and Land Information

 Housing Development Capacity                                                        Registration Agency                      Urban Land Development &
  Building Construction Bureau                                                                                                   Management Bureau



                                                                                   Federal Micro and Small                    Urban Good Governance &
     Housing Construction                                                             Enterprises Agency                       Capacity Building Bureau

          Enterprises


                                                                                   Agency for Government
                                                                                           Houses




  Capacity Building & Reform            Policy and Program     Information Technology &             Minister office & Mini-           Support Services
     Management Bureau                        Bureau         Database Development Bureau            Cabinet Affairs Bureau          Coordinating Bureau




                                                                                                                                                          62
   Urban Good Governance and Capacity Building Bureau Organizational Structure



                                                     Urban Good Governance &
                                                     Capacity Building Bureau                                Planning and Documentation
                                                                                                                        Team


                                                                                                                    የየየየየየ የየ




                          Integrated Urban   Public Participation and         Human Resource                        Municipal Service
Project Management        Infrastructure        Decentralization              Development and                        Standardization
    Department            Development              Department                  Standardization                         Department
                          Department መመመመ                                       Department

                                                       Public Participation
                     Project Preparation               Improvement Case                       Occupational                       Municipal
                         Case Team                            Team                        standardization case                    Service
                                                                                                 team                         Standardization
                                                     Decentralization Case                                                      Case Team
                                                            Team
                         Financial
                      Management Case
                           team                         Emerging Regions
                                                         Support Team                                                              Cities?
                                                                                                 Human resource
                     Procurement Case                                                                                          performance M
                                                                                                   development
                          Team                            Diaspora Case                                                           & E Case
                                                                                                 performance case                   Team
                                                              Team
                                                                                                      team


                                                                                                                                                63
Overview of Staffing in the UGCBB


 No.     Departments’ Name                                Allowed Number of Positions   Actual Filled Positions   •Vacant Positions

     1   Human Resource Development and                               9                           9                      0
         Standardization Department
 2       Project Management Department                                17                          11                     6

     3   Public Participation and Decentralization                    18                          17                     1
         Department
     4   Municipal Service Standardization Department                 10                          7                      3
     5   Urban Local Government Development Unit                      14                          12                     2
     7   Planning and Documentation Team                               -                          2                      -

     8   Integrated Urban Infrastructure Development                  14                          3                      11
         Department
     9   Facilitation Team                                             6                          3                      3
         Total                                                        88                          64                     24


Source: Based on information received from MUDHCO, September, 2013.




                                                                                                                                      64
Annex 6: MUDHCO – Overview of the Main Institutional Arrangements
The institutional arrangements for program implementation will be based on the experiences from the
current ULGDP, with clear division of tasks and responsibilities between involved parties, as per the GoE
structure and consistent with existing legal provisions, regulations and guidelines of which some will be
up-dated to include the new features of the Program. At the central level, the Ministry of Urban
Development, Housing and Construction (MUDHCo) will be responsible for the overall program
management and operations, and budget whereby MoFED will be responsible for transfers of funds,
financial management and compilation of federal fiscal reports see the figures below.

Institutional Arrangement




                                                                                                      65
Flow of Funds




MUDHCo, MoFED and the Office of the Auditor General (OFAG) shall ensure that Program resources
are budgeted for and disbursed within the Expenditure Framework, and that Program accounts are audited
as per statutory requirements. The offices of auditor general at the regional level will be supported
through the regional CB support, and a linked DLI for timely audit.

The MUHDCo will be the coordinating ministry and shall have the overall responsibility for
implementation oversight and accounting for ULGDP funds to MoFED and the days to day coordination
will be handled by the Urban Governance and Capacity Building Bureau (UGCBB). The division of tasks
is clearly outlined in the ULGDP Operational Manual, which will be updated prior to the start of the
second ULGD. MUDHCo will also be responsible for the CB support to the regions and the mobile teams
supporting within this are as will as for contracting in of private companies and management of the
annual performance assessments and oversight and M&E issues on Program specific matters. MUDHCo
has proved in the first phase to have the capacity to manage activities expected in the coming operations,
but will need support in the scaling up, and strengthening of the CB support to regions and M&E
activities.

As per the current ULGDP, MoFED will be responsible for handling of flow of funds to the regions and
the cities included in the Program, and for preparing quarterly financial reports. The flow of funds will be
simplified compared to the existing system, with fixed bi-annual tranches based on annual budget
allocations and results of annual performance assessments of the ULGs.

                                                                                                         66
Annex 7: Minimum Conditions and Performance Measures


Entry-level condition – Prior to Release:

Participatory Performance Agreement (PPA)                Show commitment by all parties and defines the   Keep the existing rule. Up-date the PPAs.
signed with MUDC                                         rules of the system                              Should be included in the ULGDP Grant
                                                                                                          Operational Manual.


DLI 1: Minimum Conditions (minimum conditions)

No.    Minimum Condition                                 Reason                                       Comments – phasing in etc.
1.     ULG has produced and the council approved         Document minimum capacity in planning and    The subject for review is the plans developed in the
       a:                                                project handling.                            previous year for the year where assessments are
                                                                                                      conducted, e.g. if assessment is conducted in August
        Rolling three year capital investment plan      Implementation readiness.                    2014, it is the plans for 2014/15 /EFY 2007), which are
         (CIP) with                                                                                   typically developed from March – June 2014.
        Annual action plan;
        Annual budget                                                                                In the assessment for 2014/15 (EFY 2007) budget
        Annual procurement plan                                                                      allocations, which is expected conducted in March 2014,
                                                                                                      it is the plans for 2013/14 (EFY 2006), which are
        The planned use of the performance-                                                          reviewed, hence the exact plan will depend on timing of
         based grants from ULGDP II is in                                                             the APA.
         compliance with investment menu (only
         from assessment in 2015 of the                                                               To make this effective it is important that the APAs are
         performance in 2014/15 (EFY 2007).                                                           conducted timely in the future, see Section on APA
                                                                                                      procedures.

                                                                                                      Transitional arrangements. For new ULGs, procurement
                                                                                                      plans will only a MC for the second year, see also below.
                                                                                                      The investment menu will only be assessed from the
                                                                                                      second assessment where there has been the first
                                                                                                      planning/budgeting on the use of the performance-based
                                                                                                      grants. From the third assessment, the actual utilization
                                                                                                      of grants in the previous year will also be assessed.
2.     Submission of financial statements for the last   Show evidence on minimum capacity in PFM     In order for the external audits to start as early as possible

                                                                                                                                                             67
No.   Minimum Condition                              Reason                                                 Comments – phasing in etc.
      FY (closure of the FY on time).                                                                       cities should close their accounts by end of September/
                                                                                                            each year.

                                                                                                            Phasing in the first year: The new ULGs participating in
                                                                                                            the Program should have completed the financial
                                                                                                            statements before the start of the assessment.

3.    Audit report from previous FY should not be    To reduce fiduciary risks                              It should be ensured that audit quality continues, and
      adverse or with a disclaimer opinion.                                                                 there is need to combine with other minimum conditions
                                                                                                            to ensure sufficient safeguards on PFM. Compared to
                                                                                                            previous system, this is a strengthening of the
                                                                                                            requirements, as it is reviewing the audit report from
                                                                                                            previous FY.

                                                                                                            If the ORAG cannot conduct the audit in time, external
                                                                                                            audit firms will have to be contracted, and their results
                                                                                                            applied. (ORAG should clear the TOR and makes
                                                                                                            QA/endorsement of the results).

                                                                                                            Transitional arrangements:
                                                                                                            A waiver is provided in the first FY for the new ULGDP
                                                                                                            ULGs providing them with sufficient time to improve, but
                                                                                                            as a minimum they should have completed the financial
                                                                                                            statements from previous FY. For the first year for the
                                                                                                            “current ULGDP? ULGs, the deadline is prior to the
                                                                                                            effectiveness.

                                                                                                            Second year: All should be on time, i.e. January 7.
                                                                                                            The audit report is the last “trigger? in the assessment
                                                                                                            process, and will be checked after the field-work, but
                                                                                                            prior to the consolidation of the results.
4.    Co-funding requirements (defined with          Reflect sustainability of the program and ensure       Is combined with performance measures so that
      various rates of co-funding depending on the   that the rule on counterpart funding is adhered        contribution above the minimum level is rewarded.
      type of ULG). The co-funding requirements      with. The co-funding is set at a realistic level and
      are the following:                             further contributions are promoted through the         Co-funding should be budgeted for prior to the start of
                                                     performance measures.                                  the FY, and by the end of a FY ULGs should have
      10 % for the new ULGs in the DRS                                                                      contributed with the specific %, measured by actual use
      20 % for the new ULGs in the non-DRS           Promote improved revenue mobilization and              of funding on capital investments on areas defined in the
      regions.                                       incentives to focus on longer-term sustainable         investment menu and source of funding (IBEX coding).

                                                                                                                                                                 68
No.   Minimum Condition                                 Reason                                               Comments – phasing in etc.
      30 % for the “old? ULGs.                          urban finance.
      50 % for Dire Dawa and Harar.                                                                          Transitional arrangements/Phasing in: ULGs can only
                                                                                                             budget for this in the second assessment, as they do not
      A higher level of co-funding is promoted in                                                            know the level for this coming FY. The assessment of
      the performance measures.                                                                              actual utilization of funds can only be done in the
                                                                                                             assessment following a year of actual disbursements of
                                                                                                             ULGDP funds, i.e. from the September 2015 assessment.
5.    Key positions in place/coordination team with     To ensure that there is minimum capacity to          The positions should be in place at point of time for the
      the following positions under the coordination    handle the entire program implementation             assessments.
      of the city manager: focal persons for revenue,   process at the ULG level.
      procurement, environmental and social
      sustainability, M&E, PFM, and civil
      engineering, plus a functioning internal audit
      unit.
6.    Safeguards: ULGs have demonstrated that           To ensure that there is a mechanism and capacity     Defined by:
      they have established a functional system for     to screen environmental and social risks of the
      environmental and social management as a          CIP prior to implementation.                         Initiation of recruitment of environmental and social
      minimum condition to access the performance                                                            safeguards focal person at the city level;
      based grant, including an environmental and
      social safeguards focal person.                                                                        Endorsement of city level ESMS document that includes
                                                                                                             procedures for due diligence; institutional procedures for
                                                                                                             grievance management (see below under No. 8) and
                                                                                                             environmental, managing resettlement/land take
                                                                                                             processes and environmental social mitigation and
                                                                                                             monitoring plan.

                                                                                                             Only from second APA (September 2014)
7.    Functional institutional set-up for procurement   Procurement is a high-risk area, hence need to
      system in place according to public               ensure that basic systems, and functioning of this
      procurement proclamation including:               is in place prior to transfer of PB grant
      1. Procurement function and minimum core          installments.
           staff in place – at least two procurement
           specialists;                                 The existence and functionality of the
      2. Functional tender committee/tender             procurement system is basic to make sure that
           award committee (TAC) in place;              Program systems coupled with the mitigation
      3. Participating cities have the copies of        measures provide reasonable assurance that the
           their respective region’s procurement law,   financing proceeds will be used for intended
           directives, manuals and standard             purposes with due consideration of economy,
           procurement documents and staffs are         efficiency, transparency and fairness.

                                                                                                                                                                  69
No.       Minimum Condition                               Reason                                               Comments – phasing in etc.
             familiar with these legal documents

8.        Complaints handling system in place,            Receiving, reviewing and addressing complaints
          including system for reporting of complaints,   within core areas such as areas related to           Only from the second APA (September 2014).
          system for receiving and addressing             environmental degradation of the surrounding:
          complaints and reporting on corrupt practices   Environmental health impacts on people; loss of      The POM will further define the requirements within this
          and complaints, through the ethics unit.        livelihood, income or assets is an important         area.
                                                          aspect of any GRM. The system will encompass
                                                          a system for complaints received, registration of
                                                          these, description of where to send the various
                                                          types of complaints, to whom, and how?; and
                                                          description of the procedures. The information
                                                          about these procedures should be published.



DLI 2: Institutional Performance

Below is a presentation of the institutional performance measures.

Main changes compared to existing ULGDP I performance assessment system are:

         Division of institutional and service delivery targets in two sets of indicators under each DLI II and III;
         Movement of CIP utilization rate to separate DLI (DLI 3), performance linked allocation; Similar for the utilization of maintenance budget;
         Improvement and sharpening of indicators in most areas;
         New indicators more focusing on the ULGs gaps and areas of importance for activities linked with achievement of targets of the program;
         Reorganization of some of the performance areas, and regrouping.
         Links to the government policy on Ethiopian Cities Prosperity Initiative are included.




                                                                                                                                                                 70
DLI 2: Institutional performance Improvements

Ser. No.   Performance Areas                             Performance measure/Indicator/score                Objective              Links to        Existing or new
                                                                                                                                   Ethiopian       indicator
                                                                                                                                   Cities
                                                                                                                                   Prosperity
                                                                                                                                   Initiative
1          Planning and Budgeting
           (maximum 10
            points)
1.1        Rolling three year CIP, with linkages                Consistency of figures and alignment       Promote efficient      Pillars 2, 3    Existing
           between the annual budget, annual action              with revenue enhancement plan and          planning, budgeting    and 4
           plan, and annual procurement plan                     asset management plan: 2 points.           and procurement for
                                                                Capturing of operational and recurrent     efficient
           (Maximum 3 points)                                    costs of investments in the plans: 1       infrastructure
                                                                 point.                                     development            Pillar 3        Existing



1.2        Participation of citizens in the planning            Evidence of participatory planning         Citizens involvement   Pillars 3 and   Yes, but
           process to meet service delivery priorities           process with involvement of citizens       and good governance    7               strengthened
           identified by citizens
                                                         Measured by:
           (Maximum 4 points)                                Number of public consultations
                                                                (minimum two per year: 1 point)
                                                             Increase or stable level of number of
                                                                people involved in planning discussions
                                                                and the % of women involvement is
                                                                more than 40 %: 1 point.
                                                             Existence of a meeting agenda and
                                                                other information has been shared in
                                                                advance and evidence that issues
                                                                discussed have included the
                                                                prioritization of projects in the up-date
                                                                of the CIP/annual plan: 1 point.
                                                             Good governance procedures on
                                                                planning reflected by minutes from the


                                                                                                                                                              71
Ser. No.   Performance Areas                     Performance measure/Indicator/score                 Objective                 Links to        Existing or new
                                                                                                                               Ethiopian       indicator
                                                                                                                               Cities
                                                                                                                               Prosperity
                                                                                                                               Initiative
                                                        consultation meetings: 1 point.

1.3        Budget appropriation                        Budget approved by Council and               Promote political         Pillar 1        New
           (Maximum 2 points)                           proclaimed in the budget proclamation        leadership and
                                                        following the standard charts of             governance
                                                        accounts: 2 points. Note that both
                                                        conditions have to be complied with to
                                                        achieve the points.

1.4        Budget reliability                          Variance in % between total budget and       Promote proper            Pillars 3 and   Existing (but
           (Maximum 1 points)                           actual for the previous FY (related with     budgeting and             5               only partial)
                                                        total budget expenditures on municipal       implementation
                                                        services) is less than 10 %: 1 point.


2          Assets Management
           (10 points)
2.1        Assets management plan prepared and                                                       Strengthen                Pillar 5        Existing
           updated                                                                                   management           of
           (Maximum 10 points)                         Asset inventory updated, featuring a         infrastructure      and
                                                        tabular and spatial database of all          assets.
                                                        infrastructure, with specification and
                                                        characteristics, at least for the five
                                                        categories of municipal assets (Road
                                                        &Drainage, Solid and Liquid waste,
                                                        Socioeconomic infrastructure
                                                        &greeneries, Utilities, Public buildings
                                                        including abattoirs (2 points)
                                                       Conditions of assets reflected in asset
                                                        inventories correctly (professional input)
                                                        (2 points)
                                                       Asset inventory show an asset value and
                                                        deficit, which calculates the remaining
                                                        asset value, maintenance and
                                                        rehabilitation deficit based on annual


                                                                                                                                                          72
Ser. No.   Performance Areas                 Performance measure/Indicator/score                Objective        Links to        Existing or new
                                                                                                                 Ethiopian       indicator
                                                                                                                 Cities
                                                                                                                 Prosperity
                                                                                                                 Initiative
                                                    depreciation rates. (2 points)
                                                   City updated the AMP according to the
                                                    AMP 10 steps (as per the guideline for
                                                    asset management preparation if exists)
                                                    elaborating its implementation strategy,
                                                    which details individual activities and
                                                    their respective budgets over the course
                                                    of the year (2 points)
                                                   AMP clearly show related budget for
                                                    asset maintenance, rehabilitation and
                                                    new assets, which lists all necessary
                                                    costs (2 points)



3          Public Financial Management
           (Maximum 15 points)
3.1        Accounting and timely reporting         Use of integrated IBEX for all              Strengthen       Pillars 1 and   New
           (Maximum 4 points)                       operations including ULGDP grants and       accountability   3
                                                    reporting on these: 1 point

                                                   Charts of accounts adhered with,                                             New
                                                    including: On site analyses of
                                                    correctness of coding – in particular of
                                                    municipal revenues: 1 point.

                                                   Timely financial reporting: 1 point
                                                                                                                                 Existing

                                                   Monthly cash count report and Bank
                                                    reconciliation submitted to region on
                                                    time (within 15 days after the end of the                                    New
                                                    month): 1 point

3.2        External audit backlogs cleared         All audit backlogs cleared for previous     Strengthen       Pillars 1 and   Existing

                                                                                                                                            73
Ser. No.      Performance Areas                                        Performance measure/Indicator/score                            Objective                      Links to          Existing or new
                                                                                                                                                                     Ethiopian         indicator
                                                                                                                                                                     Cities
                                                                                                                                                                     Prosperity
                                                                                                                                                                     Initiative
              (3 points)                                                          years (minimum 5 years back): 3 points.             accountability                 3

3.3           Audit Opinion for the previous audit                               The audit report from the previous audit            Strengthen                     Pillars 1 and     New
              (3 points)                                                          has a clean audit opinion: 3 points.                accountability                 3


3.4           Compliance with audit recommendations                              Evidence that audit queries raised in the           Strengthen                     Pillars 1 and     New        (was
              (2 points)                                                          external audit report have been acted               accountability                 3                 monitored only)
                                                                                  upon by the city: Minimum 80 percent
                                                                                  of the queries have to be cleared: 2
                                                                                  points.

3.5           Internal audit (3 points)                                          Internal audit procedures adherence                 Strengthen                     Pillars 1 and     New
                                                                                  with good practices reflected in: (a)               accountability                 3
                                                                                  quarterly reports, (b) reporting to
                                                                                  mayor, (c), and evidence of follow up
                                                                                  on audit findings). (3 points, one point
                                                                                  for compliance with each of a, b, c).

4             Procurement 61
              (Maximum 15 points)
4.1           Annual procurement plans for ULGDP II                              The procurement plan implementation                 Strengthen efficiency          Pillar 2          Existing
              prepared and its implementation is                                  is monitored and procurement process                and competition in                               (modified)
              monitored and updated as required.                                  milestones are achieved: 1 point.                   implementation of
              (Maximum 3 points)                                                 Procurement plan is up-dated, as                    infrastructure (urban
                                                                                  required at the point of time for                   productivity and
                                                                                  assessment: 2 points.                               competiveness)




61
   Annual Independent procurement audit (IPA), including contracts effectiveness is to be conducted and reported along with management response of issues raised. The IPA will have an agreed terms of
reference and conducted by regional public procurement agencies or an independent consultant. At the moment, since the RPPAs do not have the capacity, the first two years independent procurement audit
will be conducted together with APA and the terms of reference of the APA will be modified to address the IPA need. The RPPAs capacity will be enhanced during the first two years and the RPPAs will
take over the IPA responsibility from the APA consultant (Procurement audit is their legal mandate). The adequacy of the regional public procurement and asset management agencies to carry out IPA will
be assessed and confirmed by joint review of Federal Public Procurement and Asset Management Agency and the World Bank.

                                                                                                                                                                                                     74
Ser. No.   Performance Areas                         Performance measure/Indicator/score                   Objective                 Links to     Existing or new
                                                                                                                                     Ethiopian    indicator
                                                                                                                                     Cities
                                                                                                                                     Prosperity
                                                                                                                                     Initiative
4.2        Adherence to procurement procedures and   Based on the review of a sample of procured              Strengthen            Pillar 2     Existing
           effectiveness of contracts                contracts, the following are assessed as                  efficiency and                     (modified)
           (Maximum 12 points)                       procurement performance indicators (the                   competition in
                                                     contract sampling size for review should not be           implementation
                                                     less than 20 percent in each city):                       of infrastructure
                                                      Availability of adequate relevant auditable             (urban                             Existing
                                                           records on the procurement process; (1              productivity and
                                                           point)                                              competiveness)
                                                      All ICB and NCB contracts award                         (the first two                     Existing (partly
                                                           published as necessary and compliance with          years, the APA                     and modified)
                                                           procurement process and decisions made in           will conduct this
                                                           accordance with the legal requirements: (11         assessment, and
                                                           points) divided on: (a) Procured Goods,             in the following
                                                           works and services contracts are in the             year (3) and
                                                           approved PP (1 point); (b) proper advert is         onwards, the
                                                           made (1 point); (c) correct SBDs are used (1        procurement
                                                           point); (d) bid floating periods are                audit will fit into
                                                           acceptable (1 point); (e) BER are conducted         the results of the
                                                           consistent with requirements of the issued          APA, using the
                                                           BD (1 point); (f) Evaluation results are            regional PPA.
                                                           announced to bidders and to the general
                                                           public (1 point) (g) Contracts are awarded
                                                           to the lowest evaluated bidder within bid
                                                           validity periods (1 point); (h) procurement
                                                           complaints, if any, are properly addressed (1
                                                           point); (i)contract documents contents are
                                                           complete (1 point); (j) timeliness of the
                                                           procurement/contracting process and
                                                           decisions are consistent with the
                                                           procurement plan (1 point); (k) Contracts
                                                           implemented are according to planned
                                                           timing and budgets. (1 point).
5.         Own source revenue enhancement
           (Maximum 10 points)                                                                                                                    Note as 5.4 is
                                                                                                                                                  only   relevant

                                                                                                                                                               75
Ser. No.   Performance Areas                          Performance measure/Indicator/score                Objective                 Links to        Existing or new
                                                                                                                                   Ethiopian       indicator
                                                                                                                                   Cities
                                                                                                                                   Prosperity
                                                                                                                                   Initiative
                                                                                                                                                   from year 2 and
                                                                                                                                                   3,          other
                                                                                                                                                   indicators    are
                                                                                                                                                   increased in the
                                                                                                                                                   first       APA
                                                                                                                                                   proportionally.
5.1        Revenue enhancement plan updated for the                                                      Proper planning and       Pillars 1 and
           most recent year                                 The up-dated revenue enhancement            analysis is a condition   3               Existing (partly)
           (Maximum points: 2)                               plan will include: (a) city analysis of     for effective targeting
                                                             previous year’s revenue performance         of initiatives
           (Maximum 3 points in the first APA)               with detailed analyses of each main
                                                             source of revenue including discussion
                                                             of its revenue potential: 1 point. (2
                                                             points in the first APA)                                                              Existing (partly
                                                            And (b) city strategies for revenue
                                                             enhancement: 1 point.

5.2        Municipal Revenues increase                       Percentage increase of in total             Promote                   Pillars 1 and   New
           (Maximum 3 points) (Maximum 4 points in           municipal revenues from business            sustainability,           3
           the first APA)                                    taxes, municipal rent and charges and       ownership and
                                                             fees over previous year: 5-10 percent       accountability
                                                             increase: 1 point; 11-20 percent: 2
                                                             points; above 20 percent: 3 points (4
                                                             points in the first APA). (nominal
                                                             increase)
5.3        Revenue planning capacity                        Percentage of municipal revenue on          Promote realism in        Pillars 1 and   Existing  (but
           (Maximum 2 points) (Maximum 3 points in           business taxes, municipal rent and          revenue planning and      3               now focus on
           the first APA)                                    charges and fees collected against          efficiency in                             municipal
                                                             planned target for the previous EFY.        collection                                revenues)
                                                             (variation less than 5 percent: 2 points
                                                             (3 points in the first APA), less than 10
                                                             percent: 1 point.

5.4        Funding from ULGs                                ULG contribution level for capital          Promote                   Pillars 1 and   New
                                                             investments above a certain level           sustainability,           3

                                                                                                                                                              76
Ser. No.   Performance Areas                          Performance measure/Indicator/score                   Objective             Links to     Existing or new
                                                                                                                                  Ethiopian    indicator
                                                                                                                                  Cities
                                                                                                                                  Prosperity
                                                                                                                                  Initiative
           (Maximum 3 points)                                       o   More than 10 % for new              ownership and
                                                                        ULGDP cities in new (DRS)           accountability
                                                                        regions, calibrated with 11-20
                                                                        %: 2 points and above 20%: 3
                                                                        points;
                                                                    o   More than 20 % for new ULGs
                                                                        in non-DRS regions calibrated
                                                                        with 21-30 %: 2 points, and
                                                                        above 30 % 3 points.
                                                                    o   More than 30 % for old
                                                                        ULGDP cities calibrated with
                                                                        30-40 %: 2 points and above
                                                                        40%: 3 points.
                                                                    o   More than 50 % for Dire Dawa
                                                                        and Harar calibrated with 51-
                                                                        60 %: 2 points and above 60 %
                                                                        3 points.

                                                      Transitional arrangement: Only from second
                                                      assessment (September 2014) (budget allocated),
                                                      and from the third Assessment in September
                                                      2015 (both budget and account figures are
                                                      checked).

                                                      In the first assessment, the other indicators (5.1-
                                                      5.3) will be increased to 5.1: 3 points, 5.2: 4
                                                      points and 5.3: 3 points)

6          Accountability and transparency
           (Maximum 15 points)
6.1        Accountability and transparency in city’           City has identified the top three basic      Strengthen            Pillar 3     Existing     (but
           operations and service delivery                     municipal services, and prepared a           accountability  and                strengthen
           (Maximum points: 15)                                standard for delivery along with citizen     good governance                    availability   of
                                                               charter and published this ( Yes/NO                                             information on
                                                               ==6 points) This indicator will be used                                         service


                                                                                                                                                          77
Ser. No.   Performance Areas                     Performance measure/Indicator/score                 Objective                 Links to     Existing or new
                                                                                                                               Ethiopian    indicator
                                                                                                                               Cities
                                                                                                                               Prosperity
                                                                                                                               Initiative
                                                        only for the first year of the program.                                             information)

                                                       Is municipal service delivery as per the                                            Existing
                                                        standard and citizen charter? ( Yes/No
                                                        6= points). This will be as of the 2nd
                                                        year of the programme.

                                                       Dissemination of summary of annual
                                                        budgets, approved projects,
                                                        expenditures, audited accounts and
                                                        results of the procurement decisions in
                                                        city offices and other public places, or
                                                        web-pages, newspapers etc.: 6 points.
                                                       Timely submission of quarterly
                                                        physical progress reports: 3 points.


7          Environment and social Safeguards
           (Maximum 10 points)
7.1        Eligible investments for potential          All capital projects in the previous FY      Avoid         adverse     Pillar 6     Existing
           environmental and social safeguard           screened against the set of environment      environmental    and
           impacts screened                             and social criteria in the planning stage:   social impact
                                                        3 points.
           (Maximum points: 6 points)                  Environmental and social impact              Promote                                Existing
                                                        assessments, Environmental                   environmental       and
                                                        Management Plans (EMP) and                   social sustainability
                                                        Resettlement Action Plans (RAP)
                                                        prepared and approved by the Regional
                                                        Environmental Protection Agency as
                                                        required (based on a sample review of
                                                        projects): 3 points.

7.2        ESMPs and Resettlement Action Plans         ESMPs and Resettlement action plans          Avoid adverse             Pillar 6     Existing
           implemented timely                           implemented prior to commencement of         environmental and
                                                                                                     social impact

                                                                                                                                                       78
Ser. No.   Performance Areas                    Performance measure/Indicator/score               Objective               Links to     Existing or new
                                                                                                                          Ethiopian    indicator
                                                                                                                          Cities
                                                                                                                          Prosperity
                                                                                                                          Initiative
           (Maximum points: 4 points)                  civil works: 4 points.
                                                                                                  Promote
                                                                                                  environmental and
                                                                                                  social sustainability
8          Land management and urban planning
           (Maximum 15 points)
8.1        Statutory structure plan                                                               Promote efficient       Pillar 4     New
           (Maximum 5 points)                         Existence of up-to-date approved           urban planning
                                                       statutory city-wide (structure) plans
                                                       (yes/no): If Yes =3 points.
                                                      CIP is in accordance with the statutory
                                                       plan (structure plan) (sample 5-6
                                                       investments): Yes/No. If Yes= 2 points.
8.2        Land management                            Land released is serviced as per           Promote efficient       Pillar 4     New
           (Maximum 10 points)                         standards and city plan (sample 3-4        land management
                                                       projects) Yes/No. If Yes: 5 points (all
                                                       have to be fulfilled)
                                                      City has an up to date inventory of land
                                                       use (Yes/No): Yes= 5 points.




                                                                                                                                                 79
DLI 3: Achievements of Infrastructure and Maintenance Targets, planning on job creation and Value for Money in Investments
Note as some of the indicators will only kick in from the second and the third assessment, the scores of the other indicators will be adjusted pro-rate to ensure that
the scoring is always between 0-100 points

Assessment of Infrastructure Investment Performance 62

Ser. No.       Performance Areas                                 Performance measure/Indicator                            Objective                  Links to         Existing
                                                                                                                                                     Ethiopian        indicator
                                                                                                                                                     Cities
                                                                                                                                                     Prosperity
                                                                                                                                                     Initiative
1              Job creation (35 % weight (maximum 35                                                                      Promote growth and         Pillar 7         New
               points) on this in the first two assessments                                                               development
               and from the 3rd assessment: 30 % weight
               (maximum 30 points) for this theme)
1.1            Job creation                                      Cities’      achievement      of     jobs   created                                                  New
                                                                 (disaggregated by gender) under the CIP against
               (Maximum 35 points in first assessments)          their targets (% of achievement). Note: a
                                                                 condition for this, and for provision of points on
                                                                 this, is that cities have registered/planned targets
                                                                 and started implementation. Score: achievement
                                                                 rate @ weight, e.g. 100 % achieved = 35 points,
                                                                 60 percent = 21 points. As of second year, the
                                                                 job created will be measured (possibly person
                                                                 days of employment) based on standard to be
                                                                 developed by MUDHCo.


2              Achievement of Urban infrastructure                                                                                                   Pillar 5         Existing
               targets

               Maximum 35 points (35 % weight) on this
               in the first two assessments, and from the
               third assessment: Max 30 point) or 30 %
               weight on this DLI.

62
  For the first assessment in 2014: reviewing all investments implemented in FY 2012/13 (EFY 2005). Note that this DLI is only applied for the current ULGDP ULGs in the first
assessment. The assessment will review all investments, not only the ones funded by ULGDP PB grants.

                                                                                                                                                                                  80
Ser. No.          Performance Areas                                 Performance measure/Indicator                        Objective                 Links to     Existing
                                                                                                                                                   Ethiopian    indicator
                                                                                                                                                   Cities
                                                                                                                                                   Prosperity
                                                                                                                                                   Initiative
2.1               Urban infrastructure targets achieved                     Physical targets as included in the         Ensure        effective   Pillar 5     Yes
                                                                             Capital Investment Plan and annual          implementation       of                (modified)
                  (Maximum 35          points    in   the   first            work plan implemented.                      infrastructure     and
                  assessments)                                                   o The % of implementation               service delivery
                                                                                      against plans will be reflected
                                                                                      directly in the score
                                                                                      multiplied by 35 % (weight of
                                                                                      this indicator), i.e. 100 %
                                                                                      implemented = 35 points, 60
                                                                                      % = 21 points.

                                                                    The score on this indicator will be between 0-
                                                                    35.63

                                                                    Achievement under this indicator will be
                                                                    measured on the basis of actual delivery of
                                                                    infrastructure against targets laid out in the CIP
                                                                    and annual work plan for the previous year. The
                                                                    means for verification are:
                                                                     Review all planned projects and the degree
                                                                         to which they have been implemented by
                                                                         the end of the FY.
                                                                     Review annual and quarterly work plans
                                                                         and reports
                                                                     Check minimum sample of 5 projects from
                                                                         the field-work (on-the-spot of
                                                                         implementation rates)
                                                                     Check the contract implementation
                                                                         progress and contract completions through
                                                                         the review of bills of quantities, see the
                                                                         description below.

                                                                    Implementation rate of each project will be

63
     See means of verification below in the notes.

                                                                                                                                                                             81
Ser. No.   Performance Areas                             Performance measure/Indicator                        Objective               Links to     Existing
                                                                                                                                      Ethiopian    indicator
                                                                                                                                      Cities
                                                                                                                                      Prosperity
                                                                                                                                      Initiative
                                                         assessed and there will a weighting of these to
                                                         get a total score. The weight of each project will
                                                         depend on the budgeted size of the projects (see
                                                         the table below the APA table).

                                                         Assessed by the performance assessment teams.

                                                         No transitional arrangements. However, DLI II
                                                         will only kick in for the new ULGDP ULGs
                                                         from the second assessment.
3.         Maintenance Performance                                                                                                    Pillar 5     Existing but
           30 % weight of this in the first assessment                                                                                             adjusted.
           (maximum 30 points) and 20 % of the
           weight (maximum 20 points) on this DLI
           from the 3rd assessment when value for
           money kicks in).
3.1        Maintenance budget and implementation                 Maintenance plan derived from the           Ensure sustainability   Pillar 5     Existing, but
           rate (Maximum points: 15 points in first               assets management plan                      in the investments                   adjusted
           assessments)                                          ULGs have developed a clear                 through up-keep of
                                                                  maintenance budget and actual               infrastructure
           (10 points in the 3rd and following                    implementation rate is minimum 80%
           assessments)                                           of the planned.

                                                         Note: both conditions have to be complied with
                                                         to get the 15 points.

                                                         Review Overall budget and utilization rate in
                                                         final accounts.

                                                         Sample of projects to review actual
                                                         maintenance.
3.2        Actual maintenance (Maximum points 15              Maintenance is catered for (reward if          Ensure sustainability   Pillar 5     New
           in first assessments)                                 all projects, which need maintenance,        in the investments
                                                                 have actually been catered for). This        through up-keep of
           (10 points in the 3rd and the following               will be based on a sample of 3-5             infrastructure


                                                                                                                                                               82
Ser. No.      Performance Areas                                Performance measure/Indicator                         Objective                 Links to         Existing
                                                                                                                                               Ethiopian        indicator
                                                                                                                                               Cities
                                                                                                                                               Prosperity
                                                                                                                                               Initiative
              assessments)                                              projects from the Assets management
                                                                        plan.

                                                               Note: All projects have to be catered for to
                                                               achieve the points.

4             Quality of infrastructure
              (20 % weight from the 3rd assessment)
4.1           Value for the money in the infrastructure        Percentage of projects implemented with a             Ensure efficient and      Pillars      2   New
              investments funded by the Program64.             satisfactory level of value for the money,            high quality              and 5
                                                               calibrated in the value for the money assessment      infrastructure and
              (Maximum points 20 from 3rd. assessment          tool.                                                 service delivery
              and onwards)
                                                               The % of projects with a satisfactory level of
                                                               value for the money will be reflected in the
                                                               score multiplied by 0.20 (20 % which is the
                                                               weight of this indicator), i.e. 80 % satisfactory
                                                               projects=16 points, 60 % = 12 points.
                                                               The score on this indicator will be rated
                                                               between 0-20 points.

                                                               The value for the money of each project (level
                                                               of satisfactory value for the money) will be
                                                               assessed and there will a weighting of these to
                                                               get a total score. The weight of each project will
                                                               depend on the budgeted size of the projects.
                                                               The input from this will be provided by the
                                                               value for the money audits to the assessment
                                                               teams to be included in the calibration and in
                                                               the final calculation of the size of the
                                                               allocations.



64                                                rd
  The value for money will be conducted from the 3 assessment starting in September 2015. In case they are not completed by the time needed to be incorporated in the regular
assessment, the firm, which will carry out the assessment will revise the assessment results by taking the VFM audit results into account in due course.

                                                                                                                                                                            83
Ser. No.        Performance Areas                                   Performance measure/Indicator                              Objective                   Links to          Existing
                                                                                                                                                           Ethiopian         indicator
                                                                                                                                                           Cities
                                                                                                                                                           Prosperity
                                                                                                                                                           Initiative
                                                                    Transitional arrangement:
                                                                    The results of the value for money will be
                                                                    assessed first time at the APA in September
                                                                    2015 of the performance in 2014/15.
Maximum
points 1,
2,3,4 = 100
Note: The “execution rate? will be determined by a review of the bills of quantities, and verified by the physical progress against planned targets. Hence, for projects not yet
fully completed, e.g. a road project, the team will review the progress on the major items in the bills of quantities, both in the regular reports from the engineer, as well as through
field trip verification of the actual implementation rate. The % (rate), of completion measured by the bills of quantifies and physical progress against planned annual target will be
determined for each project as the status was in the situation at the end of each Fiscal Year. The completion rate (%) of each project, when determined, will then be weighted with
the relative contracted size of the projects to get an aggregate result, see the example below.

Weighting Completion Rates

                                                                         Implementation rate
                                            Contract
              Projects                                                     against planned                              Weighted                                     Result
                                            amount
                                                                            completion *
Project 1                                         100,000                                70%                                       70,000
Project 2                               500,000                                              80%                                 400,000
Project 3                                50,000                                              90%                                  45,000
Total Plan                              650,000                                             100%                                 515,000
Weighted implementation rate for this City                                                                                          0.79                                             79%
*Progress of projects monitored through bills of quantities and field verification.




                                                                                                                                                                                           84
Annex 8: ULG staffing positions


Analysis of the current staffing positions - based on a review of: 1) Collected data on staffing positions
and filled positions for the ULGDP-II, IFA exercise65, which the Ethiopian LG Revenue Enhancement
Study (ELGRS) team has summarized and reviewed, 2) a review of the general situation in the 12 sample
ULGs under the ELGRS and 3) review of previous studies, e.g. supported by GTZ on the baseline for the
coming ULGDP CB/Technical Assistance support and the Worda and City Benchmarking studies, show
that there are substantially filled positions in the ULGs in most of core areas of importance for the
operations of the ULGDP, although also some gaps to be addressed66.

The recently collected data on the staffing in the OFED covering core positions of relevance for the
coming ULGDP-II operations shows that the average staffing requirements in the OFED offices is about
50 staff (sample based on 27 ULGs) where the lowest number is 26 staff in Motta City and the highest
number in Dire Dawa with 140 staff and that the average filled positions (simple average figures across
the 27 ULGs) is 82 % filled positions with Areka City with the lowest number: 19 filled staff positions
and Dira Dawa with the highest number 97 filled. The 27 ULGs have on average 39 filled staff positions
in the OFEDs.

In the core procurement and finance positions, the percentage filled positions is on average 84% (average
figure is 22 filled staff positions). The data shows that 21 of the 27 ULGs have 75% or more of the
staffing positions filled, with the lowest level in Jijiga on 37 % (15 positions filled out of 41 required
positions). There are larger gaps in planning and budgeting (average: 64 % filled in the ULGs where data
is available, and with an average staffing number of 4 positions, lowest number is 2 staff in the ULGs
where data is available). On audit and inspection the share of filled positions is higher: 85 % on average
(the average number of staff in filled positions is 5 staff, with the lowest number in Gambella with only
one position filled).

In the OFED, ULGs on average have 15 filled staffing positions with BA/Bsc education level or above
that level (e.g. master), (the variation is between Motta with 3 positions and Hawassa with 44 staff), and
on average 11 filled staff positions with colleague diploma education. For the 19 ULGs where data is
available, the average number of engineers or staff with similar educational background is 7 staff with the
lowest number in Sebata city: 2 staff.

A comparison between ULGDP cities and the non-covered cities shows some variation with the ULGDP
ULGs in a relative stronger position, e.g. the total average staffing positions filled in the non-ULGDP

65
   Raw data provided by SuDCA based on collection of data from ULGs in August – November 2013. Based on these data files, a
table covering 27 ULGs have been constructed by the Technical Assistance (TA) showing the overview staffing positions
required versus filled positions, education skills, etc.
66
   The ELGRS, Component 2a, did not collect quantitative data on staffing positions, but the interviews and meetings with the 12
ULGs confirmed the situation, reflected in the quantitative figures presented here and the challenges with staff turn over and
shortage of engineers/technical staff. Second, prior to the start of the TA under ULGDP for the preparation of cities for ULGDP
II, a review was undertaken of the strengths and weaknesses of the cities in areas of PFM, procurement, environmental
safeguards, internal audit, etc. (GIZ supported, un-dated documents), which has benefitted the assessment as well). Finally, the
Woreda Benchmarking Study WCBS V 2013: Results of the supply-side evaluation of local government in Ethiopia Draft report
as of June, 1st 2013 Alexander Wegener : https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/7492328/WCBS V Supply Side Report.pdf
provides important information about the staffing situation and challenges at the city and woreda levels.


                                                                                                                             85
cities is only 77 % against 86 % in the ULGDP covered cities, and the number of engineers is on average
5 staff in the non-ULGDP against 8 staff in the ULGDP cities, and similar variations is noted in terms of
the education level.

In general cities and municipalities are better staffed than the rural local governments (woredas). Thus the
recent Woreda City Benchmarking Survey67 noted that:

        The average number of local government employees per 1,000 inhabitants is 16.2 for cities
         compared to 8.6 for woreda,
        Staff turnover is generally very high in local governments with an average turnover of 15% for
         cities compared to 26% in woredas,
        Within city governments the turnover is highest in Amhara (35%) and lowest in SNNP (7%)
        Vacancies as share of total workforce is much more significant for state functions than municipal
         functions in all regions – e.g. 2.8% vacant municipal post in Amhara compared to 40.0%
         vacancies for state functions

Retention and recruitment of staff is in particular a problem for staff categories such as engineers who
have opportunities for employment in the private sector. In the recent WCB V (op.cit page 39) 41.7% of
the city governments reports to face “recruitment problems? for engineers (whereas only 2% of cities
report “problems? with regards to recruitment of planners and accounting staff). The recent
Implementation Completion Report for PSCAP noted68 : “Despite intermittent salary hikes, the public
sector pay structure for skilled staffs and professionals has always remained non-competitive and non-
incentivized. Also GoE’s Five Year Action Plan for public sector capacity building did not include a ny
provision for medium term remuneration policy. As a result PSCAP has suffered from high staff turn
over, wastage of training investments and loss of skills and experience required for improved service
delivery?.

The reviews and studies of the staffing structure and patterns in the ULGs proved the importance of: (i)
having a minimum staffing positions as core screening minimum conditions for grant access in the APAs
and allocation of funds against the ULG capacity to absorb and efficiently handling of funds, (ii) having a
continued CB support from the program (supply and demand driven), (iii) having a continued focus on
ensuring improved organization and staffing at local levels, with strong incentives (iv) improvement of
OSR to ensure that staff can be hired for the beef up of the organizations.




67
   WCBS V 2013: Results of the supply-side evaluation of local government in Ethiopia
Draft report as of June, 1st 2013 Alexander Wegener – the report can be downloaded from this site:
https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/7492328/WCBS V Supply Side Report.pdf
68
   Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Civil Service – Implementation Completion and Result Based Report
2013 section 5.4.

                                                                                                                            86
Annex 9: ULGDP II- Capacity Building Support –Design


BACKGROUND

     1. The Urban Local Government Development Project (ULGDP) (2008-2014) mainly relied on
        the legacies of capacity building (CB) support from past projects. Under an earlier project -
        which preceded ULGDP - the Capacity Building for Decentralized Service Delivery Project
        (2003-2008) (CBDSD), 1869 of the 19 ULGs (Addis Ababa is the 19th) in ULGDP were given CB
        support for good urban governance and reforms. In addition, another project- the Public Sector
        Capacity Building Program Support Project (2004-2009) (PSCAP), focused on capacity building
        support for the federal level and the nine regions. During ULGDP, the CB activities of the 19
        ULGs comprised mainly backstopping support from the Ministry of Urban Development,
        Housing and Construction (MUDHCO) through a federal mobile team of specialists.

     2. Three years into the ULGDP, it became apparent that continuous and strengthened CB
        support for urban management and good governance is still required. With the opportunity
        of Additional Financing for ULGDP in 2011, 18 new ULGs70 were selected to start receiving CB
        support for urban management and governance, to prepare them for participation in the follow-on
        ULGDP II. Two technical multi-disciplinary consultant teams (with 20 and 25 experts 71
        respectively) were deployed for this purpose, as well as to further enhance the capacity of the
        original 18 ULGs. A further 8 cities 72 and some regional support are provided by a parallel
        running Urban Governance and Decentralization Program (funded by GIZ), on good urban
        governance subjects such as planning participation, finance and urban poverty. Both the
        consultant teams’ work and the GIZ program will end in December 2014.


ULGDP II CAPACITY BUILDING ARCHITECTURE

     3. Under ULGDP II a more structured and systematic approach will be adopted for CB
        activities and focuses on all three government levels – federal, regional and local. Firstly, CB
        activities for all levels throughout the program period will be supported by dedicated federal and
        regional mobile teams. In addition, CB support will be tailored to the needs of federal, regional
        and local levels: (i) for ULGs, both supply and demand side interventions will be provided to
        raise their general capacity and enable them to respond to the performance incentive mechanism;
        (ii) regions will be supported to strengthen their urban governance and management roles and in
        turn, provide CB support to ULGs under their charge; and (iii) for the federal level, CB support
        will aim to strengthen their capacity building coordination, oversight and backstopping functions
        in serving the regional and local governments.

69
   Bahir Dar, Dessie, Gondar, Kombolcha, Dire Dawa, Harar, Adama, Bishoftu, Jimma, Shashemene, Arba minch, Dilla,
Hawassa, Sodo, Adigrat, Axum, Mekele, Shire Enidailase,
70
   Debre Brehan, Debre Tabor, Finote Selam, Mota, Woldiya, Ambo, Asela, Burayu, Robe, Sebeta, Zeway/Batu, Areka, Butajira,
Hosaena, Mizan, Alamata, Humera, Wukro.
71
   The teams include specialists in urban planning, municipal finance, financial management, land management, procurement,
environmental management, social development, local economic development, infrastructure/asset management, participation
and service standards.
72
   Adwa, Asosa, Debere Markos, Gambella, Jijiga, Nekemte, Samera, Yirga Alem.

                                                                                                                       87
       4. The main focus of the CB is on enhancing urban governance and management to achieve
          better service delivery. Due to the cross-cutting nature of the subject, CB will aim to strengthen
          the governments’ capacity in a variety of subj ect matters, such as participatory planning,
          budgeting, revenue mobilization, financial management, procurement, infrastructure asset
          management, contract management and execution, urban planning, environmental and social
          safeguards, audit, ethics, fraud & corruption, monitoring & evaluation among others. The
          intention is both to strengthen the human capital capabilities as well as systems improvements in
          these related areas (such as IT system, accounting system etc.). The Annual Performance
          Assessment (APA) integral to the ULGDP II will provide a comprehensive, regular check on the
          capacity improvement and achievement or identify gaps and weaknesses to be improved upon in
          these areas for each ULG.

       Phasing

       5. To ensure effective transition from ULGDP to ULGDP II, capacity building activities are
          conceived in two phases. Phase 1, from November 2013 till December 2014, will be a transition
          period and Phase 2, from August 2014 till December 2019, will be when ULGDP II is fully
          effective in the area of CB support. In Phase 1, current CB arrangements under ULGDP and GIZ
          support will continue, and the former will start gearing towards ULGDP II requirements.
          Concurrently, preparations for Phase 2 CB activities will commence and be in place before
          ULGDP II program effectiveness. Phase 2 will overlap with Phase 1 to allow time for proper
          handing-over.

            Table: Main Capacity Building Activities in Each Phase
             Phase 1 (Nov 2013 – Dec 2014)                  Phase 2 (Aug 2014 – Dec 2019)
             1. Federal mobile team                         4. Expanded federal mobile team and
             2. Two technical consultant teams with CB         functions
                 support for ULGs (phased out by end of     5. Four new regional mobile teams
                 period)                                    6. New urban management course for
             3. CB support to ULGs under program               ULGs
                 funded by GIZ (phased out by end of        7. Demand-driven CB for ULGs
                 period)


       Federal and Regional CB Mobile Teams

       6. The federal and regional CB mobile teams will strengthen the CB provided to all three
          levels of government throughout ULGDP II. These teams will deliver on-the-job issue-
          specific guidance. With the expanded scope of ULGDP II to include a total of 44 ULGs, the
          current MUDHCO multi-disciplinary team comprising 12 specialists, which provides
          backstopping support to the 19 ULGs 73 under ULGDP, will be further strengthened to
          approximately 34 specialists. These specialists will be procured directly by the MUDHCO. This
          will first boost the capacity within the MUDHCO to tackle the greater demands of the program
          and also afford greater CB support to the regions and ULGs. The Federal Mobile Team (FMT)

73
     Including Addis Ababa.

                                                                                                         88
         will be stationed within MUDHCO but deployed regularly to the field, to both Regions and
         ULGs. The main functions of the FMT are:
              a. focused support for –
                     i.   the four new ULGDP II Developing Regional States (DRS),
                    ii.   DRS constituent four ULGs, and
                   iii.   the two single-city Regions of Dire Dawa and Harar;
              b. general backstopping support for all other regions;
              c. mentoring the four regional mobile teams;
              d. capacity building for MUDHCO; and
              e. overall coordination and oversight of CB activities under ULGDP II including the ECSU
                 urban management course (described in later sections).

     7. Four new Regional Mobile Teams will be formed under ULGDP II. Each Regional Mobile
        Team (RMT) will consist of approximately ten multi-disciplinary specialists. The four RMTs will
        each be based in the four regions with a large number of participating ULGs: Amhara (10 ULGs),
        Tigray (8 ULGs), Oromia (11 ULGs) and SNNPR (9 ULGs), and hosted by the respective
        Regional Urban Development Bureaus (or its equivalent). They will spend one out of four weeks
        per month with the regional government, and the rest of the time with the ULGs. While in the
        field, they will work closely with the relevant technical staff to provide mentorship and issue-
        specific support. The main functions of these RMTs are: (i) provide CB support to the host
        region; and (ii) provide CB support to the participating ULGs in the respective regions, totaling
        38 ULGs.

     8. The RMTs will be procured by the respective regions with technical support from
        MUDHCO during procurement. Ministry’s support will include facilitating nation-wide
        advertisements to identify optimal candidates. As part of the region’s backstopping functions, this
        process of procuring and managing the RMTs further instill ownership, confer greater
        responsibility and strengthen the capacity of regional governments.

     9. The capacity of the Regional Governments to procure and manage these teams is assessed
        to be adequate. Under past and current operations such as PSCAP, Protection of Basic Services
        (PBS) and Productive Safety Net Project (PSNP), the regional governments have procured and
        are presently managing similar teams. For example, under ULGDP, the Regional Bureaus of
        Urban Development have procured 3 full-time specialists each to staff the program. In addition,
        under the Urban Management Capacity Building Sub-Program of PSCAP, the Regional Bureaus
        of Urban Development are responsible for all regional level activities74. Almost all regions have
        been engaged in providing training for mainly city administration staff and specialists on various
        urban related issues, ranging from urban development policies and good governance to specific
        knowledge on project planning and implementation, management skills and technical skills. As a
        result, more than 18,000 people were trained in all regions, excluding SNNP, and SNNP alone
        trained more than 160,000 people. Similarly, under PBS, 54 teams of five specialists each were
        procured and managed by the regional governments to provide support and training to woredas.

74
  Specifically, for the major activities of training, consultancy and procurement, the Urban Development Bureaus
provide specification and purchase orders to purchasing experts in the Civil Service Bureau to effect the purchases.

                                                                                                                   89
     Table: Federal and Regional CB Mobile Teams Proposed Functions and Composition
                  Function                                 Composition                        Additional Notes
Federal   - Focused support for 34 specialists and 1 Long Term           Current Proposed - Spends approximately
Mobile      the four new            Advisor;                                                3 out of 4 weeks in
Team        Developing              Proposed composition:                                   the field
(FMT)       Regional States           i. Program coordinator             1          -     - To be procured
            (DRS) and their         ii. Deputy coordinator               -          +1      directly by the
            constituent four       iii. Procurement Specialist           3          +2      MUDHCO
            ULGs, and Dire         iv. Environmental Specialist          1          +2    - Specialists to be
            Dawa and Harar;          v. Social Development               1          +2      recruited and in place
          - General                      Specialist                      5          +2      by August 2014.
            backstopping           vi. Engineers                         1          +1
            support for all other vii. M&E Specialist                    -          +2
            regions;              viii. Infrastructure Asset
          - Mentor the four              Management Specialist           -          +2
            regional mobile        ix. Financial Management
            teams;                       Specialist                      -          +2
          - Overall coordination     x.  Municipal   Finance Specialist  -          +2
            and oversight of CB xi. Urban Planner                        -          +2
            activities in ULGDP xii. Land Management Specialist -                   +2
            II (including the     xiii. Budget Planning &
            ECSU urban                   Participation Specialist
            management course)
Regional - Provide CB support       4 teams of 10 specialists;                            - One team to be based
Mobile      to the four host        Proposed team composition:                              in each of the four
Team        Regions: Amhara,          i. Budget planning and participation specialist       regions: Amhara,
(RMT)       Tigray, Oromia and       ii. Procurement specialist                             Tigray, Oromia and
            SNNPR                  iii. Financial Management specialist/ Internal Auditor   SNNPR
          - Provide CB support iv. Infrastructure asset management specialist             - Spends 3 out of 4
            to participating         v. Environmental management specialist                 weeks in ULGs, and 1
            ULGs in the             vi. Social development specialist                       week in region
            respective regions,    vii. Project engineer                                  - To be procured by the
            totaling 38 ULGs.     viii. M&E specialist                                      respective Region,
                                    ix. Municipal finance specialist (with focus on         with support from
                                         municipal revenue)                                 MUDHCO (eg.
                                        Ethics officer                                      nation-wide
                                                                                            advertising)
                                                                                          - Teams to be recruited
                                                                                            and in place by
                                                                                            August 2014.




         Capacity Building for ULGs

         New urban management course


                                                                                                         90
10. Under ULGDP II, capacity building will comprise both the supply and demand side
    interventions. The supply side intervention will mainly constitute of an ULGDP II
    Implementation course to be provided by the Ethiopian Civil Service University (ECSU). The
    course content will be based on those key areas of ULGDP II implementation with a strong
    emphasis on the practitioners at the ULG level. The target group for the capacity building will be
    the key individuals responsible for ULGDP II implementation in the 26 ULGs participating fully
    for the first time in the ULGDP. The proposed design of this course comprises eight modules: (a)
    procurement and contract management (2 weeks), (b) participatory planning, capital investment
    planning, budgeting and financial management (2 weeks), (c) monitoring and evaluation,
    reporting, performance assessment systems, records keeping and IT (2 weeks), (d) environmental
    and social safeguards including fraud and anti-corruption (1 week), (e) asset management
    including O&M (1 week), (f) revenue enhancement including land leasing (1 week), (g) job
    creation, micro and small enterprise development (1 week), and (h) urban planning and land
    management (1 week). Note: in the case of modules (g) and (h) above awareness-raising as to the
    application of ULGDP II investment and capacity building funds will be given due attention. The
    eight modules will be delivered through resident training at the ECSU of 1 or 2 weeks in duration
    as indicated above. The eight packages will be offered over a period of four or five months
    during the first 6 months of ULGDP II implementation – 1 August to 31 December 2014 – and
    are separated so as not to impose too great an administrative burden on the cities.

11. This course will be provided for the new 26 ULGs that joined the ULGDP II to ensure a
    basic level of capacity for these new ULGs. MUDHCO will sponsor the costs for these 26
    ULGs to attend this one-time course, to bring the 26 ULGs up-to-speed especially to meet
    ULGDP II performance assessment requirements. After the first run, if refresher courses are
    needed, the 26 ULGs can send officials for further training at their own cost (or from the funding
    for demand-based CB). As for the original 18 ULGs under ULGDP, considering that they have
    undergone CB activities since the early 2000s, the course will be optional for them but can serve
    as a refresher or for new staff in the ULGs. For these 18 ULGs, it is suggested for them to utilize
    their own resources to attend any or all of the modules.

12. It is envisioned that the MUDHCo will be the main facilitator to put the course in place.
    This will involve inviting ECSU to submit a proposal, based on a course outline provided by
    MUDHCo. The course outline will: a) describe the eight modules and their duration indicated
    above, b) emphasis the importance of course design and delivery that is strongly practical;
    founded on GoE policies, programs and procedures and the ULGDP II Manual of Procedures and
    delivered by individuals with knowledge and experience of the subject matter at the level of ULG
    implementation. MUDHCo will fund the participants from the 26 new ULGs for which the course
    is mandatory and ECSU will arrange to recover costs of course delivery from those ULGs for
    which the course is optional. MUDHCo will work with ULGs to identify course participants.
    ECSU will be responsible for submitting a proposal to MUDHCo that describes the course design
    (including approach to delivery), course materials, system for certifying participants who
    successfully complete the course, individuals responsible for delivery of the eight modules
    (ECSU may, to ensure practicality of the course, recruit trainers with practical experience of
    program delivery in ULGs) and costs of delivery. Based on ECSU’s proposal, amended by


                                                                                                    91
    mutual agreement between MUDHCo and ECSU, MUDHCo will enter into an agreement with
    ECSU for delivery of the course. To enable broader outreach, administration of this urban
    management course could also be undertaken by other appropriate institutions in the future, in
    addition to ECSU, upon proper evaluation and accreditation to determine the qualification of
    these institutions.

Demand-driven CB for ULGs

13. In addition to the supply side interventions described above, each ULG will be able to spend
    up to 5% of Program funds on specific CB activities. This will allow ULGs to tailor their
    specific CB needs, especially in response to key areas of weaknesses identified in the Annual
    Performance Assessment. This demand-based approach will allow flexibility and cater to the
    varying needs of each ULG, especially given their different capacity levels, having received
    differing CB support over the years and their specific geographic and infrastructure
    characteristics. Each ULG will procure its own training and other services in line with GoE
    procurement guidelines and using providers from the pre-qualified list(s) of relevant Ministries
    and trainers/institutes that have been certified or accredited by the GoE. In terms of the
    availability of private sector presence to respond to the demand-side capacity building needs of
    ULGs, Ethiopia has a robust private sector market to offer technical assistance and consultancy
    services to the ULGs on various urban infrastructure and services areas such as water supply,
    drainage and flood control, roads, building, urban planning, waste collection and disposal, urban
    transport management etc.

14. The ULGs will be required to develop a CB plan (as part of the generally planning) for the
    use of funds, formulated on the same timing cycle as their physical plans. The CB plan,
    reporting and feedback will apply the standard format elaborated in the Operational Manual, and
    ULGs will have to report twice a year on basis the utilization and progress of CB activities. The
    respective Regional Urban Development Bureaus and RMTs will oversee the preparation and
    execution of these annual capacity building plans, and the execution of the CB plans will be
    verified through the APA.

15. The CB activities to be funded should adhere to the prescribed CB Activities Menu (as
    detailed in table below). Generally, these funds can be used for technical consultant work,
    backstopping support, advisory support, training, minor equipment and contract staff. Items such
    as vehicles and administration building are not part of this provision. As explicitly stated in the
    Operational Manual, should a ULG be in doubt about the eligibility of a CB activity, they will
    contact MUDHCO to ensure that the expenditure complies with the ULGDP II expenditure
    framework.




 Menu for the Capacity Building Activities
 (total costs not to exceed 5% of total performance-based grant received)




                                                                                                    92
 Training, Seminar         -   Short- term local training and related operating expenses
 and Conference            -   Selected short- term training (up-to duration of 3 months)
                           -   Peer to peer support across ULGs
                           -   Study tours as planned by the ULGs and approved by the Ministry
                               (study tours will have to be approved)
                           -   Seminars/Conferences/Workshops/Meetings Expenses
                           -   Training Materials
                           -   Hire of Venue /Hotel Accommodation
                           -   Refreshments
 Technical assistance      -   Consultancy fees and related operating expenses
 and organizational        -   Printed Material & Stationery
 development, system
 development etc.

 Equipment                Equipment related with the CB support (not vehicles and buildings) including:
                            - Server (computing)
                            - Networking & ICT equipment and software
                            - Computers ad Accessories
                            - Printer, Photocopy Machine, Scanner
                            - Binding Machine
                            - Air Condition/ Fan
                            - Filling Cabinet/ Shelf
Note: Compliance with the investment menu, including the CB Activities Menu will be a minimum condition for
access to the performance grant.


CB for Regions

16. Under ULGDP II, regions will begin assuming expanded roles in supporting ULGs within
    their jurisdictions to improve urban governance performance. The various Regional Urban
    Development Bureaus (or its equivalent) will be the main coordinating as well as recipient
    agencies of CB activities. The FMT and RMTs will provide support to the Regions to build up
    their general capacity for urban governance and management, in the range of relevant subjects. In
    turn, the Regions will have greater capacity to provide guidance for the ULGs. In particular,
    Regions will receive additional financial support to achieve results in three focus areas: (i) audit,
    (ii) environmental and social safeguards, and (iii) revenue enhancement and mobilization. The
    achievement and performance in these areas will be measured in the APA. (Additional trainings
    focused on regional procurement specialists will be provided under PBS to equip the regional
    governments with the capacity to conduct independent procurement audits from Year 3 of the
    Program.)

17. The four established Regions – Amhara, Oromiya, SNNP and Tigray - with multiple
    participating ULGs will have greater responsibilities - to host and provide logistical support
    to the Regional Mobile Teams. As mentioned earlier, the four regions will procure and be
    responsible for coordinating and overseeing one RMT each, which in turn mentors the constituent
    ULGs within the Region. These RMTs will be based in the Region, and deployed to ULGs
    frequently (as described earlier). In the process, the RMTs will directly assist the Regions
    themselves to enhance their capacity, in addition to supporting the ULGs.



                                                                                                         93
CB for Federal Entities

18. Capacity building activities for MUDHCo under ULGDP II will focus on (i) systems
    development for urban management and development (such as M&E, IT and database systems,
    procurement, revenue enhancement system and database); (ii) equipment related with the
    enhanced capacity building; and (iii) expansion of the federal mobile team and training of the
    core MUDHCO officials. In addition, it is proposed to have at least one international senior urban
    development advisor to be attached to MUDHCO to provide guidance and oversee the
    management of CB activities throughout the Program.

19. Besides MUDHCO, other federal entities will have supporting roles in ULGDP II. As the overall
    coordinator and implementing agency of the Program, MUDHCO will inform these relevant
    federal agencies (e.g. Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED) and Federal
    Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (FEAC)) of the Program, and liaise with them to
    determine specific CB needs that could be covered within ULGDP II to ensure that these agencies
    have adequate capacity to facilitate the Program.



Sustainability

20. From the onset, the capacity building functions within the MUDCo will be handled by the Urban
    Governance and Capacity Building Bureau (UGCBB). The MUDCo is in the process of setting
    up a “Centre of Excellence for Urban Governance and Capacity Building? which will undertake
    the functions of (i) capacity building, (ii) research and analysis on urban governance, and (iii)
    performance and benchmarking to support the Ethiopian Cities Resilient, Green Growth and
    Governance Programs Package. It is envisioned that CB support to all three levels of government
    will be consolidated under this Center of Excellence. The ULGDP II should therefore consider
    mainstreaming CB activities into the GoE system under this Center of Excellence, at an
    appropriate time during the course of the Program. This can be re-evaluated during the Mid-term
    review.

21. At the regional and local levels, ULGDP II would have built upon previous projects and programs
    to continue strengthening their capacity. Especially for the Regions where less CB efforts have
    been focused on previously, ULGDP II is embarking on the initial steps of empowering them to
    effectively function in their role to guide the ULGs. While ULGDP II will provide CB to the 44
    participating ULGs, in the long run beyond ULGDP II, GoE’s intention is to scale up CB efforts
    to cover all 85 ULGs in Ethiopia. The CB systems and activities, such as the urban management
    course and demand-driven CB activities, being put in place under ULGDP II, could be scaled up
    and easily applied to other ULGs in the future.




                                                                                                   94
Summary of CB Support for Regions and ULGs

CB Support for Regions

               Regions           Phase 1                Phase 2
    1   Afar                    GIZ Partial           FMT
    2   Amhara                  GIZ Partial           FMT     RMT
    3   Benishangul Gumz        GIZ Partial           FMT
    4   Dira Dawa                                     FMT
    5   Gambella                GIZ Partial           FMT
    6   Harar                                         FMT
    7   Oromiya                 GIZ Partial           FMT     RMT
    8   S.N.N.P                 GIZ Partial           FMT     RMT
    9   Somali                  GIZ Partial           FMT
   10   Tigray                  GIZ Partial           FMT     RMT

CB Support for ULGs

                                  ULGs                                  Phase 1           Phase 2
                            1     Adama                             1             3        4   5    6
                            2     Adigrat                           1             3        4   5    6
                            3     Arba Minch                        1             3        4   5    6
                            4     Axum                              1             3        4   5    6
                            5     Bahir Dar                         1             3        4   5    6
                            6     Bishoftu                          1             3        4   5    6
                            7     Dessie                            1             3        4   5    6
                            8     Dila                              1             3        4   5    6
                            9     Dire Dawa                         1             3   3        5    6
                           10     Gondar                            1             3        4   5    6
                           11     Harar                             1             3   3        5    6
                           12     Hawassa                           1             3        4   5    6
                           13     Jimma                             1             3        4   5    6
                           14     Kombolcha                         1             3        4   5    6
                           15     Mekele                            1             3        4   5    6
                           16     Shashemene                        1             3        4   5    6
                           17     Shire Enidasilase                 1             3        4   5    6
                           18     Sodo                              1             3        4   5    6
                           19     Adwa                                      2              4   5    6
                           20     Asosa                                     2         3        5    6
                           21     Debere Markos                             2              4   5    6
                           22     Gambella                                  2         3        5    6
                           23     Jijiga                                    2         3        5    6


                                                                                                    95
                                      24    Nekemte                 2       4   5   6
                                      25    Samera**                2   3       5   6
                                      26    Yirga Alem              2       4   5   6
                                      27    Alamata             1           4   5   6
                                      28    Ambo                1           4   5   6
                                      29    Areka               1           4   5   6
                                      30    Asela               1           4   5   6
                                      31    Burayu              1           4   5   6
                                      32    Butajira            1           4   5   6
                                      33    Debre Brehan        1           4   5   6
                                      34    DebreTabor          1           4   5   6
                                      35    Finote Selam        1           4   5   6
                                      36    Hosaena             1           4   5   6
                                      37    Humera              1           4   5   6
                                      38    Mizan               1           4   5   6
                                      39    Mota                1           4   5   6
                                      40    Robe                1           4   5   6
                                      41    Sebeta              1           4   5   6
                                      42    Woldiya             1           4   5   6
                                      43    Wukro               1           4   5   6
                                      44    Zeway / Batu        1           4   5   6
** Samera has been joined with Logiya to form one ULG.

 Lege
 nd
         ULGs in ULGDP
 CB Delivery Instruments
        Existing Teams
    1 (SUDCA/Safage)                         Phase 1
     2   GIZ                                 Phase 1
     3   Federal Mobile Team                 Phase 1 & 2
     4   Regional Mobile Team                Phase 2
     5   ECSU (Urban Mngmt)*                 Phase 2
     6   Dd Driven CB                        Phase 2
 Note:
 Phase 1 - Nov 2013 until Dec 2014; Phase 2 - from Aug
 2014 - Dec 2019 (Program end)
 * For the 26 new ULGs the costs to attend the course will be
 borne by the MUDHCO, while the original 18 ULGs from
 ULGDP will bear their own costs to attend the course.




                                                                                    96
