                               89341




MONGOLIA


Preparing for Debt
Management in
Ulaanbaatar:
Issues to Consider

The World Bank
East Asia and Pacific Region
April 2nd, 2014
© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

1 2 3 4 15 14 13 12

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of
The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
    The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
    Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax:
202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                          Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


Contents
Acknowledgments .................................................................................................................................... v
Abbreviations and Acronyms .............................................................................................................. vii
Legal Framework....................................................................................................................................... 3
   Establishing an Effective Debt Management Function for UB .......................................... 9
   Formulating a Debt Management Strategy ........................................................................ 14
   Ensuring Transparency and Good Governance in Bond Issuance ................................. 15
   Carrying Out Regular Audits ............................................................................................... 15
   Key Actions Required and Corresponding Outputs ........................................................ 17

Boxes
1: South Africa Regulatory Framework for Municipal Borrowing ..................................................... 4
2: Transparency in Debt Management and India’s Experience ........................................................... 6
3: National Debt Management Strategy .................................................................................................. 7
4: Sinking Fund for Municipal Borrowing ............................................................................................. 8

Figures
1: Debt Management Operations according to International Sound Practice ................................... 9

Tables
1: Fiscal Risks Matrix ............................................................................................................................... 10
2: Key Actions and Associated Outputs for Prudent Debt Management ........................................ 17
A.1: Subnational Debt Management Performance Indicators ........................................................... 19
B.1: Borrowing Frameworks for Subnational Governments Worldwide......................................... 21




                                                                                                                                                     iii
                         Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


Acknowledgments
This note is part of a broader technical assistance program designed to assist the City of
Ulaanbaatar (UB) to improve its financial management system, assess the quality of municipal
services provision, and mobilize resources from the capital markets to fund urban
infrastructure. This note identifies key issues for UB to consider when putting in place an
effective debt management framework prior to acquiring debt. It goes hand-in-hand with a
separate “Financial Self-Assessment” that was carried out in preparation for a credit rating.

This work was carried out by a joint UB and World Bank team. The UB team received guidance
from Mr. N. Bataa, Vice Mayor for Economy and Finance, and was led by Mr. Enkhmunkh
Temuulin, Head of the Economic Development Agency (EDA). The Finance and Treasury
Department (represented by Ms. Sandang Solongo), the Property Relations Department (headed
by Mr. Tumurbaatar Sharavdorj), and the Strategic Policy and Planning Department (headed by
Mr. Bayaarbatar) provided all the required information. Findings from the self-assessment and
debt management assessment were presented at a workshop in UB convening a wide range of
stakeholders, including the city administration, government agencies, and the press.

The World Bank team consisted of Meskerem Brhane (Task Team Leader and Senior Urban
Specialist, EASIN), Hernando Garzón (Senior Public Finance Economist, Consultant), Huong
Mai Nguyen (Urban Governance Analyst, EASIN), and Erdene Ochir Badarch (Operations
Officer, EASCS).

Peer reviewers Matthew Glasser (Advisor, WBCKO), Lili Liu (Lead Economist, ECSP4), Abha
Prasad (Senior Debt Specialist, PRMED), Taehyun Lee (Senior Economist, PREM), and Pat
O’Connell (Resident Debt Advisor for Mongolia, U.S. Department of Treasury) provided
valuable advice throughout the study. The work also benefitted from the close guidance of
Abhas Jha, Sector Manager (EASIN) and Coralie Gevers, Country Manager for Mongolia. This
work received funding and advisory support from the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory
Facility.

                             Vice President    Axel van Trotsenburg
                           Country Director    Klaus Rohland
                          Country Manager      Coralie Gevers
                             Sector Director   John Roome
                            Sector Manager     Mark R. Lundell
                          Task Team Leader     Meskerem Brhane




                                                                                           v
                  Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


Abbreviations and Acronyms
BL      Budget Law
CG      Central Government
DeMPA   Debt Management Performance Assessment
EDA     Economic Development Agency
FRC     Financial Regulatory Commission
GDP     gross domestic product
IT      information technology
LDF     Local Development Fund
LG      local government
MED     Ministry of Economic Development
MFMA    Municipal Finance Management Act
MNAO    Mongolian National Audit Organization
MNT     Mongolian New Tugrik
MOE     Ministry of Economic Development
MoF     Ministry of Finance
MTDS    Medium Term Debt Management Strategy
PREM    Poverty Reduction and Economic Management
PRD     Property Relations Department
SNG     subnational governments
UB      City of Ulaanbaatar
WB      World Bank

                       CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                           (As of February 2014)
                   Currency Unit = Mongolian New Tugrik
                           MNT 1 = US$ 0.00057
                           US$1 = MNT 1,762.00




                                                                               vii
                                Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider



I. Background
The Government of Mongolia passed a Budget Law (BL) in December 2011 that for the first time
allows local governments to borrow and to issue bonds. The City of Ulaanbaatar (UB) has
therefore requested Technical Assistance from the World Bank to help put in place systems for
issuing debt prudently. This note, drawing on the World Bank’s Subnational Debt Management
Performance Assessment (DeMPA) Tool (World Bank 2012c), identifies the key areas that UB needs
to focus on in order to manage future debt effectively. These include an appropriate legal
framework, effective managerial structure, a debt management strategy and a borrowing plan,
as well as timely and transparent financial reporting. (See Appendix A for a full description of
the DeMPA tool and indicators). This note analyzes the current division of relevant functions in
UB’s administrative structure along each of the key dimensions and offers recommendations for
strengthening the current borrowing framework. It stresses the need to first build local
institutional capacity for an effective and transparent debt management system before any
borrowing is considered. Finally, the note concludes that given the macroeconomic context of
massive levels of sovereign borrowing, new borrowing at this juncture would not be desirable
and cannot be recommended by the Bank. Instead, UB should use this time to put in place a
debt management system so that it is prepared for borrowing once it is ready and the
macroeconomic conditions improve.




II. Ulaanbaatar City Government
The population of Ulaanbaatar has swollen from half a million in 2001 to approximately 1.32
million in 2012, accounting for over 40 percent of Mongolia’s total population. This trend is
likely to continue as economic growth is increasingly concentrated in UB. Rapid urbanization is
straining the city’s ability to provide services, especially infrastructure. Over 60 percent of the
population lives in unplanned settlements—or ger areas—which spread more than 90 percent
of the city’s urban footprint. Most residents lack access to basic services such as central heating,
water supply, sewerage, and paved roads, and the low density and extremely cold climate
make the provision of these services costly.

UB has the legal mandate to provide a wide array of services.1 The newly approved master plan
calls for extensive investments to make up for the city’s infrastructure deficit to serve the

1The services include urban planning, construction, and building new infrastructure; maintenance of the capital
city’s constructions and buildings; establishing new property and making investments; social care and welfare
services; employment generation and poverty alleviation; development of small and medium-sized enterprises;


                                                                                                                  1
MONGOLIA



bottom 40 percent of the population. Although the city is in relatively strong financial position,
its own current resources are not sufficient to implement the investment plan within the
projected timeframe. Therefore, the city needs to mobilize financing from the capital markets
and through public-private partnerships to achieve its objectives. Moreover, with the passage of
the Budget Law (BL), citizens now have the opportunity to participate in the budgeting process,
as UB leaders are required to manage budgets in a more transparent and accountable manner.
To prioritize investments on services expansion, the city intends to base its decisions on the
transparent and effective management of its finances and the needs of its citizens.

In terms of fiscal management, while Mongolia remains a unitary state, the government is
making greater efforts at fiscal deconcentration. First, UB’s capital revenue base has been
improving significantly, which is allowing it to respond to the deficit in municipal services and
infrastructure, as well as the concerns over rising inequality. UB’s largest source of revenue, the
income tax, is stable and expected to continue to grow. The recent establishment of the Local
Development Fund under the Budget Law provides UB with predictable central government
transfers for capital investments, and a newly introduced regulation allows the city to retain its
budget surpluses. Additionally, some new revenue sources are currently under discussion, such
as the “capital city tax.”

Second, UB intends to borrow from the capital markets to meet its enormous capital investment
financing needs. In preparation for future borrowing, it plans to obtain a credit rating, assess its
actual credit needs, determine its absorption and debt carrying capacity, and put in place a
transparent and accountable system for managing future debts. The importance of a strong debt
management system is illustrated by the experiences of several U.S. cities and municipalities
that have filed for bankruptcy, including Detroit, Michigan; Vallejo, California; and Jefferson
County, Alabama. Municipal bankruptcies are often the result of over-indebtedness of utilities
(such as the sewer system in Jefferson County and an incinerator plant in Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania) or pension and labor contracts (as in Vallejo and Detroit) that were in excess of
their revenues (De Angelis and Tian 2013). To come out of their bankruptcy status, many of
these cities have had to significantly cut back on service provision and staffing. Lessons from
Hungary show that municipal bankruptcies were primarily due to accounting and internal
regulatory shortfalls (Jokay 2013). Therefore, a key lesson for UB is that ineffective debt
management can put the finances of the city at great risk.




pasture management; water supply, sewerage, and drainage; housing and public utility services; public
transportation services; pest eradication and control; disaster prevention, including flood protection; environmental
protection and rehabilitation; roads, bridges, and public lighting; solid waste removal; and operation and
maintenance of high voltage and electricity lines (Budget Law).


2
                           Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider



III. Core Areas of Debt Management

Legal Framework
A sound legal framework for local government borrowing and debt management allows for
successful management of public finance, promotes economic stability, and avoids debt distress
and insolvency. Good international practice shows that such frameworks clarify roles and
responsibilities, clearly designate the authorities responsible for incurring and managing debt,
and establish actions designed to promote transparency and accountability. These frameworks
may vary widely across countries in terms of the degree of their dependence on the national
government and the range of financing methods that they use to meet their financing needs.
(Appendix B presents a summary of possible variations.) Measured against international
experiences, how effective is the coverage and content of Mongolia’s legal framework for public
borrowing and debt management operations? What are its strengths? What are the areas that
need improvement? What needs to be developed?

Mongolian Law establishes the right of UB to issue bonds and sets debt limits. There is no legal
constraint on UB’s ability to borrow on international markets or specifications on the currency
of the debt, as is found in the legislations of other countries/subnational governments.
However, there are limits to how much UB can borrow. First, “public debt” cannot exceed the
previous fiscal year’s base revenue. Also, yearly debt service obligations cannot exceed 15 percent
of base revenue of the previous year (BL Article 62.3). Second, the Fiscal Stability Law (FSL)
makes it clear that “public debt” comprises of all internal and external borrowing, and any
obligation that is payable in the future by central and local governments, including the debts of
legal entities fully and partially owned by the state and the local governments (FSL Article
4.1.8). UB debt is therefore subjected to the total public debt limit of 40 percent of gross
domestic product (FSL Article 6). Third, the debt can only be issued for a term of up to 4 years
(BL Article 62). Finally, the law prohibits UB from using its budget revenues and assets required
in the performance of its legal mandate as collateral (BL Article 62.4.2).

There are several legal constraints pertaining to these borrowing limits that need to be
addressed for UB to make effective use of the capital markets. First, the Mongolian government
has undertaken massive borrowing and there is intense parliamentary debate as to whether or
not the debt limit has been breached. In December 2013, the Mongolian Parliament rejected a
motion to increase the debt limit for FY13 to 50 percent. The issue may be debated again if the
new Debt Management Law is introduced. This still leaves very little or no scope for UB to
borrow further. Good international practice suggests that in order to ensure accountability and
fiscal prudence, subnational borrowing and debt payment obligations should be independent of



                                                                                                 3
MONGOLIA



the central government. Furthermore, subnational governments should borrow out of their own
volition and rely on their own resources to repay debts. This said, subnational borrowing needs
to be subject to appropriate oversight by the central government, which should play a
facilitating role. Central government should only intervene when well-established rules of
borrowing are neglected, or when subnational government mismanagement threatens to trigger
a fiscal crisis (see Box 1). Second, the Budget Law does not clearly define “base revenue”2 (BL
Article 4.1.29) and the term does not appear in the financial statements of the city. This causes
confusion for UB administrators in determining the appropriate debt level for a given year. In
order to remove any ambiguity, the regulations on UB’s borrowing that are currently under
preparation should clearly define “base revenue,” aligned with the current budget reporting
system. Third, the maximum four-year borrowing term is too short for UB to benefit from
issuance of long-term and generally lower-cost bonds. This is fairly limiting, as it will not allow
for extending the debt maturity profile. Fourth, it would be useful for UB to specify in the
regulations what assets can be used as collateral.3 The only collateral that can be used is city
property that is not associated with any of the core services provided (see BL Article 62.4).


    BOX 1
    South Africa Regulatory Framework for Municipal Borrowing


    South Africa enacted the Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) in 2003. The MFMA is comprehensive
    legislation created to ensure the sound and sustainable management of the financial affairs of local governments and
    their institutions. It regulates the preparation of municipal operational and capital budgets, and the management of
    revenue, expenditure, and debt. To enhance political and managerial accountability, the MFMA clearly specifies the
    roles and responsibilities of the mayors and accounting officers. It also provides a framework for municipal
    borrowing and mechanisms to avert financial crises and debt distress. Finally, the MFMA sets conditions for
    intervention by higher-level governments through a fiscal adjustment and debt restructuring process.
    Source: Canuto and Liu 2013.



This is especially important since the Securities Markets Law (SML) specifically states that the
Prospectus for a borrowing proposal must specify the collateral being used (SML Article
10.5.15). UB can learn from the Hungarian Municipal Act, which requires municipalities to
categorize their assets based on their functions as follows: (i) core assets needed for public
service delivery that therefore cannot be sold or collateralized; (ii) essential but negotiable; and
(iii) nonessential and fully negotiable (Jokay 2013). Finally, the Budget Law states that the

2 Article 4.1.29 states that “base revenue” is defined as the sum of nontax revenues and revenues estimated at the
minimum rate and the amount of taxes to be collected for the budget of the respective level. It is unclear if this
includes transfers from the central government and if there is any distinction between capital and recurrent revenues.
3 The Budget Law states that assets to be used in implementing functions on behalf of the central government cannot

be collateralized. Such functions include preschool education, general education, cultural services, primary health,
land relations and cadaster, child development and protection, and public fitness (BL Article 61.1.1 to 61.1.7).


4
                           Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


capital city’s budget revenues and transfers from the central government cannot be used as
collateral; however, UB’s revenues can indeed be used to cover debt service obligations, including
repayment of principal. The draft Debt Management Law could try to address these legal issues.

The current legal framework for subnational borrowing includes many key provisions to ensure
transparency and accountability that are consistent with good international practice. The
Budget Law requires public consultation and information sharing on the purposes and amount
of the debt (BL Article 62.6.1), as well as approval and oversight by the Ministry of Finance
(MoF) for issuance of local government bonds as MoF is responsible for monitoring total public
debt (BL Article 62.6.2). In addition, a no-objection of the Ministry of Economic Development
(MOE) is also required, since it is responsible for overseeing public investment as a whole. The
prevailing laws do not require a central government guarantee of UB city debt, although this
can be issued as necessary (BL Article 51.1). Consistent with good international practice, the
legislation identifies the signatory for debt-related transactions, which in UB city is the Capital
City Governor (BL Art 62.2). Furthermore, the BL allows debt instruments issued by UB to be
traded in the securities market (BL Art 5.1.3). The purposes for borrowing are to be clearly
established and are limited to the core functions of UB as outlined in the Budget Law (BL Art
58.1). In order to ensure adequate information to the public, the Securities Markets Law 2012
also highlights the need to prepare a Prospectus six months prior to the bond issuance (BL Art
10.1). The Prospectus is to explain the rationale for the investment (the business plan), its
management, revenue generation, liabilities, and other financial information. UB may borrow
on a short-term basis from the central government to make up for any seasonal shortfalls, as
long as the loan is repaid within the same fiscal year.

The legal framework for the preparation of a national debt management strategy follows good
international practice, but it is unclear if these requirements apply to local governments (see
Box 2). Mongolia’s central government is expected to prepare a debt management strategy
based on financial needs and acceptable levels of risk, set the debt management objective and
amount, and establish a database on government debt that will also support transparency (BL
Article 53.1.1) (see Box 3). Given the complex process of amending laws, the UB City Council
should introduce regulations (i) that spell out responsibilities for authorizing borrowing, (ii)
for the preparation of debt management objectives and strategy, and (iii) for standard annual
reporting to the City Council on debt management activities and issued loan guarantees (where
applicable). In addition, the debt management operations need to be subjected to periodic
external audits. These points should also be included in the draft Debt Management Law.

Prevailing laws do not require a central government guarantee for UB’s borrowing. This means
that the city would need to back its debt with its own creditworthiness based on its net revenue
flow. It would be advisable for UB to make corresponding yearly budgetary appropriations to




                                                                                                 5
MONGOLIA




BOX 2
Transparency in Debt Management and India’s Experience


The IMF’s “Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary Financial Policies” (IMF 1999) outlines two key
premises. First, the effectiveness of financial policies can be strengthened if the goals and instruments of policy are
known to the public (financial markets) and if the authorities can make a credible commitment to meeting them.
Second, transparency helps enhance good governance through greater accountability of central banks, finance
ministries, and other public institutions involved in debt management. More specifically, transparency in the
mandates and clear rules and procedures in the operations of central banks and ministries of finance can help resolve
conflicts between monetary and debt management policies and operations, help issuers reduce transaction costs, and
help issuers meet their portfolio objectives. Transparency also helps reduce uncertainties among investors,
encourages their participation, and over time helps governments lower their debt servicing costs.

In India, one crucial element of the subnational debt restructuring and fiscal reform process towards the passage of
the fiscal responsibility legislation was wide stakeholder consultations and coordination. Bringing together the
different parts of the government—the Finance Commission, the Ministry of Finance, the states themselves, the
Planning Commission, and the Reserve Bank of India —created shared urgency about addressing the fiscal stress and
debt repayment pressures faced by many states in the late 1990s. The priority of fiscal consolidation was to reverse
the fiscal decline, institute structural reform of the taxation system, to develop a rule-based institutional framework
to ensure the sustainability of the debt readjustment, and to move from central government on-lending to states
toward market-based financing, with an emphasis on strong subnational market discipline. The coordination and
consultation among all engaged parties ensured consistency of approach and moved the reforms forward.
Sources: Canuto and Liu 2013; IMF 1999; Rangarajan and Prasad 2012; World Bank 2003.



cover debt service obligations, pledge revenues to a reserve fund, and make mandatory
deposits to a sinking fund to be able to periodically redeem its bonds (Box 4). Investors in bonds,
in contrast to bank lenders, pay more attention to stability in revenue sources for servicing debt
than to a city’s own commercial assets serving as collateral. Since UB would be expected to be
fully responsible for the payment of its future financial obligations, including annual interest
and principal redemption upon maturity, it is advisable that credit rating be a standard legal or
regulatory requirement.

The “Traffic Light” approach adopted in Colombia to control subnational debt is illustrative.
Even though all municipalities in the country are legally allowed to borrow, only those that
demonstrate the capacity to acquire debt and cover debt service obligations are allowed to do
so. The Ministry of Finance carries out periodic financial assessments of each municipality and
classifies them into three groups. The first group of creditworthy municipalities is given a
“green light” to borrow. The second group of municipalities with poor fiscal management is
given a “red light” and not allowed to borrow. The third group comprises municipalities that
fall between the other groups and have some debt-carrying capacity; they require a “no
objection” from MoF before they can borrow and are given a “yellow light.”




6
                                  Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider



BOX 3
National Debt Management Strategy


The public debt management strategy is the fundamental document that guides debt managers in their decisions and
operations. The strategy is built upon foundations (goals) stated in the government’s debt management objectives.
One objective is to ensure that the government’s financing needs and its payment obligations are met at the lowest
possible cost over the medium to long run, consistent with a prudent degree of risks. Other debt management
objectives typically address the government’s involvement in the domestic bond market and coordination of its
actions with fiscal and monetary policies, which contain various interdependencies.

A debt management strategy is typically proposed by the debt management authority to the minister of finance. It
usually presents specific guidelines and benchmarks for the optimal government debt portfolio. The guidelines
provide directions for future debt management operation, while the strategic benchmarks state specifically the
desired risk characteristics of the debt portfolio in a quantitative manner, including three basic types of risks: foreign
currency risk, interest rate risk, and refinancing (roll-over) risk.

A document outlining this strategy should include the following issues:

  a description of the market risks being managed (currency, interest rate, and refinancing or rollover risks) and
   the historical context of the debt portfolio
  a description of the future environment for debt management, including fiscal and debt projections
  assumptions about interest and exchange rates and constraints related to portfolio choice, including those
   relating to market development priorities and the implementation of monetary policy
  a description of the analysis undertaken to support the recommended debt management strategy, clarifying the
   assumptions used and the limitations of the analysis
  a recommended strategy and its rationale.

The strategy should be guided by an analysis of the major risk indicators, including the following:

  total debt service under different scenarios, particularly sensitivity to interest and exchange rates
  the maturity profile of the debt under different scenarios
  strategic benchmarks, such as the currency composition of the debt portfolio.
Sources: Melecky 2007; World Bank 2009a and World Bank 2009b.




To ensure that UB has the necessary fiscal capacity for providing services, servicing debt, and to
protect it from future insolvency, the Hungarian Municipal Act is again a useful reference. In
Hungary, state transfers, the personal income tax, and other shared taxes cannot be used for
debt servicing; and the local value added tax—which accounts for 84 percent of all taxes—
serves as the main source of debt financing (Jokay 2013: 271). Likewise, Hungarian restrictions
on the use of revenue in debt service illustrate the good practice of carefully considering specific
revenue sources for debt service. This practice ensures that the municipality has sufficient
resources to carry out its mandate to delivery current services while also making investments
for the future.




                                                                                                                        7
MONGOLIA



In order to enhance UB’s debt-carrying capacity, the City Council could consider introducing a
resolution establishing a reserve fund to service the debt of short- and long-term bonds. Such a
fund could be financed from UB’s operational surplus and could be designed to cover debt
service obligations for no less than six months. This would enable the city to continue to pay its
debt obligations even in the event of an unexpected drop in city revenue. The regulation should
also require the city to invest such funds in highly liquid assets, such as fixed-term deposits
and/or central government treasury bills. However, in cases where municipal revenue sources
are fairly predictable and provide adequate coverage for debt service payments, there may not
be a need for a reserve fund. Likewise, consideration should be given to establishing a sinking
fund for repaying the debt upon maturity. A sinking fund assures investors of the ability of the
city to comply with debt service obligations. In addition, UB city government could structure its
debt to level annual debt service payments by issuing serial bonds maturing at equal time
intervals. Furthermore, term bonds could be issued and gradually redeemed on a yearly basis
from a mandatory annual sinking fund (through mandatory sinking fund deposits) to level debt
service over the entire term of the debt.



BOX 4
Sinking Fund for Municipal Borrowing


Asinking fund is an account set up by a municipality to set aside bond interest payments and redemptions on a
periodic basis so as to repay the securities at maturity. By having a sinking fund, a municipality can reduce its debt
burden over time, avoiding the need to finance a large lump sum when the bond reaches maturity. Typically, a
municipally is required to put a forecasted amount in the sinking fund every year, as described by the bond offering
statement. The positive feature is that the sinking fund reduces a municipality’s chance of defaulting on its debt
obligations by enforcing fiscal discipline over the term of the bond issuance. This, in turn, has been known to
influence creditors to offer lower interest rates on government bonds and thereby reduce debt service burden.

In Morocco, establishing a sinking fund to pay for interest and redemptions is part of a broader strategy to minimize
risk, enhance creditworthiness, and protect creditors’ rights. The Communal Infrastructure Fund limits eligi bility for
borrowing to subnational governments whose debt service (i) does not exceed 40 percent of their combined own-
source and central government transfers from the value-added tax revenues, and (ii) is estimated at 20 –25 percent of
total local budgets. Under clear regulations, the borrowing entity (i) determines the types and classes of assets
pledged as security for borrowing, (ii) sets up independent trusts to handle the recurrent revenues of projects, and
(iii) has a transparent accounting system in place for transfers into the sinking fund. The assets of this fund need to be
reported in the yearly municipal balance sheet. Annual debt service payments associated with municipal borrowing
must be treated as obligatory expenditures recorded in the local budget, and debt service is priority expenditure.
Although such budgetary commitment does not guarantee against default, it does make default much less likely and
is a measure of fiscal discipline. Meanwhile, municipal bankruptcy also needs to be governed by clear regulations on
debt adjustments, bankruptcy initiation, debt workout plans, and allowed expenditures during bankruptcy
proceedings.
Source: Authors and Freire and Peterson (2004)




8
                            Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


To overcome current constraints in the legal framework, UB could prepare a comprehensive set
of regulations to be approved by its council as well as by the MoF and the Fiscal Regulatory
Commission. Such regulations are the responsibility of the central government, according to the
Securities Market Law (SML Article 8.1 and 8.2). Another option is to include these regulations
in the draft Debt Management Law currently under preparation; or a combination of these
options could be used.


Establishing an Effective Debt Management Function for UB
An effective debt management structure requires clear division of tasks. On the one hand, political-
level decision makers (including the City Council, the Mayor/Governor, Vice Mayors, and General
Auditor of the City) review, approve, and oversee the overall volume of indebtedness. They set debt
management objectives and the medium-term debt management strategy, including acceptable risk
levels. Political officeholders also address the fiscal implications of the debt on the budget, set
taxes, and designate UB’s spending programs. On the other hand, technical -level officers are
responsible for formulating the key elements described above and for implementing the
strategy as a whole. (See Figure 1 for an illustration of these roles.)


FIGURE 1
Debt Management Operations According to International Sound Practice




Source: World Bank 2012b.




                                                                                                  9
MONGOLIA



Technical experts will also be responsible for implementation and for seeking optimal risk-
adjusted outcomes within those parameters. A clear division of responsibilities between the
political and technical levels will minimize the risk of fiscal or budgetary policy dominance over
prudent debt management.

Under the present structure of UB’s city government, the technical functions associated with
borrowing are fragmented and shared across different agencies and departments. The Economic
Development Agency is responsible for securing financing for the city’s investments, including
coordinating the bond issuance process. The Finance and Treasury Department is responsible
for revenue collection, expenditure execution, overall financial management, as well as budget
preparation and reporting. The Strategic Policy and Planning Department is responsible for
preparing the city’s capital investment plans along with the estimated costs of the investments.
The Property Relations Department (PRD) is responsible for recording assets and liabilities (that
is, for preparing key parts of the city’s balance sheet). As part of this function, the PRD keeps
records of outstanding UB debts and also oversees the debt liabilities of the city enterprises.
Some municipally owned companies hold debts that are guaranteed by the municipality, the
central government (MoF), or their own assets. There is a risk that over borrowing by city-
owned enterprises could become a liability for UB. Table 1 illustrates a fiscal risk matrix to
identify potential liabilities. For example, it is fundamental that PRD’s reports make explicit
who is the owner of these liabilities (and their assets) and who is therefore responsible for the
associated debt-service obligations. As these entities are all independent of each other, debt
management operations will be fragmented and ineffective unless appropriate coordination and
debt management mechanisms are put in place.


TABLE 1
Fiscal Risks Matrix


LIABILITIES           DIRECT LIABILITIES                         CONTINGENT LIABILITIES

EXPLICIT              E.g., debt (loans contracted and debt      E.g., loan guarantees
                      securities issued)

IMPLICIT              E.g., social security schemes and future   E.g., default on loans from financial
                      public pensions not mandated by law        institutions by public enterprises

Source: World Bank.


International experience suggests that it is best for UB to streamline and consolidate these
functions under one Principal Debt Management function. It should have the mandate and
skills to transact in the markets operating within the parameters established by the UB’s
decision makers. At the central government level, for example, the debt management function is


10
                           Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


housed in the MoF. Many subnational governments have such a function within their finance
and treasury departments, as is the case of Johannesburg and Pretoria in South Africa. Hence,
UB may consider establishing a Debt Management function within its Finance and Treasury
Department. This function can be carried out by staff already in place at the Finance and
Treasury Department. Alternatively, one of the entities involved in the borrowing process may
also be assigned the lead role in coordinating among all the technical departments responsible
for different elements of the borrowing process. This would be a more challenging approach for
UB, given the high level of coordination needed to work across an already fragmented
institutional structure. The roles and responsibilities of each of the entities would need to be
clearly defined, preferably through a formalized operational manual. The coordinating entity
will be responsible for ensuring that information is shared effectively, regular meetings among
all take place, and their activities/tasks are well coordinated. It is also important that a single
entity be responsible for formulating a medium-term debt management strategy and that such
entity have access to the complete debt database.

It is important to clarify the segregation of duties between those officials who have the power
to authorize payments and those responsible for debt data recording. Strong operational
controls and well-articulated responsibilities for staff members will reduce the risk of errors,
policy breaches, and fraudulent behavior. The negotiation of loans and signing of loan
agreements will reside with the UB City Governor and the authorization to borrow will need to
be approved by the City Council. This provision is also now being included in the draft Debt
Management Law. Officials with power to authorize the payments (in accordance with the
agreements) are typically those who have the authority to directly supervise and oversee the
principal debt management function (potentially in UB, the Director of Finance and Treasury).
Officials who can authorize payments should not have the license to also record debt data into
the debt recording system. The entry of data into the debt recording system should be by
dedicated staff within the principal debt management function, and subsequently all data
entered into the system should be checked by a different official. In short, clear job descriptions
and terms of reference for all those involved in debt management functions need to be
prepared. This should be supplemented with a code of ethics and conflict of interest guidelines.
Given that this is UB’s first experience in managing debt, a training program should also be
prepared and implemented.

Some of the key tasks of the principal debt management function include the following:

Preparation of an Annual Borrowing Plan
Drawing on the five-year capital investment budget, the medium-term debt management
strategy, and annual budget cash flow forecasts, a detailed plan for borrowing is prepared.
Annual borrowing should only be undertaken for capital investment projects that are shovel-
ready. A financial analysis should be carried out taking into account all of the city’s current
financial obligations together with the implicit future costs associated with borrowing. It should



                                                                                                11
MONGOLIA



include assessments of the most cost-effective terms and conditions for available borrowings
and the risks inherent in each of these options. Such an analysis should also consider whether
the borrowings should be placed on international or domestic markets. The interest rates in the
domestic market would be higher; however, there would be no foreign exchange risk. In
contrast, interest rates on the international market would be lower, but the risk associated with
debt service costs would be considerable due to potential devaluation of the tugrik as reflected
in significant increases in the exchange rate.4 In addition, the effective rate on the domestic
market may also be lower, when the inflation rate is discounted. Short-term loans (from banks
or the central government) should also be considered, along with short-term bonds to finance
projects during the summer construction season and refinanced with longer-term debt in the
fall. The Borrowing Plan should also include the schedule of the borrowings and the amounts in
both wholesale and retail markets. Simulation models will need to be prepared to define
different options. This is an internal document that should be updated regularly and presented
to decision makers, such as the City Council and the Mayor, to make evidence-based and
informed decisions.

Leading the process of borrowing transactions
Once the annual investment projects have been identified, the Principal Debt Management unit
determines the financial sources (either domestic and/or international bond markets, as well as
concessional loans from bilateral and/or multilateral institutions) that offer the most beneficial
or cost-effective terms and conditions, including maturity periods for long-term bonds. In the
case of loans, UB would negotiate the terms and conditions of the loans with the creditor
(including the currency, interest rate, and fees) and would finalize the loan documentation.
When loans are the financing source, the entity is also responsible for coordinating with the
creditor to ensure that disbursements are completed in accordance with the loans terms and
conditions.

Maintaining debt records and debt forecasting
A key function of the debt management unit is to maintain a complete, accurate, and timely
record of all forms of UB’s debt issuances and loan guarantees. Clear differenti ation should be
made between the debt of the city, the debts of its enterprises, and the associated debt service
obligations. UB needs to ensure that these records are stored in a secure electronic registry with
adequate securities (against theft, fire, and so forth) to mitigate operational risks. Key debt data
include the total value of debt sold and the corresponding dates, total value of monthly interest
on the bonds sold, and expected yearly obligations upon maturity for rolling periods of four
years (the maximum allowable term for debt). Debt records are critical for estimating the
additional debt that could be acquired considering the legal debt limits, preparing the
Borrowing Plan, cost/risk analysis of the debt portfolio, and estimating the cost of debt service.

4Foreign-currency-denominated debt exposes UB to the risk of tugrik devaluation, because the city collects all of its
revenue in MNT.


12
                              Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


Therefore, when loans are disbursed, it is critical that this is recorded immediately. This
information will be used in forecasting debt and debt service obligations to provide a basic
input into the budget process, thereby ensuring that the yearly budgetary appropriations
include interest and principal payments, subject to sensitivity analysis for changes in interest
and exchange rates. Debt data as recorded in the terms sheet should include the following
information.

   Effective or start date        Maturity date                   Grace period (if any)
   Borrowing instrument           Currency                        Principal amount
   Interest rate                  Interest payment frequency      Interest calculation basis
   Fees                           Any complementary benefits      Lender or creditor
   Disbursement start date        Disbursement end date           Disbursement schedule
   Principal repayment            Principal repayment end         Principal repayment amount
    start date                      date                             (or principal repayment
                                                                     schedule)

Cash flow forecasting and cash balance management
UB needs to also establish an appropriate range for its cash balance so that it borrows only
when the funds are needed. Therefore, the Principal Debt Management unit needs to manage
the cash balance by maintaining a reasonably reliable forecast of UB’s cash balance needs. UB
would need to know with complete certainty that it can retain its surplus without being
required to transfer it back to MoF as has been the case in the past. To develop a reliable
forecast, comparisons of actual outcomes against forecasts needs to be undertaken on a monthly
basis to identify any variance. An annual analysis should also be carried out, identifying the
number of instances where the aggregate cash balance fell below a minimum or generated
excess funds that were not anticipated and why, including assessing the seasonality of such
forecasts. For example, it is fundamental for UB to know with full certainty whether or not the
city will receive capital transfers from the Local Development Fund and the exact amount.
These forecasts are a critical input to the preparation of the Borrowing Plan discussed above.

Reporting on debt management activities
In order to ensure accountability and transparency to investors and UB citizens alike, regular
reports on debt management activities need to be produced. There are two types of reports that
need to be produced regularly and made available to the City Council, investors, and the public
at large. First, a detailed Annual Report on UB’s debt management activities should be
prepared. It should assess the outcomes of borrowing against the stated debt management
objectives and evaluate the extent to which these activities have complied with UB’s Debt
Management Strategy. Secondly, a “Debt Statistical Bulletin” should be produced on a quarterly
or semiannual basis, depending on the level of borrowing. The bulletin should describe:




                                                                                                  13
MONGOLIA



      the debt stock—by creditor, instrument, currency, interest rate basis, and residual
       maturity
      debt flows—principal and interest payments
      debt ratios or indicators
      basic risk measure of the debt portfolio.

UB needs to also put in place a separate risk monitoring and compliance function for debt
management. This could potentially be housed under UB’s Office of the General Auditor
(internal auditor). This function is to monitor whether all debt management operations are
within the authorities and limits set by central government policy, UB’s approved debt
management strategy, and the Borrowing Plan. It is also important to prepare written and
documented procedures for all such transactions and operations undertaken in the debt office
(for example, recording data, validation, processing payment orders, and so forth).


Formulating a Debt Management Strategy
UB should prepare a medium-term debt management strategy document based on the longer-
term debt management objectives. This strategy should be set within the context of UB’s
macroeconomic assumptions and budget framework. It is to serve as a decision-making tool for
city leaders (Mayor, Vice Mayors, and the City Council) and will help identify the city’s level of
risk tolerance. The strategy should be updated periodically (preferably annually) in order to
reflect changes in circumstances the city may be facing. Good international practice suggests
that this strategy should be prepared by the technical entities responsible for debt management,
with input of key stakeholders, and then approved by the political body of the city. In UB’s
case, it could be presented by the Mayor for approval by the City Council. The document
should also be made public.

The following information is needed to formulate a strategy:

      total debt service under different scenarios, paying particular attention to interest rate and
       exchange rate variations
      maturity profile of the debt under different scenarios
      strategic benchmarks such as
       o share of foreign currency to domestic debt
       o currency composition of foreign currency debt
       o minimum average maturity of the debt
       o maximum share of the debt that is allowed to fall due during one and two budget
          years
       o maximum share of short-term (up to one year) to long-term debt
       o maximum share of floating-rate to fixed-rate debt
       o minimum average time to interest rate re-fixing


14
                               Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


       o maximum and minimum interest rates
       o ratio of concessional versus semiconcessional loans
       o repayment profile chart.


Ensuring Transparency and Good Governance in Bond Issuance
When UB decides to issue debt securities in either short-term bills or longer-term bonds
through auctions in the domestic market, it should consistently present market participants
and investors with details of an auction calendar well in advance.5 This can lead to lower costs
by providing investors with greater certainty, increasing liquidity, broadening the investor
base, and creating a level playing field for all investors. However, if the first debt issuance is
relatively small, UB could consider negotiating the sale of long-term debt with underwriters
annually, and move towards competitive sales as its credit standing becomes better known and
its debt better accepted in the marketplace.

UB’s legal advisors need to be actively involved in the loan negotiation and/or bond issuance
process to ensure that all documentation meets all legal and contractual requirements . The
legal advisor needs to alert UB government whenever there is a risk that a certain action will
breach any of the loan conditions, or bond issuance terms, and to provide a legal opinion for
each borrowing action. In the United States, for example, subnational debt issuers rely almost
exclusively on the opinion of private attorneys (“bond counsel,” paid from bond proceeds and
not by the issuer or underwriter) that debt being issued is legal, valid, and binding under all
applicable laws.

UB government needs to prepare clear procedures for every step of the borrowing process. This
would include the initial negotiations of the terms and conditions, signing of contracts,
preparation of the term sheets, disbursement procedures, and debt recording. If auctions are
being used, procedures should also address announcement of the auction, bid opening and
closing time, processing, approval of auction cutoff, announcement to successful bidders and
the market, and settlement of the auction. The auction procedures should be made available to
potential participants through the prospectus.


Carrying Out Regular Audits
UB city leaders need to ensure that the debt management activities, policies, and operations are
subject to oversight by the Mongolian National Audit Organization (MNAO) through an
annual audit and that the findings and recommendations of the auditors are used to take
corrective action as needed. The current rule is that UB government’s financial statements are

5In terms of international sound practice, at a minimum, the subnational debt issuer should prepare and publish an
auction calendar for planned issuance of domestic debt securities at least one month ahead on a rolling basis that
contains issue dates and instruments to be issued at those dates.


                                                                                                               15
MONGOLIA



already subject to an external audit by MNAO. UB’s debt management operations should also
be subject to a performance audit. The audit will include three key aspects. First, performance
effectiveness will assess achievement of the borrowing objectives and the impact of the
borrowing activities against the intended impact. Second, the efficiency audit assesses the
efficient use of resources by examining information systems, performance measures, and
monitoring arrangements. Finally, audit of the internal control system assesses the extent to which
the control system is adequately designed to ensure the debt management objectives can be
reached and fraud has been prevented. Ensuring segregation of debt management duties, sound
IT security, and a monitoring unit to promote adherence to internal rules can help prevent
fraud. This audit needs to be shared with the City Council and needs to be made publicly
available.




Conclusion and Recommendations
A key lesson learned from international experience on subnational borrowing is the importance
of laying a solid foundation for prudent management of debt. There are many examples from
around the world of municipal fiscal indiscipline. Fiscal indiscipline is especially pervasive in
situations where national governments offer guarantees. The benefits of possible lower interest
rates due to a central government guarantee do not seem to offset the risk and associated moral
hazard of such guarantees. UB can tighten its budget discipline by carefully estimating its
infrastructure financing needs, modeling the cost of borrowing and then making the
corresponding annual budgetary appropriations for debt service obligations, and setting aside
reserves to ensure that it has the required funds for repaying its debt at maturity, through the
implementation of a sinking fund. Such detailed financial planning requires close coordination
among the many different departments who will play a role in the borrowing exercise: the
Finance and Treasury Department, Strategic Planning and Policy Department, Economic
Development Department, and the specific departments providing the services for which the
debt will be issued. It is therefore critical to establish a Debt Management Unit and an effective
institutionalized coordination mechanism among all of these.

In addition to internal coordination for debt management, coordination and close collaboration
with the central government is critical on any borrowing UB might undertake. Given the city’s
large share of the national economy, any large-scale development spending will have a
significant impact on the overall economy and national-level fiscal management. For this
reason, proper alignment of any UB borrowing with the medium-term debt management
strategy at the national level would be important.




16
                                Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider


The key elements for a practical and comprehensive approach in debt management have been
outlined in this note. This note strongly recommends that UB’s leadership consider the
implementation of these principles and processes in order to set up a successful debt
management framework. (Appendix C includes a checklist of key decision points in
formulating a debt management framework.) A detailed explanation of each of these key
elements may be consulted in the Guide to the Subnational Debt Management Performance
Assessment, prepared by the World Bank (World Bank 2012a).


Key Actions Required and Corresponding Outputs
Drafting laws is a complex undertaking, but the current draft Debt Management Law provides
an opportunity for addressing many of the gaps in the current legal framework. As a second-
best option, UB also has the power to draft regulations that will clarify ambiguities in the
various laws. Table 2 summarizes the key short- and medium-term actions and associated
outputs that UB should consider for prudent debt management.



TABLE 2
Key Actions and Associated Outputs for Prudent Debt Management


Strengthening the Regulatory Framework

                                  Define “base revenue” as current actual revenues minus actual capital budget
                                  revenues and contributions. By clearly linking the definition to the budget
                                  reporting classification, the ceiling will be clarified.

                                  Set an internal limit of UB’s debt-carrying capacity based on a financial
                                  assessment of the city’s ability to repay (taking into account all its financial
Debt limits                       obligations).

                                  Clarify which parts of UB’s revenues can be used in debt service and repayment of
                                  principal (for example, capital revenue should be for investment financing only).

                                  Lengthen the current debt term limit of four years to ensure that UB can benefit
                                  from long-term and lower-cost borrowing.

                                  Specify the remaining assets that can be used as collateral for loans since the law
                                  protects those assets that are used for the purpose of carrying out the city’s le gally
Collateral, debt service, and     mandated responsibilities.
debt repayment at maturity        In parallel, consider exempting bond issuance from collateral requirements and
                                  instead require pledging revenues to debt service obligations and the
                                  implementation of a sinking fund to fully cover debt repayment at maturity.

                                                                                                      (Continued next page)




                                                                                                                       17
MONGOLIA



Table 2 (continued)

                               Require the establishment of a Special Account for the management of bond
Special Account                proceeds, with well-defined recording rules for transparency in the usage of these
                               financial resources.

Establishing a Debt Management Function

Designate the administrative   Recruit staff, prepare job descriptions, and conduct training as needed.
unit in charge of the debt
management functions           Define a coordination framework and approach among all key stakeholders.

Prepare debt management
                               Make strategy document available to the public through UB’s website.
objectives and strategy

Borrowing

                               Identify the investments that will be financed through borrowing and other
Borrowing Plan
                               capital sources, and prepare simulations to select most appropriate financing.




18
                                    Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider



Appendix A: Subnational Debt
Management Performance Indicators6
The subnational DeMPA tool assesses 33 dimensions of subnational governments’ debt
management activities (and closely related areas), organized into 14 debt performance indicators
(DPIs). The tool aims to capture sound practices that are indispensable to debt management
(Table A.1). The assessment is incorporated into a Debt Management Performance Report.


TABLE A.1
Subnational Debt Management Performance Indicators

Number                      Title
Governance and Strategy Development
DPI-1                       Legal Framework
DPI-2                       Managerial Structure
DPI-3                       Debt Management Strategy
DPI-4                       Evaluation of Debt Management Operations
DPI-5                       Audit
Coordination with Fiscal and Budgetary Policy
DPI-6                       Coordination with Fiscal and Budgetary Policy
Borrowing Planning, Borrowings, and Other Financing Activities
DPI-7                       Borrowing Planning
DPI-8                       Borrowings
DPI-9                       Loan Guarantees, On-Lending, and Derivatives
Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management
DPI-10                      Cash Flow Forecasting and Cash Balance Management
Operational Risk Management
DPI-11                      Debt Administration and Data Security
DPI-12                      Segregation of Duties, Staff Capacity, and Business Continuity
Debt and Loan Guarantee Records and Reporting
DPI-13                      Debt and Loan Guarantee Records
DPI-14                      Debt and Loan Guarantee Reporting

Source: World Bank 2012c.




6This appendix is adapted from the World Bank’s Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA)
Tool. (World Bank 2012c: 9).


                                                                                                       19
MONGOLIA



The subnational DeMPA does not specify recommendations for reforms, staff capacity, or
institution building. However, the performance indicators for each dimension do stipulate a
minimum level of performance that should be met under all conditions. Consequently, an
assessment showing that the subnational DeMPA minimum requirements are not met indicates
an area that normally would be considered a priority for reform or capacity building or both.




20
                                               Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider



 Appendix B: Regulatory Frameworks for
 Subnational Governments
 Table B.1 presents a wide range of borrowing frameworks for subnational governments (SNGs)
 around the world. It illustrates variations in terms of their dependence on the national
 government and the range of financing methods that they use to meet their financing needs.


TABLE B.1
Borrowing Frameworks for Subnational Governments Worldwide

SNG is autonomous       SNG borrowing         SNG borrowing activities are (at least partially) regulated by the rules        SNG is eligible for       SNG is not
to borrow or incur      controls such as      imposed by central (or upper-level) government                                  borrowing with prior      eligible for
debt. The borrowing     fiscal targets and                                                                                    approval of central (or   borrowing
activities of SNG are   debt ceiling are      Constraints on            Numerical constraints      Numerical constraints      upper-level) government   except on-
mainly monitored        results of            purpose of borrowing      on fiscal balance,         on new debt, debt level,                             lending
and controlled by the   negotiation                                     expenditure                and debt service                                     through
market and/or           between central and                                                                                                             central
regulated by local-     local governments                                                                                                               government
level regulations

Canada province         Australia state       Germany region            Germany local              Germany local              Japan local (above        Mexico
Japan local (up to      Austria local         and local (the            Italy state and local      Spain local                certain limit)            state
certain limit)                                Constitution)                                                                   Republic of Korea         (external)
                        Belgium local                        France local                          Brazil local
Switzerland state                      Italy state and local                                                                  local                     Armenia
                        Germany region                       Brazil local                          Peru local
                                       (the Constitution)                                                                     Germany local             local
United States           Spain region                         Columbia local                        Estonia local
                                       France local                                                                                                     (external)
state                                                                                                                         Spain region and
                                                             Peru local                            Hungary local
                                       Brazil local                                                                           local (outside EMU)       Kazakhstan
Argentina                                                    Lithuania local                       Lithuania local
                                       Mexico state                                                                           Turkey local              local
province
                                                             Russian Federation                    Latvia local                                         (external)
(domestic)                             Peru local                                                                             United Kingdom
                                                             local                                 Poland local                                         Kosovo
Czech Republic                         (external)                                                                             local (external)
                                                             Indonesia local                       Russian Federation                                   Russian
local                                  Estonia local                                                                          Argentina province
                                                             Vietnam local                         local                                                Federation
Zimbabwe local                         Romania local                                                                          (external)
                                                                                                   Serbia local                                         local
                                              Russian                                                                         Brazil local (external)
                                                                                                                                                        (external)
                                                                                                   Slovak Republic
                                              Federation local                                                                Colombia local (bond
                                                                                                   local                                                Cambodia
                                              Slovak Republic                                                                 issuance)
                                                                                                   Philippines local                                    local
                                              local                                                                           Peru local (external)
                                                                                                   Thailand local                                       India state
                                              Indonesia local                                                                 Serbia local              (external)
                                                                                                   Nigeria state
                                              South Africa local                                                              Slovak Republic local Indonesia
                                                                                                                              (above certain limit)  local
                                                                                                                              India state (domestic) (external)
                                                                                                                              Indonesia local           Nigeria
                                                                                                                              (domestic)                state
                                                                                                                              Thailand local            (external)
                                                                                                                              Vietnam local
                                                                                                                              (external)

 Source: World Bank 2012a.




                                                                                                                                                                 21
MONGOLIA




Appendix C: Checklist for Reviewing a
Borrowing Framework

Decision points   Standard options for consideration in a debt      Current status of the borrowing framework in Mongolia
                  management framework                              and action areas


1. Setting the    The borrowing framework should specify the        The law sets a four-year limit on borrowing; no other terms
terms of          permitted term of borrowing. Options include      are included. Consider extending the term to allow for long-
borrowing         a set number of years, a time period tied to      term (and lower cost) borrowing.
                  the useful life of the asset being financed, or
                  whatever the market will bear.

2. Form of        The framework should specify any limits on        The Budget Law states that “debt instrument” means all
borrowing         the form of borrowing instruments. Options        types of loans, securities, and any agreements that incur
                  might include loans from banks, financial         debts. However, this definition remains general and the
                  institutions, or other entities; tradable         regulations should provide more specific guidance on the
                  securities; or financing leases.                  form of borrowing that is appropriate for UB.

3. Pledges,       The framework should specify whether and to       The Budget Law does not specify how debt service
intercepts, and   what extent specific revenue streams or assets    obligations would be met (examples include pledging
other security    may be pledged to secure creditors’ right to      general revenues to secure debt service obligation and
interests         repayment.                                        repayment of principal, or securing associated revenue
                                                                    streams in the case of revenue-generating projects).
                                                                    However, it does specify that local government revenues
                                                                    cannot be used as collateral in case of default. Amending the
                                                                    Budget Law or including a provision in the draft Debt
                                                                    Management Law to allow for a pledge of revenues for debt
                                                                    service would provide greater assurance to bond investors.
                                                                    In addition, consideration should be given to a fiscal
                                                                    intercept of transfers from the central government to enforce
                                                                    debt payment compliance.

4. Reporting      The framework should specify the                  The provisions of the Budget Law on “Property and
requirements      information to be reported to the Ministry of     Government Debt Management” are not specific enough
                  Finance, the City Council, and/or disclosed       and reporting requirements are still fairly broad. A detailed
                  publicly. Examples include the term and           reporting requirement (recommendations for which have
                  amount of the debt, interest rates, loan          been included in this note) should be elaborated and
                  origination or brokerage fees, repayment          integrated into the borrowing regulations/framework.
                  schedules, and any pledges, intercepts,
                  security interests, or credit enhancements.




22
                                   Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider



Decision points     Standard options for consideration in a debt      Current status of the borrowing framework in Mongolia
                    management framework                              and action areas


5. Monitoring,      The framework should specify early warning        The framework does not yet provide any guidance on early
government          systems to alert the MoF or other agency to       warning systems in the event of developing liquidity issues.
intervention, and   developing liquidity issues. It should specify
                                                                      This note and the “Financial Self-Assessment” have
creditor remedies   any interventions or controls that may be
                                                                      highlighted the importance of upgrading current reporting
                    imposed by government, and the conditions
                                                                      formats. An accurate, relevant, and timely reporting system
                    under which these would be appropriate. The
                                                                      should significantly assist in the monitoring function. This
                    framework should specify the remedies and
                                                                      note also recommends that the draft Debt Management Law
                    procedures available to a creditor in the event
                                                                      (or regulations to be developed) explicitly include the legal
                    UB defaults.
                                                                      procedures available to creditors in the event of defaults.

6. Ratios and       The framework should specify any limitations      Current legislation has established that public debt
limits              in terms of either aggregate debt or annual       (including local government debt) should not exceed 40
                    debt service, which may be stated in absolute     percent of GDP. Furthermore, the absolute amount of debt
                    or proportional terms.                            cannot be larger than UB’s previous fiscal year base revenue;
                                                                      debt service obligations cannot be greater than 15 percent of
                                                                      base revenue. A revision is needed to make the definition of
                                                                      base revenue operational and consistent with the financial
                                                                      reporting system.

7. Purpose of       The framework should specify the purpose          The current framework does not specify the purpose of
borrowing           for which funds may be borrowed. Examples         borrowing, beyond restricting it to the provision of the 18
                    might include authorization for infrastructure    functions of the city and short-term intergovernmental loans
                    investment, or other property, plant, and         for budget shortfalls to be repaid during the same fiscal
                    equipment, and refinancing (with limitations).    year. Specific regulations for UB’s borrowing, including the
                    Additionally, there may be prohibitions—for       purpose of borrowing, need to be prepared by MoF and
                    example, on investments for arbitrage or          approved by the government.
                    investment in derivatives.

8. Borrowing        The framework should specify any limitations      Consideration should be given to the explicit inclusion of
limitations and     on terms and conditions of borrowing. These       establishing sinking funds and reserve funds.
or prohibitions     might include prohibitions on zero coupon
                                                                      Empirical evidence of good international practices strongly
                    structures in the absence of a sinking fund, or
                                                                      suggests that UB should focus on debt issuance in the
                    prohibitions on borrowing in foreign currency
                                                                      domestic rather than the international markets, particularly
                    or in structures dependent on the value of
                                                                      considering the relatively high foreign exchange risk in still
                    foreign currencies.
                                                                      volatile economies. International investors should be
                                                                      encouraged to invest in bond denominated in tugriks in the
                                                                      domestic market.

9. Borrowing        The framework should specify the processes        Current legislation requires public consultation and the
authorization       by which debt is authorized, which may            explicit authorization of MoF, the Financial Regulatory
                    include a vote by the City Council, a             Commission (FRC), and the City Council. It also requires
                    referendum by the electorate, and/or              implicit approval of the Ministry of Economic Development
                    certification of financial statements or          (MED) as they are responsible for overseeing investments.
                    projections by an independent auditor.            Nevertheless, to facilitate the borrowing process, the
                                                                      regulations should include a summary of the authorization
                                                                      steps required and provide a clearer role for public input
                                                                      (such as through a referendum or clarification of the steps
                                                                      for consultation).




                                                                                                                                   23
MONGOLIA



Decision points   Standard options for consideration in a debt      Current status of the borrowing framework in Mongolia
                  management framework                              and action areas


10. Short-term    The framework should specify limits on the        Current legislation addresses local government borrowing
borrowing         use of short- municipal borrowing, for            needs (through central government loans) in case of cash
                  example, to bridge operating cash shortfalls in   shortfalls. It also requires the payment of short-term
                  anticipation of specific and realistic revenues   government loans within the same fiscal year. It is
                  to be realized within the fiscal year. The        understood that all debts need to be paid upon maturity,
                  framework may also require that short-term        including short-term debts. However, it should be
                  debt be paid off annually, to prevent             determined (consistent with current legislation) whether
                  accumulation of unserviceable debts.              further legal refinements on the management of short-term
                                                                    debt are needed.




24
                           Preparing for Debt Management in Ulaanbaatar: Issues to Consider



References
Canuto, Otaviano, and Lili Liu, eds. 2013. Until Debt Do Us Part: Subnational Debt, Insolvency, and
      Markets. Washington, DC: World Bank.
De Angelis, Michael, and Xiaowei Tian. 2013. “United States: Chapter 9 Municipal
     Bankruptcy—Utilization, Avoidance and Impact.” In Otaviano Canuto and Lili Liu, e ds.,
     Until Debt Do Us Part: Subnational Debt, Insolvency, and Markets, 311–353. Washington,
     DC: World Bank.
Freire, Mila, and John Peterson. 2004. Subnational Capital Markets in Developing Countries: From
        Theory to Practice. Washington, DC: World Bank.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 1999. “Code of Good Practices on Transparency in
       Monetary and Financial Policies: Declaration of Principles.” IMF, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund and World Bank. 2013. “Medium Term Debt Management
       Strategy (MTDS).” Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, April 19.
Jokay, Charles. 2013. “Hungary: Subnational Insolvency Framework.” In Otaviano Canuto and
       Lili Liu, eds., Until Debt Do Us Part: Subnational Debt, Insolvency, and Markets, 261–311.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
Melecky, Martin. 2007. “A Cross-Country Analysis of Public Debt Management Strategies.”
      Policy Research Working Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Mongolian Government. 2005. “The Procedures on Issuing and Making Payments for Treasury
     Securities.” Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
Mongolia, State Great Khural. Undated. Law on Management of Government Financial Assets
     and Liabilities. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
———. 1994. Securities Law of Mongolia, 13 October 1994. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
———. 2003. Law on Coordination of Foreign Loans and Grant Aid, June 12, 2003. Ulaanbaatar,
    Mongolia.
———. 2010. Law of Mongolia on Fiscal Stability (Certified Translation). June 24, 2010.
    Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
———. 2011. Budget Law (IBL) of December 23, 2011. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
———. 2012a. Budget Law (Revised Edition) of February 1, 2012. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
———. 2012b. Securities Markets Law of Mongolia (Revised Edition), 2012. Ulaanbaatar,
    Mongolia.




                                                                                                25
MONGOLIA



RTI International.1999. “Formulation of a Regulatory Framework for Municipal Borrowing in
       South            Africa.        Final         Report.”        Available         at:
       http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMF/Resources/339747-1251914038224/4p.pdf.
Ulaanbaatar City Government. 2013. “Economic Development Agency. City Bond Procedures.”
      Draft of proposed regulation. October. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
World Bank. 2003. “Guidelines for Public Debt Management.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
      Available                                                                     at:
      http://treasury.worldbank.org/bdm/pdf/PDM_Guidelines_2001_english.pdf
———. 2009a. “Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) Tool,” Economic Policy
    and Debt Department and Banking And Debt Management Department. World Bank,
    Washington, DC.
———. 2009b. “Developing a Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS)— Guidance
    Note for Country Authorities.” World Bank and the International Monetary Fund,
    Washington, DC.
———. 2012a. Guide to the Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) Tool.
    Economic Policy and Debt Department. Poverty Reduction and Economic Management
    Network (PREM). August 17. World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2012b. “Review of the Readiness and Suitability for DKI Jakarta to Issue Municipal
    Bonds.” June. World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2012c. Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) Tool. Economic
    Policy and Debt Department. Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network
    (PREM). August 15. World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2014. “Ulaanbaatar Financial Self-Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC.




26
