                             89382

                 Knowledge Series 015/13




Scaling-Up Renewable
   Geothermal Energy
          in Indonesia
An Integrated Approach to Evaluating a
             Green Finance Investment
TA B L E O F C O N T E N T S


KEY MESSAGES	                                                                               1
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY IN INDONESIA	                                                             2
		 The Project	                                                                             3
		 Economic Justification For The Project	                                                  4
ENGINEERING A SOLUTION TO BRIDGE THE FINANCIAL VIABILITY GAP	                               7
		 The Need For Robust Project Design To Handle Investment Risks	                          10
		 Who Benefits And Who Bears The Cost Of This Project?	                                   12
A N I N T E G R AT E D A P P R O A C H T O E V A L U AT I N G T H E R AT I O N A L E F O R
  EXTENDING GREEN FINANCING	                                                               15
ENDNOTES	17
A C R O N Y M S A N D A B B R E V I AT I O N S 	                                                      18


L I S T O F F I G U R E S A N D TA B L E S
Figure 1 | Selected Geothermal Areas in Indonesia	                                                     3
Figure 2 | Results of the Economic Analysis Comparing Geothermal to Coal (Present Value of Costs)	     6
Figure 3 | Bridging the Financial Viability Gap (NPV from PGE’s Equity Point of View)	                 9
Figure 4 | Results of Risk Analysis: Probability of a Negative Financial Return and Excessive Loss	   11

Table 1 | Project Financing by Component and Source of Funding	                                        5
Table 2 | Summary of Financial Scenarios	                                                              8
Table 3 | The Benefits of Increased Electricity Consumption (in US$ millions)	                        13
Table 4 | Distributional Impacts of Project	                                                          14




                                              Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia          i
KEY MESSAGES

Indonesia is rapidly increasing its power generation capacity to meet the needs
of its growing economy. This has included a significant expansion of coal-based
power—a cheap option with significant environmental costs. To meet its increasing
energy demand in an environmentally responsible way, the government has embarked
on an ambitious plan to expand its geothermal resource, which is the largest
worldwide. Geothermal is a reliable and non-intermittent power source and the only
renewable energy that can effectively substitute baseload generation. Electricity from
geothermal plants would displace coal-based power in Indonesia.

Pertamina Geothermal Energy (PGE) is leading Indonesia’s effort to scale-up
geothermal, attempting a globally unprecedented expansion of over 1,000 MW of
capacity. The World Bank is helping kick-start PGE’s investment program through
the development of the Ulubelu (Units 3 & 4) and Lahendong (Tompaso) (Units 5 & 6)
geothermal fields. Loans totaling US$ 300 million are being extended from the World
Bank’s facility for lending to middle-income countries through International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loans and from the global Clean Technology
Fund (CTF) established to promote climate-friendly investments. To justify public
support and evaluate the viability of this “green finance” investment, an integrated
approach to decision making was utilized based on the combined assessments
of financial-economic-stakeholder-risk impacts. Key conclusions resulting from the
integrated project evaluation for this project are:

■■ There are financial and economic additional (incremental) costs associated with
  geothermal development when compared with a baseload power generation
  alternative, such as coal-based power.
■■ Even when accounting for the value of local externalities, the geothermal project
  is not economically justified unless other benefits, such as energy security and
  diversification, are considered.
■■ Once the global environmental externalities of geothermal are accounted for, the
  project is then “globally” justified, making a strong case for international support
  to the project.
■■ The project also is not financially viable unless it receives a price from the off-taker
  for the electricity that is commensurate with the cost and risks of developing
  geothermal resources. Since a pricing policy to make geothermal power invest-
  ments financially attractive is still under development in Indonesia, immediate
  scale-up of geothermal investments require an “engineered” solution to buy-down
  the cost and bridge the financial viability gap.
■■ Theconcessional financing package, which included a CTF loan, was necessary
  to bridge the financial viability gap, along with government intervention to cover
  some of the additional (incremental) costs.
■■ The stakeholder/distributional analysis confirms that global compensation (i.e., CTF
  funds) are justified since the environmental benefits of reducing greenhouse gas
  emissions are global, extending beyond Indonesia. Indonesian energy consumers
  will also receive substantial benefits from the project.
■■ Giventhe resource and other inherent risks associated with geothermal develop-
  ment, it is important that the project’s design is sufficiently robust to withstand the
  impact of such uncertainties.



                                      Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia     1
    GEOTHERMAL ENERGY IN INDONESIA

    Indonesia is often referred to as the world’s largest archipelago, comprising some
    17,000 to 18,000 islands. It is located in Southeast Asia and has a population of over
    220 million people, with much of the population concentrated on the islands of Java
    and Sumatra. The country’s gross domestic product, estimated around US$ 800
    billion in 2010, has seen robust and steady growth over the past decade, generally
    between 5 to 6 percent per year.

    The sustained economic growth has also led to increasing demand for electricity that
    has averaged around 8 percent per year. As a result, a capacity surplus that existed
    about a decade ago, following the Asian Financial Crisis, has progressively given way
    to a shortfall in generation characterized by power shortages. Perusahaan Listrik
    Negara (PLN), the national power company, has struggled to mobilize investments,
    and has also required growing government subsidies to keep operating a system that
    is highly dependent on petroleum products, which has driven up its cost of supply.
    Private investments that came to a halt due to several major factors1 have rebounded
    somewhat in recent years, but remain far short of the country’s needs. Supply is
    barely able to keep up with increasing demand. Brownouts and load shedding are
    commonplace, impacting economic growth, and affecting even ordinary consumers.

    In 2006, the Government of Indonesia (GoI) responded to what, at the time, was a
    pending crisis by implementing a Fast-Track Program designed to rapidly develop
    10,000 MW of generation capacity equivalent to about one third of PLN’s then total
    existing system capacity. Newly constructed power plants, located throughout the
    country, would utilize Indonesia’s abundant, readily available, and relatively inexpen-
    sive coal resources. They would displace high cost oil-fired generation units, increase
    supply at an affordable price to the economy and households, and reduce the impact
    of PLN’s Public Service Obligation (PSO subsidy) 2 on the state budget. This first
    Fast-Track Program is well under implementation.

    The 10,000 MW coal-based Fast-Track Program also poses significant challenges. It will
    exacerbate local and global environmental impacts and increase Indonesia’s dependence
    on fossil fuels for power generation. Over 80 percent of the current electricity generation
    in Indonesia is based on fossil fuels, and environmental conditions will further deterio-
    rate when the additional 10,000 MW of coal-based capacity is fully commissioned. To
    ensure a more environmentally sustainable development of the sector, the GoI launched
    a second 10,000 MW Fast-Track Program in late 2008 that is predominantly made up
    of renewable energy, with geothermal power making up 40 percent of the target. The
    expected outcome is a substantial increase in renewable energy displacing alternate
    investments in coal-based power production. This investment in renewable energy will
    reduce the carbon footprint of the power sector and substantially lower local environmental
    impacts. However, these benefits would come at sizable additional (incremental) costs that
    could undermine the affordability objective, as well as add to the already high PSO subsidy.

    Indonesia has the largest estimated geothermal reserves in the world, and geothermal
    is an ideal option to diversify the country’s power generation mix (Figure 1). It is a
    baseload generation technology not subject to the intermittency and variability
    challenges associated with most renewable electricity sources. As an indigenous and
    non-tradable energy source, it will also enhance the country’s energy security and
    serve as a natural hedge against the volatility of fossil-fuel prices. Despite having an
    estimated 27,000 MW of geothermal power potential (the rough equivalent of the

2   Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
Figure 1 | Indonesia’s Geothermal Prospects
              95°                                 100°                        105°                             110°                   115°                   120°                         125°                         130°                             135°                       140°
             15°                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15°
                                                                                                                                                               SPECULATIVE = 9,533 MWe
                                                                                                                                                               HYPOTHETICAL = 4,475 MWe
                                                                                                                                                               PROBABLE = 10,317 MWe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INDONESIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NATIONAL CAPITAL
                                                INDONESIA                                                                                                      POSSIBLE = 728 MWe
                                                                                                                                                               PROVEN = 2,305 MWe                                                World Bank-Financed Project Locations
                                                                                                                                                               TOTAL = 27,358 MWe                                                ENERGY GEOTHERMAL POTENTIAL (MWe)
             10°                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10°




             5°                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5°

                                                                                           Natuna                                                                                                        Talaud
                                                                                            Besar                                                                                                          Is.


             Simeulue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Morotai


                              Nias                                                                                                                                            1,961
                                                                                                                                                                                                              534                              PAC IFIC                 OC EAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Halmahera
             0°                                                                                                          KA L IM ANTA N                                                                                       Waigeo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0°
                                                                                  Lingga
                                     Me




                                                                         13,778                                     50                                                                                                                                           Biak
                                                                                                                                                                                      Peleng                  Obi
                                       nt




                                            Siberut                                     Bangka
                                                                                                                                                        SULAWESI
                                           aw




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Misool                     Yapen
                                                            SUMATRA                                                                                                                       Sula Is.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ceram
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                            ai




                                                                                                         Belitung
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Buru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PAPUA
                                                 Is
                                                  .




             5°                                                                                                                                                                   Muna                                                   Kai
                                                      Enggano                                                                                                                                                                            Is.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Is.
                                                                                                                             Madura
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Wetar
                                                                                            9,304                                     1,681                                                                           Babar            Tanimbar
                                                                                                                                                   Sumbawa                               Alor                 Moa                      Is.
                                                                                                                                       Bali Lombok                   Flores
                                                                                       JAVA
                          0           200        400 Kilometers
             10°                                                                                                                                                    Sumba                                                                                                                 10°
                                                                                                                                                                                           Timor
                          0          100    200       300   400 Miles
              This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IBRD 39996
              The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
              shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank                                                      INDIAN OCEAN
APRIL 2013




              Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any         GSDPM
                                                                                       Map Design Unit
              endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
              95°                                 100°                        105°                             110°                   115°                   120°                         125°                         130°                             135°                       140°

                                                                        Speculative                               Hypothetical Hypothetical
                                                                                                             Speculative                         Probable
                                                                                                                                                  Probable           Possible                Proven
                                                                                                                                                                                          Possible                   Total   Proven                                        Total
                  Sumatra                                                     Sumatra
                                                                        5,530 MWe                               5,530 MWe
                                                                                                                  2,353 MWe       2,353 MWe        5,491
                                                                                                                                                 5,491   MWe
                                                                                                                                                       MWe               15 MWe                389 MWe
                                                                                                                                                                                           15 MWe                 13,778 MWe 389 MWe                                    13,778 MWe
                  Kalimantan                                               50 MWe
                                                                              Kalimantan                           50 MWe –                                –                                         –                50 MWe        –                                      50 MWe
                  Sulawesi                                               900 MWe
                                                                             Sulawesi                               125
                                                                                                                  900   MWe
                                                                                                                      MWe           125 MWe        761 MWe
                                                                                                                                                     761 MWe             110 MWe          110 MWe
                                                                                                                                                                                                65 MWe             1,961 MWe 65 MWe                                      1,961 MWe
                  Maluku                                                  275 MWe
                                                                              Maluku                                117
                                                                                                                  275   MWe
                                                                                                                      MWe           117 MWe        142 MWe
                                                                                                                                                     142 MWe                                         –               534 MWe        –                                     534 MWe
                  Java                                                  2,363 MWe
                                                                              Java                                1,521
                                                                                                                2,363   MWe
                                                                                                                      MWe         1,521 MWe      2,980 MWe
                                                                                                                                                   2,980 MWe             603 MWe          603 1,837
                                                                                                                                                                                              MWe MWe              9,304 MWe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1,837 MWe                                     9,304 MWe
                  Papua                                                   50 MWe
                                                                             Papua                                 50 MWe –                                –                                          –               50 MWe        –                                      50 MWe
                  Bali-Nusa Tenggara                                     365 MWe
                                                                             Bali-Nusa Tenggara                     359
                                                                                                                  365   MWe
                                                                                                                      MWe           359 MWe        943 MWe
                                                                                                                                                     943 MWe                                          – MWe
                                                                                                                                                                                                     14            1,681 MWe 14 MWe                                      1,681 MWe



Source | Authors based on information from Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources, Indonesia.



current PLN system capacity), less than 4 percent of Indonesia’s geothermal resources
have been developed to generate electricity. 3 The second Fast-Track Program
is expected to change that, with Indonesia poised to become the world leader in
geothermal power generation capacity when the program is successfully implemented.

PGE is a leading geothermal developer and a fully owned subsidiary of the state-
owned oil and gas company, Pertamina. PGE has been mandated by the government
to undertake a globally unprecedented scale-up of over 1,000 MW of geothermal
capacity, which would make it a global leader in geothermal development. The World
Bank is working with PGE to help kick-start this ambitious program by immediately
developing the fields where preparation is advanced and to strengthen the company’s
capacity to successfully implement its investments.

THE PROJECT
The project financed by the World Bank includes the development of two geothermal
fields: Ulubelu, which is located in the Lampung district in the southern part of the island of
Sumatra, and Lahendong (Tompaso), located in the northern part of the island of Sulawesi.
PGE plans expansions of approximately 110 MW in Ulubelu (Units 3 & 4)4 and 40 MW
in Lahendong (Tompaso) (Units 5 & 6).5 The 150 MW of total power generation capacity
to be developed through the project is expected to displace an equivalent amount of
coal-based capacity. As a result, the investment will reduce local pollution, such as sulfur
dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxide (NOx), and total suspended particulates (TSP); as well as
curtail global greenhouse gas impacts by reducing the emission of carbon dioxide (CO2).

                                                                        contingencies.6
The project is budgeted at a total cost of US$ 574.7 million, including ­
Approximately half of the costs associated with the development of the upstream steam

                                                                                                                                      Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia                                                                                                                    3
    field will be funded by PGE’s own resources (equity) through the support of its parent
    company, Pertamina. The World Bank is providing loans totaling US$ 300 million.7
    The financing package includes a US$ 175 million loan from the IBRD with a variable
    spread loan (LIBOR + variable spread), maturity of 24.5 years, and a grace period
    of 9 years. The CTF, which is a part of the global Clean Investment Funds, a group
    of funds established by the international community to promote climate-friendly and
    transformational investments, is providing a US$ 125 million loan at concessional
    terms, through the World Bank. The terms of the CTF loan are: 0.25 percent service
    charge (interest), total maturity of 40 years, and a grace period of 10 years.




    E C O N O M I C J U S T I F I C AT I O N F O R T H E P R O J E C T
    Is this project economically justified? This is a particularly important question since the
    second Fast-Track Program is being promoted on behalf of Indonesia by its govern-
    ment while also taking steps to facilitate financing, including the World Bank loans.
    Therefore, an analysis was carried out from the viewpoint of the entire Indonesian
    economy, to confirm the GoI’s rationale for promoting the project. Indonesia is
    predominantly expanding coal-based capacity to meet its baseload power needs and
    the development of geothermal power would displace coal-based generation. The
    relevant question was not whether the generation of electricity was justified but rather
    which alternative technology would be best to produce it. Therefore, the appropriate
    methodology compared geothermal power generation costs with the avoided costs
    of coal-based power generation (Table 1).

    The analysis first compared the investment and operational costs of coal with that of
    the combined 150 MW geothermal operations at Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso).
    Economic or “shadow prices” were estimated to reflect the true economic resource
    costs of the investment and operation of the project, including the impact of a foreign
    exchange premium of 10.8 percent for tradable content in goods. All economic
    resource flows were discounted by the economic o    ­ pportunity cost of capital (EOCK,
    or the social discount rate) estimated to be 10 percent for Indonesia. Several technical
    parameters specific to geothermal and coal were also applied in order to evaluate
    the investments. The capital cost of a medium-size coal plant was estimated at
    US$ 1,400 per kW, with a plant operating capacity factor of 75 percent.8 In contrast,

4   Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
Table 1 | Project Financing by Component and Source of Funding

                                                                     World Bank Financing
                                                     PGE Internal
                                            Total      Sources         IBRD        CTF
  Project Component                                         (US$ million)
  Investments in Geothermal Field
  Development and Power Generation
    a. Ulubelu                             326.2        140.2         108.5        77.5
    b.  Lahendong (Tompaso)                191.8        105.8          50.2        35.8
  Total Baseline Costs                     518.0        246.0         158.7       113.3
  Physical & Price Contingencies (10%)      51.8         23.8          16.3        11.7
  Total Project Cost                       569.8        269.8         175.0       125.0
  Interest During Construction                4.1          4.1
  Front End/MDB Fee (0.25%)                   0.8          0.8
  Total Cost and Financing Required        574.7        274.7         175.0       125.0
Source | Authors.



based on experience in Indonesia,9 geothermal plant operating capacity factors are
estimated at 92 percent. Investment costs for Indonesia’s geothermal plants are
based on feasibility studies carried out by PGE with the assistance of international
consultants.10 The cost of fuel is a key operational factor, especially in the case of
coal-fired power plants. In Indonesia, PLN mostly utilizes a medium-grade coal, with
an average heat content of 4,200 kcal/kg, which is predominantly used for domestic
purposes. The cost of this coal is estimated at US$ 40 per ton in Sumatra—including
a relatively low US$ 5 per ton transportation cost—since it is available locally on the
island, and assumed to be US$ 50 per ton in North Sulawesi and elsewhere factoring
in the additional cost of transportation. The operational costs for geothermal plants
are less significant since the fuel source—the geothermal steam field—is developed at
the investment stage. Therefore, the operational costs for the Ulubelu and Lahendong
(Tompaso) geothermal fields are largely comprised of the drilling of make-up and
reinjection wells and routine operational and maintenance expenditures.

The results of the economic analysis of the investment and operational costs, as
indicated in Figure 2, suggest that the geothermal project is not competitive with
an equivalent scale coal-based project when comparing the present values of
the economic resource costs for investment and operations only. Based on the
analysis, the present value of the investment and operational costs for geothermal is
US$ 658 million, a full US$ 135 million more than the comparable coal-based option.
However, these initial results do not take into consideration the environmental costs
associated with utilizing coal or, conversely, the benefits of geothermal. Therefore, a
complete economic analysis requires the inclusion of all externalities.

Local pollution arises from emissions that result from burning coal that are released
into the atmosphere unabated. Emissions commonly associated with coal include SO2,
NOx, and TSP. These emissions can adversely impact the health of people residing in

                                         Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia   5
    Figure 2 | Results of the Economic Analysis Comparing Geothermal to Coal
    (Present Value of Costs)
                                      800

                                      700
                                                         150    Global Externality
                                      600
                                                         45     Local Externality
                                      500

                        Million US$   400
                                               658
                                      300
                                                         523    Cost of Generation
                                      200

                                      100

                                        0
                                            Geothermal   Coal
    Source | Authors.




    the vicinity of the power plants. A health impact estimate undertaken for the Suralaya
    coal-fired power plant in Indonesia was updated to extrapolate the local health impacts
    from coal-based power.11 These negative local environmental externalities were
    estimated to be US$ 0.00546/kWh of electricity produced from coal. As a result, the
    present value costs for the equivalent coal-based power plant increased by US$ 45
    million.12 In contrast, geothermal power generation does not emit SO2, NOx, or TSP.

    The development of geothermal energy also has global benefits, since it substan-
    tially reduces the emission of CO2 when compared with a coal-fired power plant. The
    reduction in greenhouse gases, such as CO2, will positively impact global climate
    change. It is important to note that this is a benefit that extends beyond the economy
    of Indonesia since the entire global community stands to benefit. The prices in the
    carbon markets at the time of the study were considered a proxy for the value placed
    by the global community on the reduction in CO2 from the earth’s atmosphere.
    Historical settlement prices in the European Carbon Exchange fluctuated between
    €12 and €34 per ton of CO2 from 2005 to 2010, roughly the same time frame in which
    the project was being prepared, and some studies have estimated prices in excess
    of US$ 100 per ton of avoided CO2. For the purposes of this analysis, a conservative
    estimate of US$ 20 per ton was utilized as a proxy valuation for the global benefits
    of reducing CO2 emissions. The result is a global economic externality resulting from
    the project that is at least US$ 150 million in present value terms.13

    The present value of the economic costs of the prospective coal-based operation is,
    therefore, US$ 718 million when its local and global environmental costs are consid-
    ered. This exceeds the present value of the cost of developing the geothermal sites
    at Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso), which amounts to US$ 658 million. Even if the
    geothermal investment cost were 10 percent higher, the present value of a geothermal
    project cost at US$ 707 would be less than a coal-based project; while the valuation
    of the global externality remains conservative. As such, it can be concluded that
    the geothermal project is economically justified when its local and global environ-
    mental impacts are considered. These externalities would be substantially internalized
    if Indonesia were able to access carbon revenues for the emissions reductions (ERs)
    that result from the geothermal project, making the economic justification more

6   Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
explicit. However, given the considerable uncertainty surrounding the global carbon
markets and its future structure,14 such prospects are unlikely to catalyze decisions by
developers to proceed with investments in geothermal. It is nevertheless appropriate
to consider the global externalities in this particular case since Indonesia has voluntarily
pledged to reduce its carbon footprint in the future (including through changes in the
energy sector) and that CTF funds serve as compensation from the global community
for undertaking climate-friendly investments. It should be noted that the government
maybe considering other strategic benefits to geothermal development, such as
energy security, hedging against the volatility of fossil fuels, and technological interests.
These benefits are difficult to quantify, yet may factor into Indonesia’s ultimate motiva-
tion in pursuing its ambitious scale-up of geothermal resources.

ENGINEERING A SOLUTION TO BRIDGE THE FINANCIAL
VIABILITY GAP

Although the geothermal project is economically justified, PLN’s estimated (avoided)
cost of coal-based electricity of US$ 6.4 cents/kWh does not reflect a potential tariff
that is adequate to cover the financial cost of the geothermal project and provide
private developers, or even PGE, with a return commensurate with the risks they
face with the undertaking. The project’s environmental benefits do not help in this
case as they do not necessarily translate into financial revenues as previously noted.
Raising financing for geothermal investments can be challenging in itself due to the
high upfront capital expenditure required. In the Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso)
projects, the initial capital costs account for 75 percent of the total project costs in
present value terms, while the investment costs for a comparable coal-based plant
make up only about 45 percent of the total costs. In absolute terms, the capital
investment cost per MW of capacity is significantly higher for Ulubelu (US$ 3.3 million)
and Lahendong (Tompaso; US$ 4.6 million) compared to a medium-sized coal-fired
power plant (US$ 1.4 million). On the other hand, PLN—already running losses before
it is compensated through the PSO subsidy—is under pressure to reduce its cost of
supply. Therefore, it seems that the most financially attractive option for the power
company to fulfill its baseload power needs is to rely on coal rather than geothermal.

It is not uncommon for renewable energy technologies to cost more than fossil-
based alternatives on a purely financial basis when externalities are not considered.
Since this represents a market failure, it is also common practice for governments to
intervene through pricing and other policies designed to help scale-up the develop-
ment of renewable energy. Comprehensive renewable energy pricing policies generally
include a mandate to electricity utilities to off-take power at a higher (premium) price
while it is compensated for any associated additional (incremental) financial costs. The
GoI has been attempting to implement such a policy for scaling up geothermal, but
this has been done through a piecemeal approach that has not been successful thus
far. The GoI continues to pursue the implementation of a comprehensive pricing and
compensation policy,15 but it is understood that such reforms may take more time. In
the absence of such a policy, developers must resort to long, drawn out negotiations
with PLN, which is hardly conducive to a time sensitive scale-up of the proposed
magnitude. Moreover, delays in implementing the geothermal program would result
in the construction of more coal-fired power plants to meet Indonesia’s baseload
power demand. This would lock the country into a environmentally detrimental path
since a coal-fired power plant, once constructed, will operate for the duration of
its commissioned period, which typically ranges from 20 to 25 years. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to begin investments in geothermal immediately while longer

                                       Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia      7
    term improvements to the regulatory framework are developed. Consequently, the
    developments at Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso) required an engineered solution
    to bridge the financial viability gap confronting the project.

    To address the financial viability gap, the GoI took steps to facilitate the buy-down
    of project costs. In its absence, under a business-as-usual scenario, PLN was
    likely to offer a geothermal electricity purchase tariff of around US$ 6.4 cents/kWh,
    which, as mentioned earlier, is not sufficient to cover geothermal costs, including
    adequate return on equity that, in the case of private developers, may be in excess
    of 20 percent. It is also not uncommon for large geothermal development companies
    to use equity to finance a majority of the investment based on the strength of their
    balance sheets.16 Under a full equity financing scenario, the projected losses for the
    project in net present value (NPV) terms are 2US$ 269 million. The project was far
    from being financially attractive to developers.

    The GoI took a number of actions to bridge the financial viability gap of this project.
    First, the government convinced PGE to accept a lower rate of return on its equity
    of 14 percent. PGE agreed given the public-good imperatives of the project even
    though investments by its parent company, Pertamina, typically generate substantially
    higher returns. Second, the government agreed to facilitate tariff/power purchase
    agreement (PPA)17 negotiations between PLN and PGE, which, by virtue of existing
    law, would result in an increase in the PSO subsidy in the absence of the higher costs
    being passed through to electricity consumers. Third, the GoI made low-cost public
    financing options available for the purposes of implementing the project. Ultimately,
    PGE was able to secure electricity purchase tariffs of US$ 7.53 cents/kWh for Ulubelu
    and US$ 8.25 cents/kWh for Lahendong (Tompaso). The additional financial costs
    associated with these tariffs will initially be funded through an increase in the PSO
    subsidy to PLN (over and above what is already being provided to the utility), but
    could eventually be passed on to electricity consumers. As illustrated in Table 2,
    even at the negotiated rates, the financial NPV of the project is highly unattractive at
    2US$ 126 million and would create serious financial hurdles for PGE to overcome.

    As a part of its effort to advance the implementation of its second Fast-Track Program
    by facilitating low-cost financing, the GoI sought assistance from the World Bank.
    The World Bank was able to offer a concessional loan package of US$ 300 million to


    Table 2 | Summary of Financial Scenarios

                                                                      Financial                               Lahendong    Combined
                                                                      Metrics                 Ulubelu         (Tompaso)     Project
         PGE all equity financing @ 14% ROE                      Nominal FIRR                  9.0%                6.8%     8.3%
         Tariff @ US¢6.4 /kWh1                                   NPV (US$ million)            2109.9               279.0   2188.8
         PGE all equity financing @ 14% ROE                      Nominal FIRR                  11.0%               9.4%    10.4%
         Tariff @ PPA2                                           NPV (US$ million)             271.1               255.8   2126.2
         PROJECT SCENARIO IBRD 1 CTF                             Nominal FIRR                  17.4%               14.6%    16.5%
         financing
         Tariff @ PPA2                                           NPV (US$ million)               46.8               4.0      51.4
    1
        US$ 6.4 cents/kWh is cost of coal-based electricity as estimated by PLN in its 2010 official statistics.
    2
        PPA tariff rates are US$ 7.53 cents/kWh for Ulubelu and US$ 8.25 cents/kWh for Lahendong (Tompaso).
    Source | Authors.

8   Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
 PGE towards developing the Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso) geothermal fields.
 This lowered PGE’s equity exposure in the project to less than half the investment and
 provided an attractive debt-financing package. As previously noted, US$ 175 million
 was from the World Bank’s middle-income borrowing window (IBRD) while US$
 125 million was a highly concessional loan from the CTF. The CTF is a part of the
 US$ 6 billion Climate Investment Funds (CIFs) established by the global community
 to promote activities and investments that would positively impact climate change.
 Renewable energy is eligible for the softest CTF terms: long-term financing (40-year
 maturity with a 10-year grace period) at concessional interest rates (0.25 percent
 annual service charge/interest rate). The IBRD loan also has a long-term maturity
 (24.5-year maturity with a 9-year grace period). Although PGE opted for an interest
 rate on the IBRD loan that has a variable spread over LIBOR, for the purposes of the
 analysis of what is a long-term investment, a fixed rate of 5.02 percent based on a
 forward LIBOR rate of 3.87 percent and a fixed spread of 1.15 percent18 is applied.
 The IBRD rate is more costly than the CTF service charge but considerably lower
 than commercial lending rates and significantly lower than PGE’s reduced financial
 return expectations on its equity. The financing package offered by the World Bank
 in conjunction with the negotiated tariff rates and PGE’s reduction of its nominal
 required rate of return to 14 percent results in a US$ 51 million NPV projection for the
 project. In the absence of World Bank financing, the financial viability of the project
 would rest on either PGE accepting an even lower rate of return on its equity or on
 securing higher tariffs from PLN for electricity purchases, which in turn raises the PSO
 subsidy burden on the government. It is worth noting that the offer for World Bank
 financing was not sequentially last. Instead, the prospects of World Bank financing
 were made by the government to PGE at the onset of project design, which partly
 provided the assurance to PGE to accept the early phase geothermal resource risks
 by using its own equity to begin investments in exploration drilling in order to develop
 the upstream steam field. Although the financing terms and the loan were finalized
 later, the involvement of the World Bank from the early stages of preparation played
 a catalytic role in the initial investment decision. Figure 3 graphically illustrates the


 Figure 3 | Bridging the Financial Viability Gap (NPV from PGE’s Equity Point of View)
               100
                                                                                                 51
                50

                 0                                                                91

              –50
US$ Million




                                                                     87
              –100

              –150
                                                        63
              –200
                                            74
              –250
                          –263
              –300
                     All Equity @ 20%     Reduced    Negotiated   IBRD Loan    CTF Loan    Final Estimated
                     Coal Tariff @ 6.4   ROE @ 14%       PPA                                 Project NPV
                         cents/kWh                   w/ Premium
                                                        Tariff         World Bank
                                                                   Financing Package
 Source | Authors.

                                                     Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia     9
     buy-down that bridged the financial viability gap and resulted in the final outcome.
     It indicates how actions by multiple stakeholders were required in order to bridge
     the financial viability gap, since someone has to pay for it. PGE agreeing to a lower
     return on its equity, the government providing PSO subsidy support to underwrite the
     premium tariffs that were negotiated, and the concessional financing package from
     the World Bank—each was instrumental in “buying down” the additional financial
     costs and improving the financial standing of the project.

     THE NEED FOR ROBUST PROJECT DESIGN TO HANDLE
     INVESTMENT RISKS
     Although there is a sound rationale for the CTF loan, there is also a reasonable question
     as to how much CTF financing is actually required by the project. With the current IBRD/
     CTF loan package, the project is expected to have a financial NPV of US$ 51 million
     and a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 16.5 percent. The deterministic analysis
     presented thus far could lead to the conclusion that the project would remain financially
     viable even if the CTF concessional funds were reduced. For example, the CTF loan
     could be reduced to as much as US$ 54 million and replaced with equity and the project
     would still break even with a NPV just above zero. However, to evaluate the project in this
     manner ignores the risks that the project will face, including those that are specific and
     inherent to geothermal development. It unrealistically assumes certainty of the estimated
     deterministic results (i.e., estimated NPV and FIRR).

     A Monte Carlo simulation 19 was carried out to assess the project’s risks and
     their impact on the project’s outcomes. Although a complex operation such as
     the development of a steam resource and the construction of a power plant can
     face various risks, for the purpose of the analysis, only the major risks that could
     substantially impact the project were considered. Instead of using one value for
     each of these “risk” variables that would lead to a single value for a project outcome
     (such as the NPV, for example), probability distributions were assigned to reflect
     the variability of the selected risk parameters. As a result, a probability distribu-
     tion illustrating a likely range of values for each of the outcomes was analyzed.
     The evaluation of a range of outcomes based on probabilities allows for a better
     understanding of the risks involved in a project, and also provides insights as
     how best to mitigate them. The key risks that were modeled for the Ulubelu
     and Lahendong (Tompaso) projects related to the geothermal resource and the
     operational capacity of the power plants:

     ■■ Well  Productivity | The contribution to power generation capacity (i.e., MW) from
       each well can significantly alter the required investment costs and impact the
       viability of a geothermal project. It is also a factor that has a considerable degree
       of uncertainty ex-ante until the wells are actually drilled and tested. The consid-
       erable number of wells that were already drilled at Ulubelu provided the basis for
       a more informed assumption about productivity of future wells. A mean value of
       8 MW per well was used with a uniform distribution that ranged from 7 to 9 MW.
       Since there was limited drilling in Lahendong (Tompaso) at the time of the assess-
       ment, a custom distribution with a mean of 6 MW per well with a wide range of
       0 to 21 MW that reflected actual Indonesia-wide probabilities for geothermal well
       productivity, was used to model the risk.
     ■■ Geothermal   Steam Resource Availability | There should be sufficient geothermal
       steam available to operate a power plant if a project is to realize its full benefits. The
       steam resource should be available at the required capacity (MW) for the duration of
       the project (30 years, in this case). If the estimated steam availability is less than the

10   Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
    desired capacity of the power plant, then the project should be scaled-down in design
    to match the level of steam available to fuel the power plant. In the case of Lahendong
    (Tompaso), at the time of the evaluation, the steam resource was estimated at 83 MW
    at a highly certain 90 percent probability, far exceeding the 40 MW of steam that is
    required by the plant’s design. However, at Ulubelu, for Units 3 & 4, only 65 MW was
    confirmed with the same 90 percent probability. Efforts were underway to confirm
    more steam availability. However, if only 65 MW of steam capacity were to be available
    for Ulubelu Units 3 & 4, then it would shorten the duration that the 110 MW power
    plant could sustain its operations to less than the full 30-year life-cycle. The prospect
    of a steam resource being exhausted prematurely poses a risk to the project. Given
    the assessment at the time of evaluation, it was necessary therefore to model the likeli-
    hood that Ulubelu Units 3 & 4 would run out of steam prior to the required 30-year
    plant life and assess the resulting financial impact of foregone revenues.
■■ Plant    Factor | Geothermal power plants usually have a high plant capacity factor,
    which is a measure to indicate the number of hours the power plant operates and
    its reliability during the year. This variable directly affects the amount of electricity
    that is generated, thereby impacting financial revenues and environmental benefits.
    The power plant capacity factor was modeled using a custom distribution with a
    mean of 0.9220 based on experience from operations of existing geothermal power
    plants in Indonesia.

The probability distributions of the above-mentioned variables were used in the Monte
Carlo simulation risk assessment. One thousand simulations were run, each reflecting
a different potential financial scenario. The simulations were carried out for each of
the considered financing options. The key risk analysis conclusions are illustrated in
Figure 4 and discussed below.

In the first two financing scenarios, where PGE is receiving negotiated tariffs that
have a premium over coal and is fully financing the project by equity, the probability
that the NPV will be positive is less than 1 percent for a required rate of return of 14
to 20 percent. Furthermore, there is more than a 98 percent chance that the losses



Figure 4 | Results of Risk Analysis: Probability of a Negative Financial Return and
Excessive Loss
                                               99%           99%
         Probability of a Negative Return




                                                                                                  67%




                                                                               23%



                                             All Equity    All Equity     Equity @ 14% ROE   Equity @ 14% ROE
                                            @ 20% ROE     @ 14% ROE       IBRD (US$ 175 M)   IBRD (US$ 175 M)
                                                PPA           PPA          CTF (US$ 125 M)    CTF (US$ 54 M)
Probability of Loss
                                               99%           98%                2%                23%
  > US$ 50 M
Source | Authors.


                                                          Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia   11
     will be in excess of US$ 50 million, even for a required financial rate of return of
     14 percent. Needless to say, no investor would take on such downside risks. However,
     when the World Bank IBRD/CTF financing is incorporated, then the probability of a
     negative return is reduced to a more manageable 23 percent. Moreover, the likelihood
     of an excessive loss of US$ 50 million drops to 2 percent. The financial robustness
     of the project under this scenario enables PGE to withstand substantial risks while
     maintaining the viability of the project. If the circumstances were altered, with the CTF
     financing reduced to the financial break-even level of US$ 54 million and financing
     increased to make up the difference, then the probability of a negative return would
     increase significantly to 67 percent and the chance for excessive losses would also
     rise, to 23 percent. Even if the reduction in CTF financing is replaced by an increase
     in the amount of the IBRD loan, which is still much cheaper than equity financing, the
     probability of a negative return would be about 40 percent (not shown in Figure 4).
     Therefore, it is important that a project’s financial outcome be sufficiently robust to
     withstand key uncertainties and allow for the sustainability of operations. As such,
     it can be concluded that the size of the concessional CTF loan (US$ 125 million) is
     necessary to mobilize investments and ensure project sustainability.




     WHO BENEFITS AND WHO BEARS THE COST OF THIS PROJECT?
     A distributional analysis was also carried out to evaluate the impact of the project on
     key stakeholders. In previous analyses, financial evaluations assessed the financial
     feasibility of the project from the perspective of the sponsor (PGE) while the economic
     analysis evaluated the project’s impacts from the point of view of the entire country. Due
     to the existence of a global externality (the climate change benefits) and the compen-
     sation provided by the international community through concessional financing, the
     boundaries of the economic analysis were expanded to include the broader global
     community. The difference between the economic and the financial values represents

12   Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
Table 3 | The Benefits of Increased Electricity Consumption (in US$ millions)

                                  Financial Payments        Economic Benefits       Consumer
  Benefits                           @ 10% EOCK               @ 10% EOCK             Surplus
  To Residential Consumers                260                       670                410
  To Commercial Consumers                 168                       206                 38
  To Industrial Consumers                 223                       415                192
  TOTAL                                   651                      1,291               640
Source | Authors.



externalities that accrue to a party other than PGE.21 These externalities can be further
allocated to the beneficiaries (winners) and those who bear the costs (losers) to evaluate
the magnitude of the distributional impacts from the project on these groups.

The primary beneficiaries of the project are electricity consumers in Indonesia. The project is
expected to generate over 1.2 billion kWh of electricity annually, which could facilitate nearly
1 million new electricity connections. The additional electricity consumed would provide
an economic benefit to the various groups of consumers: primarily residential customers,
commercial entities, and industrial users. The maximum willingness to pay (MWTP) for
electricity, as measured by the next best alternative, is a proxy for the gross economic
benefit of the electricity produced by the project, which is estimated to be about US$ 1.4
billion over the life of the project in present value terms. What these consumers actually
pay, however, is the retail electricity tariff in Indonesia. Based on the weighted average retail
electricity tariffs for each of the consumer categories, the estimated total financial payments
made by consumers of this electricity is US$ 651 million over the life of the project in present
value terms. The difference between the gross economic benefit and the actual payments
for electricity is the additional benefit or consumer surplus that accrues to consumers. It is
important to note that this benefit is generated due to the additional electricity supplied and
not as a result of a specific technology used. In other words, consumers would receive this
benefit whether the electricity was generated using geothermal or coal.

The distributional impacts specific to the geothermal project and their allocation are
illustrated in Table 4. The magnitude of the impact on stakeholders is the ­  difference
in externalities between the Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso) geothermal invest-
ments and an equivalent coal-based project. The major stakeholders impacted by the
geothermal project are the Government, the local community in the area of the project,
and the global community. The net impact on the Government, in present value terms,
is 2US$ 78 million. This represents US$ 110 million in additional subsidies that are
partially offset by an additional US$ 84 million in tax receipts that the Government is
expected to receive from PGE over the life of the project. There is also a cost to the
Government of US$ 52 million in present value terms due to the impact of the foreign
exchange premium on the tradable portion of project investments. The local community
in proximity to the project is expected to enjoy an estimated US$ 45 million in health
benefits from the avoided pollution from the generation of geothermal power instead of
coal. Another major beneficiary of the geothermal project is the global community due
to the reduction in potential greenhouse gases in the atmosphere resulting from the
avoided CO2 emissions. The gross global benefit that was estimated on a conservative
basis in the economic analysis is US$ 150 million. However, the global community also
provides compensation for receiving this benefit through a CTF concessional loan that

                                         Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia        13
 Table 4 | Distributional Impacts of Project (in US$ millions)

                                                           Additional                                 Allocation of Externalities
     Geothermal                             Economic       Economic              Total                          Local           Global
     Generation              Financial1       Local1       “Global”1,2        Externality       Government Community Community2

     Revenue/Benefit            637             527                              (110)             (110)

     Investment                 (454)          (493)                              (39)             (39)

     Make-Up Wells              (65)            (70)                               (5)              (5)

     O&M                        (87)            (95)                               (8)              (8)

     Tax                        (84)             –                                 84               84

     Health Benefit               –             45                                 45                            45

     Reduction of GHG             –                            150                150                                         150

     CTF Compensation            86             86             (86)               (86)                                        (86)

                                                                                                   (78)          45            64


                                                           Additional
     Coal-Based                             Economic       Economic              Total                          Local        Global
     Generation              Financial1       Local1       “Global”1,2        Externality       Government    Community    Community

     Revenue/Benefit            527             527                                –

     Investment                 (207)          (225)                              (18)              (18)

     Fuel Cost                  (218)          (237)                              (19)              (19)

     O&M                        (56)            (61)                               (5)              (5)

     Tax                        (38)             –                                 38               38

     Health Benefit               –              –                                 –

     Reduction of GHG             –              –                                 –

                                                                                                    (4)           0            0


     NET DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACT: GEOTHERMAL VS. COAL-BASED
     GENERATION
                                                                                                  (74)           45           64

 Notes
 1
     Discounted at the economic discount rate (EOCK) of 10%
 2
     The global economic benefits accrue to entire global community, including Indonesia
 Source | Authors.



                  is made available by the international community to promote climate-friendly projects.
                  The global impact of this concessional financing, estimated at US$ 86 million in present
                  value terms, is a cost borne by the international community.22 The final net global benefit
                  (or global consumer surplus) of the project is US$ 64 million in present value terms.

                  The top panel in Table 4 presents the net distributional impacts as a result of the
                  geothermal project. Some of these impacts are a direct result of displacing equivalent
                  coal-fired power plants, as illustrated in the second panel in Table 4 under “Coal-Based
                  Generation.” These avoided distributional impacts largely affect the government as


14                Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
it avoids US$ 42 million in foregone costs associated with the foreign exchange
premium on tradable goods but also loses potential corporate income tax revenues of
US$ 38 million that is no longer accrued since the coal-based operation will no longer
take place. The net impact is that the government avoids a US$ 4 million outlay because
the coal-fired power plants are not constructed. The resulting difference between the
impact to the Government from the geothermal power plant ( 2US$ 78 million) and
the avoided impact of the coal-based operations (2US$ 4 million) is 2US$ 74 million,
which is the net distributional impact on the government from the geothermal project.

A N I N T E G R AT E D A P P R O A C H T O E VA L U AT I N G T H E
R AT I O N A L E F O R E X T E N D I N G G R E E N F I N A N C I N G

The economic analysis undertaken for this project confirms the rationale for undertaking
this investment and explains why the international community needs to share the costs
given the project’s global environmental benefits. However, without financial support,
the project is not financially viable since the international and domestic policy environ-
ments do not “internalize” the “externalities” that would have adequately compensated
the project’s investor. This global market failure was addressed, in this particular
project, through a financing package that included a concessional loan from the CTF,
which was instrumental in bridging the financial viability gap of the project. Combined
with the costs borne by Indonesia through the higher geothermal tariffs and lower
return expectations by PGE, the concessional financing package was essential for the
financial viability of the project. As a result, the investments in the geothermal fields at
Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso) are proceeding without delay. This is particularly
important given the urgency with which action is needed to address climate change.

According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), immediate investments are required
globally at a staggering scale if a widely accepted climate change goal, known as
the 450 Scenario, is to be met. The 450 Scenario aims to limit the average long-term
increase in global temperatures to no more than two degrees Celsius (2˚C) compared with
pre-industrial levels, which the IEA estimates will require that the CO2 equivalent concentra-
tions in the atmosphere are limited to no more than 450 parts per million (PPM). However,
the IEA cautions that 80 percent of the expected future emissions will result from the
existing global capital stock, implying that there is limited time and opportunity to reverse
the business-as-usual emissions trend. Moreover, if urgent action is not taken, by 2017,
the IEA predicts that the world will lock in the emissions of the existing capital stock, leaving
little room to maneuver and only far costlier options to consider thereafter for curtailing
greenhouse gas emissions. This is well exemplified in Indonesia, where delays in expanding
geothermal power generation will directly lead to the development of coal-based power
to meet baseload energy needs. Thus, this particular investment, as well as other similar
geothermal projects, represent global and local development imperatives.

An integrated approach to decision making, as illustrated in this paper, is a useful way
to evaluate a green finance investment in geothermal power. It helps bring together
multiple perspectives that are important to making a well-informed investment
decision. In this specific project, the economic analysis provided the development
rationale for the undertaking and confirms that geothermal power is competitive with
coal when its environmental and other benefits are considered. The financial assess-
ment provided the basis for designing the green finance scheme that made the
project financially feasible for PGE to undertake. The Monte Carlo simulation, carried
out as a part of the risk analysis, provided a stochastic perspective with multiple


                                         Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia        15
     scenarios based on probabilities. It enabled the design of a more robust structure for
     the project with sufficient financing to withstand the risks that often face geothermal
     developers—a major factor in the project’s sustainability. Finally, the distributional
     analysis evaluated the impacts on various key stakeholders beyond PGE. It confirmed
     that there were net global environmental benefits from the geothermal project even
     after the compensation provided by the international community through the conces-
     sional loan from CTF. The analyses were key reasons, among others, on the basis of
     which the World Bank’s Board of Executive Directors approved the Geothermal Clean
     Energy Investment Project on July 26, 2011. The geothermal operations at Ulubelu
     and Lahendong (Tompaso) are presently under development.




16   Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
ENDNOTES
1
    	 Some key factors include overall capital flight in                on the report—An Assessment of Geothermal
      emerging markets following the Asian Financial                    Risks in Indonesia, 2010, PPIAF Report.
      Crisis, and the regulatory uncertainty and the              11
                                                                       	 Environmental Impact Assessment of Java’s
      institutional turmoil that followed the annulment                  Electricity Generation Using SimPacts Model,
      of the 2002 Electricity Law by Indonesia’s                         Liun et al.
      Constitutional Court.                                       12
                                                                       	 Note that in this analysis, the externalities are
2
    	 Government compensation to PLN under                               attributed as the cost of coal-based power
      State-Owned Enterprise Law to cover shortfalls                     generation. However, these values can also be
      between the utility’s cost of supply and the                       evaluated as a benefit of a geothermal power
      electricity tariffs, which in Indonesia, are set by                plant since it would help avoid an equivalent
      Government policy.                                                 level of negative environmental impacts. Both
3
    	 1,189 MW of capacity has been developed by 2011.                   approaches will lead to the same result.
4
    	 Units 1 & 2 are also under construction where PGE           13
                                                                       	Ibid.
      is a steam supplier to PLN operated power plants.           14
                                                                       	 Carbon revenues, which are intended to
      Units 3 & 4, which are being financed by the World                 internalize some of the global environmental
      Bank, will be operated by PGE—including the                        externalities, face considerable uncertainty due
      steam fields and the power plants.                                 to the end of the Kyoto Protocol commitment
5
    	 The adjacent geothermal field, which is also                       period in 2012 and the absence of a global
      part of the government designated Lahendong                        agreement on the future market structure for
      geothermal work area (WKP) includes four 20 MW                     carbon offset trading.
      units (Units 1, 2, 3, & 4). The project financed by         15
                                                                       	 This effort spearheaded by the Ministry of
      the World Bank is in the Tompaso geothermal field,
                                                                         Energy and Mineral Resources is being assisted
      which is also part of the Lahendong WKP, and
                                                                         by the World Bank through a US$ 4 million
      therefore, referred to as Lahendong Units 5 & 6.
                                                                         grant from the Global Environment Facility
6
    	 The project costs, except where otherwise noted,                   (GEF) under the Geothermal Power Generation
      are based on feasibility studies for the Ulubelu                   Development Project.
      Units 3 & 4 and Lahendong (Tompaso) Units 5 &               16
                                                                       	 Instead of through borrowing (debt finance), as
      6, which were independently prepared by interna-
                                                                          has been the case previously with Pertamina/
      tional consultants for PGE.
                                                                          PGE. This is partly because the resource risks
7
    	 Given the globally unprecedented scale-up being                     of developing the upstream steam field can
      undertaken, there is a need for PGE to enhance                      render financing unavailable or cost prohibitive.
      its institutional capacity, as well as secure               17
                                                                       	 Commonly referred to as an ESC or Energy
      significant financing, to successfully realize its
                                                                         Sales Contract.
      investment program. The World Bank, in addition
      to the loans, has also facilitated grants that total        18
                                                                       	 30-year forward as of November 12, 2010, and
      about US$ 10 million from the Governments                          long-term fixed spread for IBRD loans.
      of New Zealand and Netherlands, to provide                  19
                                                                       	 A stochastic simulation technique that generates
      technical assistance to strengthen PGE’s                           random values based on probabilities to model
      capacity.                                                          uncertainty when solving a problem. It is a
8
    	 This is a typical plant operating capacity factor                  technique used to evaluate investment risks.
      for a coal-fired power plant. In 2008, the United           20
                                                                       	 Implies that the power plant operates 92 percent
      States Energy Information Agency estimated                          of the time or 8,059 hours in a year.
      that the average operating capacity factor for
      coal-fired power plants throughout the country
                                                                  21
                                                                       	 Based on the Harberger/Jenkins methodology:
      was 72 percent.                                                    Σ PV (externalities) 5 NPV (economic resource
                                                                         flows)—NPV (financial cash flows), where the
9
    	 Studies and specialists’ opinions confirm that it                  economic and financial streams are discounted
      is typical for geothermal power plants to operate                  by the EOCK, in this instance, for Indonesia.
      at plant operating capacity factors in excess of                   For more information on the m  ­ ethodology,
      90 percent, especially in the case of newer power                  see “Evaluation of Stakeholder Impacts in
      plants. Operations in Indonesia are observed to                    Cost-Benefit Analysis” by Glenn P. Jenkins,
      typically operate between 90 and 95 percent, and                   Development Discussion Paper No. 631,
      at times higher.                                                   Harvard Institute for International Development,
10
     	 The drilling costs at Lahendong (Tompaso) included                Harvard University, 1998.
       in the feasibility study are very conservative since       22
                                                                       	 The benefit of the CTF concessional financing
       sufficient drilling data was not available at the time.           is captured as a line item in this specific
       Therefore, for the purpose of the analysis, the drilling          ­
                                                                         distributional analysis since this impact is not
       costs were adjusted utilizing the expected value for              reflected in the unleveraged cash flows or in the
       drilling costs based on Indonesia-wide data based                 economic discount rate.




                                                      Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia                     17
     A C R O N Y M S A N D A B B R E V I AT I O N S
     €		    Euro (currency)
     CO2	   carbon dioxide
     CTF	   Clean Technology Fund
     EOCK	  economic opportunity cost of capital
     FIRR	  financial internal rate of return
     GHG	   greenhouse gas
     GoI	   Government of Indonesia
     IBRD	  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
     IEA	   International Energy Agency
     kcal	  kilocalorie (4,184 joules)
     kg		   kilogram
     kW	kilowatt
     LIBOR	 London Interbank Offered Rate
     MDB	   multilateral development bank
     MW	megawatt
     NOx	   nitrogen oxide
     NPV	   net present value
     O&M	   operation and maintenance
     PGE	   Pertamina Geothermal Energy (Indonesia)
     PLN	   Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Indonesia’s state-owned power company)
     PPA	   power purchase agreement
     PSO	   Public Service Obligation (subsidy)
     PV		   present value
     ROE	   return on equity
     SO2	   sulfur dioxide
     TSP	   total suspended particles
     US$	   United States dollar (currency)
     WKP	   geothermal work area designated by GoI




18   Scaling-Up Renewable Geothermal Energy in Indonesia
Photo Credits
Page 12 - Mott MacDonald, courtesy of Pertamina Geothermal
Energy.
All other images courtesy of Migara S. Jayawardena / World Bank.


Written by | Migara S. Jayawardena, Senior Energy Specialist,
World Bank
M. Baher El-Hifnawi, Lead Transport Economist, World Bank
Gangadhar P. Shukla, Professor of the Practice of Public Policy,
Duke Center for International Development, Duke University
Yan Li, Financial Specialist Consultant, World Bank


Production Credits
Production Editor | Heather Austin
Typesetting | Automated Graphic Systems, Inc.
Reproduction | Automated Graphic Systems, Inc.


Copyright © May 2014
The International Bank for Reconstruction
And Development / THE WORLD BANK GROUP
1818 H Street, NW | Washington DC 20433 | USA


The text of this publication may be reproduced in whole or in
part and in any form for educational or nonprofit uses, without
special permission provided acknowledgement of the source is
made. Requests for permission to reproduce portions for resale
or commercial purposes should be sent to the ESMAP Manager at
the address above. ESMAP encourages dissemination of its work
and normally gives permission promptly. The ESMAP Manager
would appreciate receiving a copy of the publication that uses this
publication for its source sent in care of the address above.


All images remain the sole property of their source and may not be
used for any purpose without written permission from the source.
The Energy Sector Management Assistance
Program (ESMAP) is a global knowledge and
technical assistance program administered
by the World Bank. It provides analytical and
advisory services to low- and middle-income
countries to increase their know-how and
institutional capacity to achieve environmen-
tally sustainable energy solutions for poverty
reduction and economic growth. ESMAP
is funded by Australia, Austria, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Lithuania,
the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom, as well as the World Bank.


For more information on the Clean Energy
Program or about ESMAP’s geothermal
development work, please visit us at
www.esmap.org or write to us at:


Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
email: esmap@worldbank.org
web: www.esmap.org
