                                          89450




IMPLICATIONS OF A CHANGING CHINA FOR BRAZIL:
A NEW WINDOW OF OPPORTUNITY?
              ECONOMIC REPORT




IMPLICATIONS OF A CHANGING CHINA FOR BRAZIL:

      A NEW WINDOW OF OPPORTUNITY?




               THE WORLD BANK

                    2014
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank

1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org, informacao@worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution
to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications,
The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE ....................................................................................................................................... 7

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ 9
      A Changing China in a Changing World .............................................................................. 10
      Brazil’s Evolving Linkages with China ................................................................................ 12
      Policy Implications for Brazil ............................................................................................... 14

INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ 19
      In Context: Brazil’s Growing Connections with China ........................................................ 19
      The Outlook: Relevance of a Changing China for Brazil ..................................................... 20
      This Report: Objective, Scope and Structure ........................................................................ 21

PART 1. A CHANGING CHINA IN A CHANGING WORLD ................................................ 23
      I. China’s Journey of Structural Transformation ................................................................... 23
            A. The Past Three Decades: China’s Journey of Economic Reform ........................... 23
            B. The Next Two Decades: A New Phase in China’s Development ........................... 25
      II. China in the World: Growing Integration and Mutual Dependence ................................. 31
            A. China’s Position in the World ................................................................................. 31
            B. Relations between China and the World ................................................................. 34

PART 2. BRAZIL’S EVOLVING LINKAGES WITH CHINA................................................. 39
      I. Looking Back: Facets and Characteristics over the Last Decade ...................................... 39
            A. Facets of the Brazil-China Relationship: Trade, Investment and Indirect Effects .. 40
            B. Characteristics of the Relationship: Complementarity and Similarity .................... 47
      II. Looking Ahead: Impact of a Changing China on Brazil .................................................. 61
            A. Changes in China: A More Detailed Analysis ........................................................ 61
            B. Implications for Brazil: Rising Complementarity, Changing Similarity ................. 65

PART 3. POLICY IMPLICATIONS FOR BRAZIL .................................................................. 69
      I. Growth Expectations and Structural Reform ..................................................................... 69
            A. Recent Developments: Muted Growth Expectations .............................................. 70
            B. Structural Reform: The Unfinished Agenda ............................................................ 72
      II. Scope for Enhancing Global Integration .......................................................................... 75
            A. Has Trade with China Made Brazil Too Outward Oriented? .................................. 75
            B. Has Brazil’s Trade Structure Become Too Concentrated? ...................................... 82
            C. Has Brazil Become Too Specialized in Commodities? ........................................... 87
      III. Leveraging External Connections with China................................................................. 93
            A. Tackling Home-Grown Supply-Side Constraints .................................................... 93
            B. Enhancing the External Environment for Trade and Investment ............................ 98

REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................... 107
APPENDICES ............................................................................................................................ 113
              A. Main Features of the Envisage Model ................................................................... 113
              B. Brazil’s Top Exports by Destination ..................................................................... 119
              C. Brazil’s Most and Least Dynamic Products by Destination .................................. 123
              D. Export Similarity between Brazil and Other Countries ......................................... 126
              E. Export Sophistication by Destination and Lall Category ...................................... 127
              F. Comparison of Number of Products Traded by Classification .............................. 129
              G. Technical Notes ..................................................................................................... 130
                                         PREFACE

This report – a product of the Economic Policy Unit of the Latin America and Caribbean
Department (LCSPE) of the World Bank – reflects a collaboration between the World Bank’s
Brazil and China country teams, the Development Economics Prospects Group, and the
International Trade Department. It builds on earlier work in China, including “China 2030”
(World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council of the P.R. China, 2013)
and “China Quarterly Update: Sustaining Growth” (World Bank, 2012b), as well as related work
on “A Changing China: Implications for Developing Countries” (Schellekens, 2012).

The report has benefited from the work and insight of many people. The report was led and
managed by Philip Schellekens (Senior Country Economist for Brazil and formerly China) under
the guidance of Deborah Wetzel (Country Director for Brazil), Klaus Rohland (Country Director
for China), Humberto Lopez (LCSPR Sector Director), Auguste Tano Kouame (LCSPE Sector
Manager) and Roland Clark (Brazil Sector Leader). The team of contributors consisted of Maryla
Maliszewska and Marcio Jose Vargas da Cruz under the guidance of Maurizio Bussolo and Hans
Timmer (DECPG); Karlis Smits and Xiaoli Wan under the guidance of Chorching Goh
(EASPR); Jorge Thompson Araujo, Fabio Sola Bittar, Laura de Castro Zoratto, Cornelius
Fleischhaker and Aleksandra Iwulska (LCSPE); Thomas Farole, Claire Honore Hollweg, Jose
Daniel Reyes, Luis Diego Rojas Alvarado and Swarnim Wagle under the guidance of Mona
Haddad, Daniel Lederman and Jose Guilherme Reis (PRMTR). Helpful comments were
received by Otaviano Canuto, Indermit Gill and Jose Guilherme Reis, who were the peer
reviewers of this report, and the Office of the Chief Economist for Latin America and the
Caribbean. A special word of thanks goes to Renato Baumann and his team for organizing a
seminar at IPEA and commenting on a draft version of the report.

Three staff visits were organized to Brazil (Brasilia, Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo). In this
connection, the team wishes to thank representatives of government, think tanks, industry
associations and companies for helpful discussions: Agencia Brasileira de Desenvolvimento
Industrial (ABDI), Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Economico e Social (BNDES),
Ministerio da Fazenda (MF), Ministerio das Relacoes Exteriores (MRE), Ministerio do
Desenvolvimento, Industria e Comercio (MDIC); BRICS Policy Institute, Conselho Empresarial
Brasil-China (CEBC), Centro Brasileiro de Relacoes Internacionais (CEBRI), Centro de Estudos
de Integracao e Desenvolvimento (CINDES), Fundacao Fetulio Vargas (FGV-Rio), Fundacao
Centro de Estudos do Comercio Exterior (FUNCEX), Instituto de Estudoes para o
Desenvolvimento Industrial (IEDI), Inter-American Development Bank (IADB, Brasilia Office),
Instituto de Pesquisa Economica Aplicada (IPEA), Tendencias; Associacao Brasileira da
Industria de Maquinas E Equipamentos (ABIMAQ), Associacao Brasileira das Industria da
Alimentacao (ABIMA), Confederacao Nacional da Industria (CNI), Federacao das Industrias do
Estado do Sao Paulo, Instituto Aco Brasil; Banco Itau, Bunge Brasil, Embraer and Vale.

The team further thanks Adriana Abdenur, Claudio Frischtak, Edith Kikone, Tom Kenyon,
Gilberto Libânio, Luis-Felipe Lopez-Calva, Joana Silva and Shahid Yusuf for helpful comments
and suggestions, Mauro Azeredo, Paula Castello Branco, Marcela Sanchez-Bender, Juliana
Braga Machado and Mariana Kaipper Ceratti for external relations support, and Fernando Viana
Braganca, Patricia Chacon Holt, Angela Nieves Marques Porto and Diana Mercedes Lachy
Castillo for office support.

                                                                                            7
                                   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

As Brazil and China have become two of the largest global economies, they have also
become increasingly connected. Three decades of fast-paced growth and structural change have
turned China into the world’s second-largest economy and have transformed it into an upper-
middle income country. Brazil, which had experienced its own episode of high growth between
1965 and 1974, has also become one of the largest economies. Over the last decade, Brazil and
China have developed increasingly close linkages, which has come as no surprise given the scale
of their economies, the complementary structure of resource endowments as well as the
differences between the two countries in the structure of production and demand. While the most
apparent connection between the two countries is the increased volume of bilateral trade and
investment, other important indirect linkages have developed, such as through the influence of
Chinese demand on the global prices of Brazil’s commodity exports. The expansion and
deepening of connections between the two economies resulted in new forms of partnership as
well as competition, and has brought significant benefits to both countries.

Given the closer ties between both countries, the question of how the Chinese economy will
evolve over the longer term has been of considerable interest to Brazil. In recent years,
cyclical and structural factors have combined to slow down China’s economic growth. The
slowdown has been further facilitated by a shift in focus by the Chinese authorities from the rate
of expansion to the quality of development – as articulated in the 12th Five-Year Plan and
reinforced recently by the Third Plenum of 18th Central Committee of China’s Communist Party.
Over the longer term, this shift of focus is expected to result in different patterns of growth as
well as a growing sophistication of Chinese production and exports. These developments have
been followed with much interest in Brazil as well as elsewhere, and have sparked several
questions. How the transition to a new growth equilibrium in China can be managed with little
disruption to the economies of the rest of the world? What new opportunities as well as
challenges might arise from China’s structural transformations?

While Brazil’s economy will remain primarily based on its large domestic market, external
impulses from a changing China could nevertheless generate a considerable impact. Direct
linkages with China – primarily in the form of trade and investment – have grown rapidly from a
low base, but relative to Brazil’s large internal market and given its well-diversified economy the
direct contribution of these linkages to Brazil’s growth dynamic remains small. Yet, it is on
account of indirect linkages – the impact of China on world commodity prices, world interest
rates, the availability of lower-priced consumption and capital goods, and more broadly its
contribution to global growth – that the relevance of Chinese developments for Brazil has been
non-negligible and the impact of change in China going forward will be non-trivial. Furthermore,
as this report will argue, how Brazil adapts to the new opportunities and challenges arising from
a changing China will also have broader implications for Brazil’s economic links with other
countries as well as for its internal growth dynamic. In other words, the changes in China could
be a catalyst for reforms that would bring benefits to the Brazilian economy beyond those
narrowly related to its interactions with China.




                                                                                                 9
This report examines how structural change in China is expected to present new
opportunities and challenges for Brazil to enhance its global position and energize growth.
Building on recent work (World Bank and Development Research Center, 2013), this report
identifies three potential longer-term transformations of the Chinese economy – structurally
slower growth, a rebalancing on the demand and supply side, and a move up the value chain –
and examines their implications for Brazil. The report shows how the slowdown and rebalancing
of China may also present new opportunities for Brazil, even if China’s progression up the value
chain is likely to present also new challenges. It lays out how Brazil could generate greater
benefits from its interactions with China and how the changes in China would offer a new
window of opportunity for Brazil to press ahead with its structural reform agenda. Overall, Brazil
could gain tremendously from the anticipated structural changes in China, even though realizing
these gains will require a proactive policy stance to enhance external ties and address internal
growth and productivity constraints.

A CHANGING CHINA IN A CHANGING WORLD

China’s Journey of Structural Transformation

The last three decades have seen the structural transformation of China into an upper
middle-income country and global economic powerhouse. At the beginning of this period, in
1978, China’s per capita income level averaged less than a third of Sub-Saharan Africa’s. Since
then, Chinese living standards have improved considerably and more than half a billion people
have been lifted out of poverty. China also returned – after an absence of nearly two centuries –
to the center stage of the global economy: China became the world’s second-largest economy
and import market, the largest producer and exporter of manufactured goods, and the largest
holder of foreign exchange reserves. Through these transformations, China exerted increasing
influence over the development path of other countries: directly through bilateral trade and
financial flows and indirectly through growth spillovers, exchange rate developments, and terms
of trade effects.

The coming two decades are expected to register continued structural transformation as
China enters the next chapter of its development towards a high-income society. While
economic commentary has recently focused predominantly on the near-term challenge facing
China as it transitions to slower growth, the broader – and perhaps more important – picture
relates to the longer-term outlook which will be shaped by profound structural transformations.
Three key transformations are anticipated. First, China is expected to register a structural
slowdown that could reduce growth rates by 4 to 7 percentage points by 2030. Second, as China
rebalances the patterns of growth, the structure of expenditure, production and employment is
expected to change significantly. Key features of the rebalancing process include rapid growth of
private consumption (between 8 and 11.5 percent through 2030) and services (between 7 and 8
percent). Third, the technological sophistication and human capital intensity of production is
likely to rise further in response to rising wage pressures. As China moves up the value chain, it
will redefine its competitive advantage in the global marketplace.




10
China in the World: Growing Integration and Mutual Dependence

As China continues its transformation into the next two decades, the global footprint of its
economy is expected to evolve in new directions. China’s position in the world economy has
risen as the country has become more integrated in it. Looking ahead, the transformations
underway in China are expected against a backdrop of a world that is also changing: other
developing countries, including Brazil, are expected to enhance their role as major driving forces
for growth and come to contribute over 40 percent of future global growth. If both China and the
rest of the world continue to develop along their changing pathways, the relationship between
them is bound to adjust as well. While there may be bumps along the road, the general picture is
one of rising mutual dependence as China and the world continue to benefit from closer
integration in trade and increasingly also investment and cooperation.

Even if China grows more slowly, the fact that such a slowdown occurs against a high base
should provide ample opportunities for countries like Brazil to tap into rising Chinese
import demand. If China were to gradually halve its growth rate by 2030, it would still be
expected to become the world’s largest economy and achieve high-income status. Despite the
slowdown, China’s national income would rise through this period, adding the equivalent of
approximately one Republic of Korea to the world economy every year. This growth, combined
with a rising propensity by Chinese consumers to import, should offer new opportunities for
other countries to benefit from increased exports. The patterns of import demand are likely to
change though, favoring consumption goods in relative terms over investment goods.

Rising labor costs in China are expected to affect production pattern and could trigger a
relocation of low-cost manufacturing, creating opportunities for low-wage countries. The
pace of this development remains uncertain and depends on the type of manufacturing activity.
Recent survey data for the manufacturing-dominated Pearl River Delta show that the preferred
response of 61 percent of firms is to raise capital intensity. While some firms may wish to lower
costs by relocating overseas, others prefer to remain in proximity to Chinese consumption
demand. The grand-scale out-migration of low-cost, labor-intensive manufacturing will therefore
unlikely happen overnight and may indeed never play out fully. Moreover, if other countries do
not have the collective ability to absorb the manufacturing activities migrating out of China, the
most likely trend will be a reversal of the China price effect and a return to pricier manufactured
goods. This would dampen the purchasing power of the world’s middle classes whose rise was
helped by the availability of cheaper imported goods from China, as was the case in Brazil.

China is expected to boost productivity and move up the value chain, which could generate
heightened competition in new areas. Past competition from China has challenged the
manufacturing sectors of lower-cost producers. As China continues to move up the value chain,
this challenge is likely to progressively shift to higher-cost countries. Rising competition with
respect to skills and technology-intensive production is expected to generate new pressures onto
countries that seek to expand or even maintain their market shares domestically as well as
internationally. While rising competition could constrain some countries’ efforts in moving up
the value chain, it also presents an opportunity to boost innovation efforts. To remain externally
competitive as competition from China rises, entrepreneurial capacity to innovate and political
determination to introduce structural reforms that support innovation will be very important.


                                                                                                11
BRAZIL’S EVOLVING LINKAGES WITH CHINA

Looking Back: Trends and Characteristics over the Last Decade

Initially merely a blip on each other’s radar screens, Brazil and China have developed
increasingly close economic connections over the last decade. Bilateral trade and investment
linkages have expanded significantly, with China emerging as Brazil’s most important export
destination and an important foreign direct investor by the early 2010s. Conversely, Brazil
played an increasingly important role in China as a supplier of natural resources and contributor
to energy and food security. The two countries also developed cooperation arrangements and
agreements in various areas. Even more so, Brazil and China developed economic connections in
indirect ways through terms of trade effects, exchange rate developments, and growth spillovers.

The multi-faceted economic relationship between Brazil and China is characterized by
partnership and competition and has produced both opportunities and challenges. The
characteristics of partnership and competition arise from features of complementarity and
similarity, which generate opportunities for beneficial exchange but also challenges in the form
of competition. While the most discernible interaction has been in the area of bilateral trade (and
to a lesser extent Chinese investment), indirect effects have played an important role as well.
China’s resource-intensive growth lifted commodity prices, which raised the return to
commodity exports and allowed Brazil to build on earlier structural reform efforts and expand its
consumption frontier. However, as commodity demand increased, so did the pressure of currency
appreciation, which in combination with domestic bottlenecks has hurt the external
competitiveness of other sectors, particularly manufacturing.

The Brazilian manufacturing sector has borne the brunt of increased competition from
China, yet this competition may be receding and changing. The strength of Brazil’s natural
resource sector in the face of rising demand from China has meant that the share of Brazilian
manufacturing exports in total exports has shrunk, at the same time as that of increasingly
sophisticated manufactured imports from China in total imports has been rising. The analysis of
Brazil’s competitiveness position suggests that Brazil has lost market share in several overseas
destinations – even though Brazil remains more dynamic than China in certain product groups.
The analysis suggests that Brazil’s exports remain subject to competition from China even
though the strength of that pressure has diminished. In the Latin American region, some 45
percent of Brazilian exports remain subject to significant competition, compared to 29 percent in
Europe and 21 percent in the US. Brazilian manufacturing also faced competition from China in
the domestic market, which afforded consumption benefits in terms of access to cheaper
intermediate and final goods but also led to production displacement of less competitive
domestic firms. Between 2003 and 2011, the average import penetration coefficient rose from 12
to 22 percent.




12
Looking Ahead: Impact of a Changing China on Brazil

Looking ahead, as the Chinese economy slows, rebalances and moves up the value chain, a
key question is how this will affect the economic linkages with Brazil. For this purpose, this
report developed illustrative scenarios on the basis of a global general equilibrium model that
takes into account the anticipated developments in China as well as their interactions with
developments in other parts of the world. The results suggest an overall positive outlook for the
Brazilian economy.

      Even with slower growth in China, Brazil is expected to be one of China’s fastest-
       growing import sources. The scenarios suggest a continued and significant rise in
       China’s share of global imports and imply a continued trend of rising Chinese import
       demand for key commodities. Brazil is expected to register growth in exports to China at
       an average of 8-12 percent per year. Thus, even if growth in China slows, it slows from a
       high base and the rebalancing associated with the inward orientation of the Chinese
       economy is expected to produce robust consumption demand that would offer new
       opportunities for Brazil.

      Brazil’s natural resource endowments make the country ideally-suited to take
       advantage of rising Chinese demand for agricultural and food products. Increased
       protein demand is expected from China as its population becomes wealthier and food
       habits change, creating higher demand for soybeans and meat. Industrial commodities
       such as iron ore may benefit comparatively less as China moves away from its
       investment-led, resource-intensive growth model even though the sustained strength of
       demand for residential housing and consumer durables continues to present opportunities
       for such commodities.

      Brazilian manufacturing is expected to face changing competition as well as new
       market opportunities as China moves up the value chain and rebalances. As China
       carves out new niches to retain its global competitive advantage in manufacturing, the
       knowledge intensity and technological sophistication of Chinese manufacturing is
       expected to rise. Recent indicators such as patent registrations indicate that this process is
       occurring at a rapid pace. This, in turn, should generate a new wave of competition for
       Brazilian manufacturing. At the same time, however, new opportunities will open up for
       Brazilian manufacturers across the technology spectrum as China continues to expand its
       domestic market.

      The changes in China present an opportunity for Brazil to improve the efficiency of
       its services sector and expand its international reach. To the extent that services
       productivity in China remains insufficient to meet rising demand domestically, there may
       be large opportunities for countries to export tradable services to China. The simulations
       suggest that higher-income countries would be best positioned currently to tap into this
       opportunity, but it would also present an opportunity for Brazil, providing it can
       strengthen the efficiency of its services sector.




                                                                                                  13
POLICY IMPLICATIONS FOR BRAZIL

Growth Expectations and Structural Reform

Over the last decade, Brazil has seen a significant growth acceleration followed by a recent
moderation against a backdrop of changing demand pressures and structural change.
Brazil registered high growth from 2004 to 2008 benefiting from both domestic and external
tailwinds, which have faded in strength and produced lower growth since 2009. The recent
growth slowdown took place against a backdrop of inflationary pressures and tight labor market.
In addition, productivity growth has been relatively sluggish and Brazil is undergoing a
demographic transition that has led to a deceleration of growth of the working-age population.
The above factors have caused concern that the relatively slow growth rate Brazil is currently
experiencing reflects a diminished structural growth capacity.

Even though significant progress has been made in various areas, the structural reform
agenda remains unfinished while the urgency to press ahead has increased. In addition to
the macroeconomic reforms that provided economic stability, Brazil liberalized significant parts
of the economy and introduced reforms in education and health during the 1990s. During the
2000s, reforms continued, particularly in the financial and social sectors. However, the structural
reform process may have lost some momentum as the urgency of addressing difficult supply-side
issues receded in the wake of buoyant consumption growth, an external commodity boom and an
international environment of low global interest rates. Therefore, important bottlenecks remain to
be addressed, particularly in infrastructure, labor markets and the tax system. With growth
slower now and the external environment less favorable, the urgency to press ahead with the
reform agenda has increased.

Scope for Enhancing Global Integration

With growth having slowed, the question of how Brazil can leverage its connections with
China has become more pertinent than before. Brazil will likely remain an economy
propelled mainly by its internal market. At the same time, the recent growth acceleration and
subsequent deceleration were not just related to internal factors but also to external ones. Chinese
economic developments played a significant role. As China undergoes structural change, new
opportunities will avail themselves. It is clear that the way in which Brazil responds to these will
have implications that go beyond the confines of the Brazil-China relationship. For example, to
the extent that heightened competition from China in high-end manufacturing fuels innovation
effort in Brazil, this would not only benefit Brazil’s external competitiveness but also infuse
productivity improvement into the domestic growth dynamic.

Herein lies the real significance of Brazil’s changing linkages with China: the extent to
which evolving connections contribute to transforming the supply side of the Brazilian
economy. As mentioned earlier, the recent slowdown of growth in an environment of elevated
inflation, has led to concerns about whether the underlying growth capacity of the Brazilian
economy has declined. To the extent that the windfalls of the boom years contributed
predominantly to the expansion of domestic consumption as opposed to investment, the result
has been a pick-up in headline growth but not a corresponding expansion in the capacity of the
economy to deliver more rapid growth on a sustained basis and in a non-inflationary manner.

14
Looking ahead, the transformations anticipated in China are expected to play out in Brazil’s
favor to a large extent, generating therefore a new window of opportunity to leverage on the
external connections and enhance underlying growth.

Scope remains for Brazil to derive benefits from global integration. The Brazilian economy
remains relatively inward-oriented and therefore there is potential for continued integration into
the global economy alongside ongoing efforts to further develop and integrate the domestic
market. In addition, this report suggests that Brazil does not have a ‘concentration problem’ with
respect to its external orientation to the world either in terms of markets or products. However,
an asymmetry stands out in terms of the relations with China, where Brazil is much less
diversified in terms of products on the export than on the import side. While this result carries
through to other countries’ relations with China, it also points to opportunities going forward to
broaden and deepen linkages. Finally, while Brazil’s exports to China are concentrated on
natural resource-related commodities, there is nothing intrinsically wrong with exporting
commodities, provided efforts are made to ensure that the natural resource sector contributes to
the economy more broadly and that its development does not come at the expense of other
sectors.

Leveraging Brazil’s Connections with China

Alleviating home-grown supply-side constraints represents one way in which Brazil could
leverage on its changing connections with China. Productivity-enhancing reforms would not
only contribute to home-grown economic dynamism; it would also allow Brazil to better
leverage its evolving connections with China. Important areas where further structural reform
effort would help Brazil accelerate growth include the investment climate (ranging from
reducing the administrative burden of the state, improving the quality and profile of public
spending, strengthening the goods and labor market) as well as physical and human capital
accumulation (strengthening logistics and enhancing the skills base of the work force). A more
favorable investment climate and more investment in infrastructure and skills would also
position Brazil better to tap into Chinese demand. It would also position the country better to
meet increased competition in higher-end manufacturing.

Brazil faces opportunities to enhance productivity and take full advantage of its
connections with China in all sectors of its economy. Opportunities exist in all sectors to
increase productivity and respond to rising demand going forward. Similarly, all sectors hold
significant potential to do better in terms of their productivity performance. Moreover, the
performance of any single sector has come to depend more than ever before on the performance
of other sectors given that products have become bundles of value-added derived from different
sectors. Therefore, the objective of raising productivity would favor a comprehensive approach
that tackles bottlenecks across sectors, as has been well recognized by the Plano Brasil Maior.

      Natural Resources: Widening Economic Impact. With the demand for Brazil’s natural
       resources expected to remain strong, the challenge will be to respond to robust demand
       by enhancing the economy-wide potential of the sector. The possible pitfalls of buoyant
       natural resource demand are well understood. The recent discovery of vast offshore oil
       reserves in Brazil adds to these opportunities and challenges. The appropriate response
       will not be to limit commodity exports or to erect costly import barriers to protect

                                                                                               15
         domestic industries, but rather to alleviate demand and supply constraints on productive
         activity by improving infrastructure, creating a conducive investment climate, and
         facilitating private sector access to capital, skills, technology, and markets.

        Manufacturing: Strengthening Competitiveness. Insofar as China will remain a
         competitor, the need to enhance external competitiveness will likely become more
         significant as China moves up the value chain. The prospect of changing competition
         underscores the need for Brazil to redouble its efforts to foster innovation and strengthen
         external competitiveness. Upgrading will not only help withstand competition from
         China, it will also enable Brazil to better tap into emerging opportunities in China. Brazil
         will need to build its endowments of human and physical capital in order to develop
         comparative advantages in manufacturing products that China imports intensively.

        Services: Raising Efficiency. While the need to raise productivity is relatively well
         understood, the role of the services sector is generally less than fully articulated in the
         domestic debate on productivity. However, large segments of the services sector remain
         largely informal and are found to be expensive and of poor quality. Services inflation has
         outpaced that of other sectors as a result of rapid wage increases – partly tied to minimum
         wage adjustments – and has led through the wage-price spiral to rising unit labor costs
         that have dampened industrial competitiveness. Strengthening the efficiency of services
         would bring large benefits to the Brazilian economy. Services play a key role in
         economic growth and job creation and improvements in the productivity, quality and
         range of services would have positive spill-over effects for the productivity and
         competitiveness of other sectors of Brazil’s economy.

In addition to advancing the domestic reform agenda, this report argues that further
improvements to the external environment for trade and investment could strengthen
Brazil’s development prospects. Given their importance in the bilateral relationship, the
discussion focuses on trade and investment. While the report also offers perspectives on how
China could contribute, the focus will be on Brazilian policies. Finally, the trade and investment
agenda is closely related to Brazil’s domestic agenda of generating productivity growth and
therefore needs to be seen in conjunction with the previous section. Possible ways to improve the
external environment include the following:

        Trade Policies. Significant progress has been made in lowering tariffs but tariff barriers
         remain high in Brazil and China. In addition, both countries impose higher barriers on
         products where the other has a comparative advantage. Together with tariff escalation,
         this has particularly affected Brazil’s ability to diversify into higher value -added exports
         to China. Trade in services remains relatively unencumbered but the degree of openness
         varies depending on the mode by which services are delivered (e.g. cross-border supply
         or overseas commercial presence). Non-tariff measures are ubiquitous and pose
         economically important trade barriers to both countries and the use of temporary trade
         barriers has caused additional frictions in the trade environment. Further progress is also
         needed on the regional trade agenda.




16
      FDI Policies. While Brazil has a highly liberal policy regime for FDI, however, the de-
       facto process of setting up a foreign-owned subsidiary remains relatively cumbersome –
       taking more than 2.5 times longer than in China. Brazil holds potential for broadening
       and deepening its FDI in China, especially in services. The growing impetus for outward
       FDI from China will also benefit Brazil, where it can be expected that the composition of
       such flows will become more diversified.

A changing China is expected to bring about a new window of opportunity for Brazil to
leverage on its external connections and augment the domestic engine of growth. Brazil will
face many new opportunities to benefit from a changing China insofar as the two economies are
expected to become more complementary in that the demand for Brazil’s natural resources is
expected to rise, even if new competitive challenges are also likely to arise as China continues to
move up the value chain. Seizing these opportunities as well as meeting the challenges would
however require additional efforts on the domestic structural reform agenda as well as with
respect to the environment for cross-border trade and investment. Further progress in these areas
would not only allow Brazil to derive greater benefits from its connections with China but also
provide impetus more broadly to productivity and growth.




                                                                                                17
18
                                       INTRODUCTION

This report explores the implications of a changing China for Brazil and examines whether
these changes may present a new window of opportunity for Brazil to accelerate growth.
By way of introduction, it is useful to first provide context by examining Brazil’s growth path in
recent decades along with the importance of the growing connections with China over the last
decade. Next the significance of the possible changes in China – particularly over the longer term
– are discussed with reference to the evolving economic linkages between Brazil and China. This
introduction concludes with an overview of the objective, scope and structure of this report.

IN CONTEXT: BRAZIL’S GROWING CONNECTIONS WITH CHINA

Brazil’s post-war era is marked by a prolonged episode of fast-paced growth, intermittent
bouts of macro instability, and – until recently – a period of renewed growth momentum.
Between 1947 and 1980, Brazil grew at an annual average rate of 7.5 percent. Rivaling the likes
of South Korea, Brazil reached upper-middle income status on the back of a sophisticated
business community and one of the world’s largest internal markets. The following two decades
saw much slower growth (2 percent between 1981 and 2003), with the Latin American debt
crisis of the early 1980s setting off a period characterized by macro instability and stabilization
efforts. Inflation was brought under control with the Real plan in 1994, which led to a brief pick-
up in growth, which was however interrupted again by the currency crisis of 1999. Subsequently,
Brazil introduced inflation-targeting and strengthened its fiscal policy framework. Over the last
decade, Brazil experienced a period of renewed growth momentum, starting in the mid-2000s
(4.8 percent between 2004 and 2008), which in recent years has lost some of its strength (2.7
percent between 2009 and 2012).

The recent pick-up and subsequent moderation of growth was related to not only forces
internal to Brazil but also major changes in the external environment. With Brazil’s new
macroeconomic framework laying the foundation for renewed growth, financial reforms
contributed to a long cycle of credit expansion whereas well-targeted social programs and rapid
growth of the formal labor force enlarged the size of the middle class and reduced poverty and
inequality. The growth impulse of these internal forces was reinforced by external factors as
Brazil benefited from record-low world interest rates, buoyant capital flows and favorable terms
of trade. The 2008/09 financial crisis caused a short recession but growth resumed soon
thereafter at 7.5 percent in 2010. Since then, however, the economy has slowed significantly as
the long cycle of credit expansion came to an end and infrastructure bottlenecks and labor market
constraints became more prominent with unemployment at historic lows around 5 percent and
the working-age population growing more slowly. External factors again contributed
significantly as the slow U.S. recovery, long recession in much of Europe and slower growth in
the emerging world dampened Brazil’s exports, commodity prices and investment.

An important aspect underlying the changing external environment faced by Brazil as well
as other countries has been the rise of China to the global stage. China’s transformation over
the last three decades into an upper-middle income country has lifted the country to the center
stage of the global economy: China became the world’s second-largest economy and import
market, the largest producer and exporter of manufactured goods, and the largest holder of
foreign exchange reserves. Through this transformation and particularly over the last decade,

                                                                                                19
developments in the Chinese economy have exerted increasing influence on other countries:
directly through an increase in trade and financial flows and indirectly through growth spillovers,
exchange rate developments and terms of trade effects due to higher prices for commodities and
lower ones for manufactured goods. Conversely, given the importance China has attained in the
global economy, the recent slowdown of the Chinese economy has affected the direction and
intensity of these cross-border effects.

Brazil and China have over the last decade developed increasingly close economic linkages.
Bilateral trade and investment linkages have expanded significantly, with China emerging as
Brazil’s most important export destination and an important foreign direct investor. Conversely,
Brazil played an increasingly important role in China as a supplier of natural resources and
contributor to energy and food security. The two countries also developed cooperation
arrangements in various areas. The development of these linkages came as no surprise given the
size of the two economies, the complementary structure of their resource endowments as well as
the differences between the two countries in the structure of production and demand.

While these linkages developed at a fast pace from a low base, their importance in Brazil’s
overall growth dynamic needs to be placed in perspective. On the one hand, the significance
of direct linkages with China must not be overstated as exports to and imports from China only
represent a couple of percentage points of Brazilian GDP. Brazil also remains a well-diversified
economy: it produces a broad range of products and exports these to a wide range of trading
partners. On the other hand, the impact of China goes well beyond any direct effects. A number
of important – but harder to measure – indirect effects need to be taken into account (e.g.,
China’s impact on commodity prices, the new consumption possibilities afforded by lower-
priced consumer goods imports from China, and the efficiency enhancements arising from the
availability of cheaper capital goods). While these external tailwinds are widely believed to have
raised the pace of economic growth, Brazil remains an economy primarily driven by the
independent growth dynamic of its large domestic market.

THE OUTLOOK: RELEVANCE OF A CHANGING CHINA FOR BRAZIL

The question of how the Chinese economy will evolve over the longer term has been of
considerable interest to policy makers and the business community in Brazil. While their
pace and timing is subject to uncertainty, three anticipated developments in China have been of
key interest to Brazil. First, as the Chinese labor force shrinks and China becomes more oriented
towards services, growth is likely to structurally slow, hereby affecting the relative strength of
import demand and overseas investment. Second, as China rebalances its growth model, the
patterns of production and expenditure are expected to shift in favor of services and consumption
relative to manufacturing and investment, thereby affecting the relative patterns of import
demand for commodities and creating new opportunities for Brazilian exports. Third, as wages
continue to rise, China will need to raise productivity and move production and exports up the
value chain, which could mean intensified competition for higher-cost countries such as Brazil.

The discussion in Brazil about the impact of a changing China has been surrounded by a
considerable degree of negativism, which is unwarranted as this report will argue. Brazil
and China have over the last decade established a relationship of partnership and competition.
Looking ahead, it appears that along both of these dimensions there is considerable negativism

20
about the impact of prospective developments in China. Insofar as Brazil and China have forged
a close partnership in the trade of natural resources, the prevailing concern is that a slowing and
rebalancing China would hurt the commodity trade as both the rate and patterns of import
demand would negatively affect Brazil. Insofar as the two countries are competitors such as in
medium and high-end manufacturing, the concern is that China’s moving up the value chain will
heighten the competition on Brazilian industries and cause further deindustrialization.

The question of how Brazil could leverage its external connections with China to energize
its own growth engine has become more pertinent than before. Following a recent growth
slowdown amidst elevated inflationary pressures, concerns have emerged in Brazil about a
reduction in the country’s structural growth capacity. As this report will argue, how Brazil adapts
to the new opportunities and challenges arising from a changing China will also have broader
implications on how Brazil could improve its global competitiveness as well as how it could
energize its domestic growth dynamic. Herein lies the real significance of Brazil’s closer ties
with China: the extent to which the bilateral relationship could contribute to transforming the
supply side of the Brazilian economy and how these transformations enhance the capacity of the
Brazilian economy to grow on a sustained basis in a non-inflationary manner.

THIS REPORT: OBJECTIVE, SCOPE AND STRUCTURE

This report examines how structural change in China will present new opportunities and
challenges for Brazil to improve its global competitiveness and energize growth and
productivity. Building on the recent China 2030 report (World Bank and Development
Research Center, 2013), this report presents scenarios for the development of the Chinese
economy over the next two decades and examines the implications for Brazil. The report shows
how the slowdown and rebalancing of China may present new opportunities for Brazil, even if
China’s progression up the value chain will present new challenges. It also lays out how Brazil
could gain greater benefits from its interactions with China but also shows how changes in China
increase the urgency of completing Brazil’s structural reform agenda. Overall, the report presents
a narrative of conditional optimism: Brazil could significantly benefit from the anticipated
structural changes in China, even though realizing these gains will require a proactive policy
stance to enhance external ties and address internal growth and productivity constraints.

In terms of scope, this report will emphasize the Brazilian angle, focus on trade and
investment, and offer broad rather than specific policy guidelines. First, the focus of the
report will be on the impact of a changing China on Brazil, where the anticipated changes in
China are taken as a starting point and eventually the focus is on the impact on Brazil. The other
side of the coin, i.e. the impact of Brazilian developments on China, while interesting and
relevant in itself, is left outside the scope of this report. Second, the report will emphasize
economic interactions in the areas of trade and investment – which have thus far represented the
most important linkages – abstracting thus from other types of bilateral linkages such as bilateral
and multilateral cooperation. Third, the report will emphasize longer-term economic
developments that are expected to affect the external environment Brazil is facing and based on
these, will lay out general policy directions or areas of reform that demand urgency, leaving
specific, more targeted suggestions for future work.



                                                                                                21
The remainder of this report is structured as follows:

        Part 1. A Changing China in a Changing World. The first part centers on China and its
         changing development trajectory over the last three decades and the next two. The
         purpose of this part is to motivate scenarios that will be analyzed with reference to Brazil
         and situate the development of China and its cross-border impact in the context of a
         global economic environment subject to change.

        Part 2. Brazil’s Evolving Linkages with China. In a second part, the evolving
         economic linkages between Brazil and China are examined: how they have come about,
         what they consist of, and how they would be affected by a changing China. Focusing on
         trade and investment, this second part will provide a structured analysis of the
         implications of different scenarios of a changing China.

        Part 3. Policy Implications for Brazil. The third part of the report considers the policy
         opportunities arising from the anticipated changes in China and their projected
         implications for Brazil. This third part will be primarily focused on Brazil and lay out
         how ties with China could be enhanced and how Brazil could accelerate growth of its
         economy by leveraging on its external connections with China.




22
               PART 1. A CHANGING CHINA IN A CHANGING WORLD

China’s stellar growth record during a period of unprecedented global integration has
raised the question to what extent this remarkable performance can be sustained into the
future. Three decades of rapid growth and structural change have transformed China into an
upper middle-income country and global economic powerhouse. This stellar performance
occurred against a supportive global backdrop that enabled China to develop increasing
interactions with the rest of the world as well as wield increasing influence across its borders.
Meanwhile, it has become evident that China has entered a phase of slower growth and is facing
structural challenges to transition into a new growth model. It has also become clear that the
global environment is significantly different compared to a decade ago.

                  I. CHINA’S JOURNEY OF STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION

Following three decades of rapid growth and structural change, China has arrived at a
crossroads indicating a new direction for the next two decades. The last three decades saw
some remarkable transformations, which led to considerable improvements in Chinese living
standards but were also associated with rising imbalances in a number of spheres. Looking
ahead, the question is whether the growth dynamic can be sustained into the future. The answer
offered below is that this has become increasingly unlikely. China is currently at a cross-road,
which carries with it both the opportunity and the challenge to maintain the momentum of the
makeover of the Chinese economy. This section will identify key transformations that are
expected to shape economic developments in China over the coming two decades.

A. The Past Three Decades: China’s Journey of Economic Reform

Over the last three decades, China experienced an economic transformation through fast-
paced growth and structural change (Table 1, Figure 1 and Figure 2). A key aspect of
China’s economic transformation was the change from a command-based economy to a more
decentralized system with a greater role for the market mechanism. Another important change
occurred through urbanization, where China transformed itself from a primarily rural,
agricultural economy into an increasingly urban one with a more diversified economic structure.
Together, market orientation and urbanization coalesced to produce large efficiency gains and
made it possible for China to sustain rapid growth that averaged 10 percent annually over three
decades. Industry and services grew most rapidly on the production side, with agriculture
registering a diminishing relative importance despite solid growth. On the expenditure side, the
key growth drivers were in the first place rapid investment growth as well as sustained
consumption growth. Exports and imports grew quickly too, even though on a net basis their
direct contribution to GDP was more limited.

This economic transformation led to considerable improvements in living standards, which
allowed the country to quickly climb up the income ladder (Figure 3). In 1978, the year that
marked the beginning of China’s opening up and economic transformation, the country’s per
capita income stood at merely one third of the average income in Sub-Saharan Africa. Compared
to Brazil and South Korea, which both had enjoyed a period of strong growth in the 1960s and
1970s, China’s income was just one tenth. China did catch up, however, very quickly and
managed to realize significant advances in per capita income terms. Considering its per capita

                                                                                              23
 Table 1. Industrialization and capital accumulation                   Figure 1. Industry dominated the supply side, with
 fueled growth, among other factors                                    services becoming more important

 Decennial growth rates (real, annualized, percent)                    Share in GDP by production (percent)
                                                                        50                         46             47
                           1980s        1990s        2000s                            1981
                                                                                                                                     42
                                                                                      1991
   GDP                       9.4         10.5         10.5              40            2001
   Agriculture               6.2          3.8             4.2                   32    2011
   Industry                  9.6         13.6         11.5               30
                                                                                                                        22
   Services                 12.4         10.9         11.2
                                                                         20
   Consumption               9.5         10.2             6.3
                                                                                           12
   Investment               11.0         11.6         13.6
                                                                         10
   Exports                   3.0         16.2         18.6

   Imports                   6.2         17.9         15.3                0
                                                                                  Agriculture          Industry            Services
 Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China; World Bank
 staff calculations.                                                   Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China; World Bank staff
                                                                       calculations.


Figure 2. On the demand side, investment and trade                      Figure 3. As a result of rapid growth, China climbed up
rose relative to GDP, but consumption fell                              the income ladder quickly
Share in GDP by expenditure (percent)                                   Gross national income per capita (current US$, Atlas method, logs)
 70     66                                                                                                                                High
                                                                                                                       South Korea
                                                                1981
 60                                                             1991
                 51                                                     10000
                                                                2001                                                                      Upper
 50                          44                                 2011                                                                      middle
                                                                                                                       Brazil

 40                                                                                                                                     Lower
                      33                 33
                                                                                                                                        middle
                                                     28
 30                                                                       1000          Sub-Saharan
                                                                                        Africa
 20
                                   13           12                                                                                       Low
                                                                                                                                        Low

 10                                                               5
                                                            1                        China
   0                                                                      100
          Cons.      Inv.      Exports      Imports Net exports               1978 82        86    90    94   98     02     06    10
 Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China; World Bank staff         Source: World Development Indicators; World Bank staff calculations.
calculations.                                                           Note: Light gray lines are WB income classification thresholds.




gross national income expressed in current dollars and adjusted for exchange rate fluctuations,
China became a lower-middle income country in 1998 and joined merely a decade later in 2010
the upper-middle income league. By 2012, Chinese per capita income stood at four times the
level of Sub-Saharan Africa’s, one half of Brazil’s and one quarter of South Korea’s. China’s
rapid growth and change into a more diversified economy created plenty of income-earning
opportunities that led to significant improvements in living standards. In the process, China
reduced the national poverty rate from 65 percent to below 10 percent and lifted over a half a
billion people out of poverty.

While benefitting the country in many respects, rapid growth and structural change have
also resulted in a series of imbalances. Spurred by high savings, cheap finance and other inputs
and export-oriented policies, the expansion of industry stunted the development of the services
sector, particularly in productivity terms, while the focus on physical capital accumulation
constrained investment in human capital (Bosworth and Collins 2008). With wages lagging
productivity growth, the wage share in national income was a mere 47 percent in 2011, with the

24
consumption share at comparatively low levels for a major economy. Income disparity widened
and social imbalances were exacerbated by unevenness in access to basic public services and by
tensions surrounding land transactions. Furthermore, the scale and concentration of
industrialization as well as pace of urbanization meant that China became the world’s largest
energy user and fast growth led to serious environmental pollution. Finally, many of the policies
that produced internal imbalances also contributed to external imbalances that have fueled
protectionist pressures in key foreign markets.

B. The Next Two Decades: A New Phase in China’s Development

The China 2030 report identifies three structural transformations that are likely to guide
China into a new phase of its development. These transformations reflect underlying structural
developments relating to demographics and other factors as well as policy directions that have
been laid out in the China’s 12th Five-Year Plan as well as the recent Third Plenum of the 18th
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. The first transformation is that China, like
other developing countries, is likely to slow down, but, depending on the scenario, the slowdown
could be more significant than elsewhere given the high growth rates enjoyed in the recent past.
The second transformation concerns the shift in the pattern of growth, which will likely be driven
on the demand side by a rise in consumption and imports and on the supply side by a rebalancing
in favor of the services sector. The third transformation relates to the patterns of production and
trade, where China is expected to gradually move up the value chain and hereby increase the
sophistication of its output and exports.

The implications of these transformations for Brazil will be assessed on the basis of global
scenarios that were developed using the World Bank’s Envisage model (Appendix A).1
Recognizing that the analysis of structural change does not permit the mere extrapolation of past
trends, it is necessary to resort to model-based assessments that provide a structured way of
analysis of the implications of the changes. In addition, given the uncertainties about the depth
and breadth of China’s transformations as well as of the changes that are likely to occur in the
rest of the world, it is necessary to recognize the degree of uncertainty by developing illustrative
scenarios that are based on reasonable assumptions about certain structural changes.

Transformation #1: China Registers a Structural Slowdown

Due to slower growth in recent years, economic commentary on China has increasingly
focused on the downside risks to the near-term outlook. Weaker global growth and tighter
domestic policies have combined over the last few years to slow Chinese GDP growth from 10.4
percent in 2010 to 7.8 percent in 2012. Against this backdrop, concerns have heightened about
domestic risk factors related to local government debt and credit-levered exposure to real estate.
As a result, the recent economic commentary on China has become preoccupied with the tail risk
of a hard landing, even if the baseline scenario of most observers, including the World Bank’s,
remains for a gradual and orderly slowdown (World Bank 2013).




   1
       The global scenarios correspond to those presented in Part II Chapter 5 of World Bank and DRC (2013).

                                                                                                               25
Adding to the short-term uncertainty is the expectation that China will experience a
structural slowdown in the longer term. China appears to be in a situation where its economy
is registering a cyclical slowdown against the backdrop of slowing potential growth. While the
traditional driving forces of growth are far from exhausted, many signs suggest that they are
likely to gradually weaken over time (Eichengreen, Park, and Shin 2011):

        Much of the growth obtained by shifting resources from agriculture to industry has
         already occurred. Going forward, the continued accumulation of capital, although
         sizable, will inevitably contribute less to growth as the capital-labor ratio rises, even
         though further capital accumulation will be needed given that China’s current capital
         stock per worker is estimated at only about a tenth of the U.S. level.

        China is poised to go through dramatic demographic change. The old-age
         dependency ratio will double in the next two decades, reaching the current level of
         Norway and the Netherlands by 2030 (between 22 and 23 percent), and the size of
         China’s labor force has started to shrink, dampening savings and therefore investment
         and growth. Yet workers will become more productive as the physical and human capital
         stock per worker continues to rise. These demographic changes should have a sizable
         impact on the rate of potential growth (Cai and Lu 2013).

        Total factor productivity growth (a measure of improvements in economic efficiency
         and technological progress) is expected to decline, in part because the economy has
         exhausted gains from first-generation reforms and the absorption of imported
         technologies that were relatively easy to access, adopt, and adapt. As a result, the distance
         to the technological frontier has shrunk, and second-generation policy reforms are likely
         to have a smaller impact on growth.

To capture these longer-term uncertainties in China as well as elsewhere, the following two
scenarios are considered.

        The first scenario foresees significantly lower growth due to an aging population
         and a shift into lower-productivity services. Technological progress within sectors is
         assumed to continue at the pace it was previously. Population aging will constrain labor
         force growth and reduce savings and hence investment rates and lower growth. In
         addition, the demand for services will rise as countries become richer (given that the
         income elasticity of services is typically larger than unity) or grow older (given the rising
         demand for health and public services). This will boost the services sector, but given that
         productivity growth in services is typically lower than in other sectors, the shift in
         services will result in lower economy-wide productivity growth as well. 2




     2
       Bosworth and Collins (2007) report that total factor productivity (TFP) in China’s services sector grew at 1.9 percent
annually between 1978 through 2004, whereas industry TFP grew at 4.4 percent. During the shorter period of 1993 through 2004,
services TFP grew at only 0.9 percent, whereas industry TFP picked up to 6.4 percent.

26
      The second scenario is characterized by sustained growth at high levels thanks to
       productivity-enhancing structural reforms. Specifically, growth at elevated levels can
       be sustained because of productivity-enhancing reforms and innovations, especially in the
       services sector. This higher productivity is supported by globalization of both the
       production and consumption of services, boosting innovation, competition and economies
       of scale. Thus, even if on the demand side there is a pull into services, the corresponding
       shift of production does not lead to a result in significantly lower aggregate productivity
       growth and therefore overall economic growth.


                         Figure 4. By 2030, China’s could grow 4 to 7
                         percentage points more slowly than in 2010

                         Average annual GDP growth (percent)
                           12     11.2                       11.2
                                                                          10.5
                                                                                 9.5
                           10
                                        8.5                                             8.4
                            8                                                                 6.9
                                              6.2
                            6                       4.9

                            4                             3.5


                            2

                            0
                                              Low                                High
                                2005-10       2010-15           2015-20   2020-25         2025-30
                         Source: World Bank and Development Research Center of the State
                         Council 2013.
                         Note: Actuals for 2005-10. Other values are simulated with Envisage.




Depending on the effectiveness of services sector reform, the illustrative scenarios suggest
that long-term growth could slow down by anywhere between 4 and 7 percentage points
(Figure 4). Whereas in the high-growth scenario growth is expected to settle at 6.9 percent by
2025-30, the low-growth scenario would be characterized by much-lower growth at 3.5 percent.
This would represent a decline in the growth rate by 7 percentage points compared to 2010
(compared to 4 percent for the high-growth scenario).

Transformation #2: China Rebalances the Patterns of Growth

Not only is China’s rate of economic growth likely to decline, the pattern of growth is also
expected to change as the components of demand grow at different speeds (Table 2). The
low-growth scenario foresees a pick-up in private consumption growth, whereas investment
growth is expected to decelerate gradually turning into an actual decline by the year 2030.
Exports continue to grow, albeit at a decelerating pace, whereas imports register also slower
growth. The high-growth scenario in turn projects an even faster pick-up in private consumption,
whereas the deceleration in investment is dampened. Predictably, export and import growth are
more buoyant in the high-growth scenario, with the stronger pick-up in domestic demand leading
to rising import demand.



                                                                                                    27
                                  Table 2.The two scenarios foresee rather different
                                  expenditure growth patterns through 2030
                                  Average annual growth rate (percent, constant prices)

                                                                      2005-10       2015-20       2025-30
                                   Low-growth scenario
                                   GDP                                    11.2             6.2         3.5
                                   Private Consumption                     5.9             9.4         7.0
                                   Public Consumption                     10.1             4.8         4.0
                                   Investment                             14.1             4.2        -3.0
                                   Exports                                13.0             6.7         4.3
                                   Imports                                11.4             7.5         3.7
                                   High-growth scenario
                                   GDP                                    11.2             9.5         6.9
                                   Private Consumption                     5.9            13.2        10.3
                                   Public Consumption                     10.1             9.6         7.3
                                   Investment                             14.1             6.6        -0.5
                                   Exports                                13.0             9.5         7.9
                                   Imports                                11.4            10.7         7.4

                                  Source: World Bank staff simulations
                                  Note: Actuals for 2005-2010. All other values are simulated with Envisage.


This process is expected to lead to considerable ‘internal rebalancing’ as well as some
‘external rebalancing’ (Figure 5 and Figure 6). In both scenarios, China manages to realize a
significant reorientation of its economy towards private consumption. This is accompanied by a
significant decline in the share of investment in GDP, particularly in the low-growth scenario.3
China is expected to continue its integration into global economy, even though the share of net
trade in GDP declines somewhat. The slow-growth scenario depicts a somewhat less favorable
environment for export and import growth. The share of net trade is expected to decline
somewhat to about 3 percentage points of GDP.

On the supply side, the Chinese economy would see a larger shift to services (Figure 7 and
Figure 8). In both scenarios the services sector is the fastest growing one in volume terms. This
results from the changing demand patterns outlined earlier, including population aging and the
rising propensity to consume services as incomes rise. In terms of value share in GDP, however,
services rise a lot more quickly in the low-growth scenario. This is because the low-growth
scenario is associated with lower productivity growth in the services sector which constrains the
supply of services at a time when demand is rising, thus producing an increase in the relative
price of services. This effect is much less pronounced in the high-growth scenario where
services productivity is boosted through productivity enhancing reforms, which would entail also
a redistribution with the services sector towards higher-productivity services.




     3
       Despite a significant drop in the investment rate the capital stock to output ratio increases very slightly from 2.4 in 2004 to
2.5 in 2030. This is in the range of the US capital to output ratio which reaches 2.6 by 2030, but significantly lower than that
same ratio for the EU (3.1) or the rest of high income countries (3.4), but also lower than the rest of East Asia (2.9).

28
 Figure 5. The share of private consumption in GDP                              Figure 6. The high-growth scenario is associated with a
 rises considerably in the low-growth scenario                                  stronger degree of rebalancing
 Low-growth scenario                                                            High-growth scenario
 Share in GDP (percent, current prices)                                         Share in GDP (percent, current prices)
 70                                                                             70
                                                        2010         2030                                                                  2010        2030
 60                                                                             60

 50                                                                             50

 40                                                                             40

 30                                                                             30

 20                                                                             20

 10                                                                             10

        0                                                                             0
        Private       Public    Investment     Exports     Imports                     Private       Public   Investment Exports         Imports
         cons.        cons.                                                             cons.        cons.
 Source: World Bank staff simulations                                           Source: World Bank staff simulations
 Note: Actuals for 2010; 2030 values are simulated with Envisage.               Note: Actuals for 2010; 2030 values are simulated with Envisage.


 Figure 7. On the production side, the services sector is                       Figure 8. Price increases make the share of services rise
 expected to see most rapid growth                                              more in the slow-growth scenario

 Average annual growth rate between 2010 and 2030 (percent)                     Share in total value added (percent)

                                                                                              Agriculture and food    7
               Agriculture and food       3.2               5.6 average                                              6
                                                            GDP growth
                                                                                Low-growth




                                                                                                                       10
 Low-growth




                Energy and mining                     5.3                                      Energy and mining
                                                                                                                      8                                2010
                                                                                                   Manufacturing                     30
                    Manufacturing               4.2                                                                       11                           2030

                                                                                                         Services                            53
                          Services                             6.9                                                                                            75
                                                                  7.1 average                 Agriculture and food   8
               Agriculture and food       3.3                     GDP growth                                         7
                                                                                High-growth
 High-growth




                                                                                               Energy and mining          11
                Energy and mining                                    6.7                                                   12
                    Manufacturing                                                                  Manufacturing                      33
                                                            6.3                                                                 25
                          Services                                                                       Services                           49
                                                                       8.2                                                                        57
                        0      2       4        6        8      10                                     0        20        40         60        80
 Source: World Bank staff simulations.                                          Source: World Bank staff simulations.
 Note: Values for both 2010 and 2030 are simulated with Envisage.               Note: Values for both 2010 and 2030 are simulated with Envisage.



The evolving patterns of growth are expected to reduce social and environmental
imbalances. Income inequality would likely flatten and eventually decline as: (i) faster growth in
the middle and western regions would further reduce the gap with coastal areas; (ii) migrant
wages would continue to rise rapidly, reducing the income gap with urban residents; and (iii) as
urbanization continues, rural-urban migration would likely slow as the structural shift from
agriculture to manufacturing eases and the rural-urban wage gap narrows. Finally, China would
likely consume energy less intensively and produce less pollution. This is because it would have
less industry and, within industry, less heavy and dirty industry, largely because of better pricing
of energy, commodities, and environmental degradation.




                                                                                                                                                               29
Transformation #3: China Moves Up the Value Chain

China’s growth success has been mainly the result of rapid productivity growth. The growth
of labor productivity—a key indicator of economic efficiency and a fundamental determinant of
real wages—was sustained at high levels, particularly in industry. China’s performance in
industry has been closely tied to its ability to facilitate industrial upgrading, and, during its recent
past, China has gone through several such stages. As a result, the structure of production and
exports has progressively shifted from resource-intensive raw materials and primary products to
labor-intensive manufacturing of textile and clothing, and eventually machinery, electronics, and
other products supported by more sophisticated production processes.
 Figure 9. The sophistication of China’s exports is                    Figure 10. China’s technological catch-up is expected to
 growing quickly                                                       continue at a rapid pace

 Index of product sophistication relative to Japan                     Growth in USPTO utility patents granted, 2000-10,
  100                1988 1990 1995 2000             2005    2010      average annual growth in percent
                                                                        40

  80                                                                                          China
                                                                        30
  60
                                                                                               India
                                                                        20
  40
                                                                                                                 South Korea
                                                                                         Hong Kong SAR
  20                                                                    10
                                                                                                                  Taiwan PRC

     0                                                                                                                          Japan
                                                                         0
          South    China      Russia      India     South     Brazil
                                                                             10          100           1000         10000          100000
          Korea                                     Africa
 Source: World Bank staff calculations.                                       Number of USPTO utility patents granted, 2000, log scale
 Note: Index is EXPY relative to Japan’s, with PRODY averaged over
 2000-09. EXPY maps export mix into per capita income level typical    Source: United States Patent and Trademark Office and World Bank
 of the development level of the countries that produce such goods.    staff calculations.



China’s 12th Five-Year Plan lays the foundation for the country’s aspiration to move
further up the value chain as a source for sustained productivity growth. For China to
sustain relatively rapid growth and maintain its competitiveness in the global marketplace, the
key is to sustain productivity growth. China has already made significant progress in
strengthening its technological capabilities and upgrading the technological sophistication of
production and exports (Figure 9 and Figure 10). These efforts were supported by large
investments in physical infrastructure, such as logistics, renewable energy, and communications.
In addition, China’s expanding education system and large supply of workers with science and
engineering skills bode well for the future (World Bank, 2012b).

China is expected to continue to advance up the value chain by deepening human capital
and technological capability. China is expected to further deepen its human capital base and to
impart the flexible core competencies that workers of the future will need to remain productive
across their working lives in the face of rapid technological change and structural shifts in
China’s labor market. Rising educational standards and brisk growth in tertiary education will
position China well to move up the value chain. In addition, China is expected to upgrade its
technological capabilities by fostering a learning and research environment that encourages new
ideas and lateral thinking and gradually making the pursuit of innovation more sensitive to
market signals, with the government playing a more facilitating role (World Bank, 2012b).

30
       II. CHINA IN THE WORLD: GROWING INTEGRATION AND MUTUAL DEPENDENCE

As China continues to change, its position in and relationship with the global economy are
also expected to evolve. China has elevated its position in the world by interacting more closely
with it. If both China and the rest of the world continue to develop along their changing
pathways, the se interactions are likely to adjust as well. This section will present simulations
based on a global general equilibrium model that captures the anticipated changes in both China
and the world, providing insights into the evolving relationship between them and the possible
impact on Brazil.

A. China’s Position in the World

China Re-Emerges onto the Global Stage

A key element in China’s growth success has been the economy’s increasing openness and
orientation towards the rest of the world over the last three decades. This time period saw
the make-over of an initially poorly integrated economy into one with deep connections to the
rest of the world. China’s gradual opening fostered the global demand for Chinese products and
the Chinese demand for imports from the rest of the world. By reducing import barriers,
domestic firms became more efficient as competition was strengthened and access to imported
inputs improved. This also helped promote China’s participation in the parts and components
trade and helped fuel China’s overseas expansion through reciprocal reductions in foreign import
restrictions and eventual entry into the WTO. By dismantling many barriers to FDI inflows,
China benefited from better access to foreign technologies and business practices, whereas the
integration of foreign standards into regulation and business practices allowed for an
improvement of the quality of domestic production. Finally, China enhanced its exposure to
foreign ideas through the education of Chinese students abroad and increasing communications
over the internet.

Conversely, the global economy has benefited considerably from China’s outward re-
orientation. The expansion of China’s trade was made possibly primarily through its
participation in global production networks, with nearly half of China’s exports being processing
exports with significant import content and more than half of all exports exported by foreign
multinational companies. Enterprises from many countries have therefore participated either
directly or indirectly in China’s success. Moreover, China has become the world’s second-largest
– and also one of its fastest-growing – import markets, where its formidable demand for raw
materials, advanced machinery and consumer products have brought significant benefits to
exporters overseas in both developing and developed economies.

As China increased its economic importance, its relations with the rest of the world
changed profoundly, especially over the last decade. Following its meteoric growth
performance, the Chinese economy overtook Japan as the world’s second-biggest economy in
2010 (third-biggest if the countries of the European Union were to be treated as one economy)
and is forecast at current growth rates to replace the US as the world’s top economy in about a
decade. Its outward-oriented growth model elevated China to become the world’s largest
exporter and its biggest manufacturer. On the back of persistent current account surpluses, China
also became the largest holder of foreign exchange reserves and a premier creditor in sovereign

                                                                                              31
debt markets. As the Chinese economy has grown, its domestic policies have come to matter in
terms of their impact on the global economy. The fiscal stimulus package in 2009, for example,
helped shore up global demand during the Great Recession, whereas China’s demand for
commodities and overseas investment have played an increasing economic role for its trading
partners.

For other countries particularly in the developing world, China’s re-emergence onto the
global stage has created both opportunities and challenges. The upsurge of commodity
prices, which resulted partly from China’s resource-intensive growth, benefited for example, net
producer countries, but hurt the terms of trade of net consumer countries. In turn, access to
lower-priced manufacture imports from China expanded the consumption possibilities of many
countries and elevated their middle classes, but at the same time it also created tough competition
for domestic manufacturing industries at home and in third markets.

Global Integration of China and the Wider Developing World Deepens

The recent dynamism of the global economy has been driven mainly by rapid growth in
developing countries. Developing economies grew at an average of 4.6 percent between 1990
and 2010 and, with prices rising quickly, the share of their collective GDP in global output rose
from 16 to 31 percent. While a big chunk of the strong economic performance of the developing
world reflected the rise of China (which raised its share in global GDP from 2 to 9 percent), the
share of other developing countries rose equally substantially (from 15 to 22 percent). High-
income economies, however, registered much slower growth (at 2.1 percent), which along with
lower inflation, led to their declining importance in global GDP.

Looking ahead, the changes in China will occur against the backdrop of a world that is also
changing. Fundamentals in developing countries remain strong, but there are limits to the
current patterns of growth if only because the share of services in these economies is likely to
increase over time. In addition, there is the question of whether other developing countries will
be able to become a major driving force for global growth and whether high-income countries
will be able to reignite their growth engines in the face of structural problems that restrain
competitiveness.

Relative to other countries, it is expected that China will maintain strong growth even if it
slows down considerably (Table 3 and Figure 11). Over the next two decades, developing
countries are expected to grow between 4.9 in the low-growth scenario and 7 percent in the high-
growth scenario. This represents a significant deceleration compared to the last decade,
particularly compared to the two years that preceded the global financial crisis when developing
countries registered more than 8 percent growth. Over time, by 2030, growth would come down
to 3.5 and 6 percent in the low- and high-growth scenarios. Among developing countries, the
growth decline in China is forecast to be somewhat larger, even if China remains among the
fastest-growing economies in the world. Despite the slowdown in China and other developing
countries, the developing world is expected in both scenarios to continue growing twice as fast as
high-income countries.




32
 Table 3. Growth trends for developing and high-                          Figure 11. China could potentially slow down a lot more
 income countries likely continue diverging                               than other developing countries

                                                                          Annual GDP growth rate (5-year moving average, percent)
                  Developing countries     High-income countries
                                                                          14
  GDP growth rate (decennial average, percent)
                                                                          12
  1990–00                  3.3                       2.7                                             China
  2000–10                  5.9                       1.6                  10

  2010–20                5.6–7.4                  2.0–3.1                   8
  2020–30                4.2–6.6                  1.3–2.7
                                                                            6           Developing countries
  GDP per capita growth rate (decennial average, percent)                               excluding China
                                                                            4
  1990–00                  1.6                       2.0

  2000–10                  4.6                       1.0                    2
                                                                                                High-income
  2010–20                4.4–6.1                  1.6–2.6                   0
                                                                                                countries
                                                                             1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
  2020–30                3.4–5.8                  1.1–2.4

 Source: World Bank and Development Research Center of the                Source: World Bank and Development Research Center of the State
 State Council 2013; World Bank staff projections.                        Council 2013; World Bank staff projections.
 Note: Bounds reflect low- and high-growth scenarios simulated            Note: Solid and dotted lines reflect high- and low-growth scenarios
 with Envisage.                                                           simulated with Envisage.


 Figure 12. Developing countries are expected to contribute more to global growth
 Contribution to global GDP growth as share of total (percent)
                         Low-growth scenario                                                      High-growth scenario
 100                                                                       100

                                                                                                                         High-income
                                                High-income
                                                                            80                                           countries
  80                                            countries


  60                                                                        60


                                                Developing world                                                         Developing world
  40                                                                        40
                                                excluding China                                                          excluding China


  20                                                                        20
                                                   China                                                                    China

    0                                                                           0
     1980       1990        2000         2010       2020         2030            1980     1990       2000        2010       2020        2030

 Source: World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council 2013; World Bank staff projections.



Regardless of these scenarios and even excluding China, developing countries are expected
to replace high-income countries as the main contributor to global growth (Figure 12). By
2030, developing countries without China will account for more than 40 percent of global
economic growth, with only one-third coming from the current high-income countries. About a
quarter of global growth, however, will originate in China – slightly less in the low-growth
scenario and slightly more in the high-growth scenario. The rise of developing countries other
than China will have profound implications for the future configuration of world trade patterns,
which is the subject of the next section.




                                                                                                                                                33
B. Relations between China and the World

If both China and the rest of the world continue to develop along the changing pathways
described above, how will the relationship between them evolve? Given the current size of
the Chinese economy and the complex ways in which it connects with the world economy, it
would be safe to conjecture that as China changes, so will the rest of the world, and vice-versa.
Thus, structural changes driven by technological catch-up, demographic transformation and
further capital accumulation will set in motion changes in the way countries interact:
comparative advantages change, countries move up the value chain, production and trade
patterns shift and relative prices adjust.

China and the rest of the world are likely to see closer integration. China’s growing middle
class will become an even more important source of global demand as well as investment, the
country’s industrial upgrading and expanding trade will lead to further specialization and
increased efficiency in world markets, and its increasingly educated labor force will become a
force for global innovation. Both China and the rest of the world stand to benefit from closer
integration. Just as increasing openness has been a critical driver of China’s remarkable growth
performance over the last three decades, many of the opportunities and solutions to the
challenges that may emerge in the next few decades can be found in global markets.

While trade will probably remain dominant, interaction and cooperation in other areas are
expected to become more important in the future relations between China and the world.
Outward flows of foreign direct investment are likely to continue rising as Chinese firms attempt
to establish themselves on a regional or global footing. The prospect of the increased opening of
China’s services sector may create new opportunities for overseas firms. As China expands its
presence in international financial markets, it may consider gradually opening up the capital
account and possibly internationalize its currency. China is also becoming an important source of
development assistance to other developing countries – a trend which is expected to continue.
And, finally, with its growing share in the world economy and its rising per capita income, China
has become a key partner in the provision of global public goods, where China’s participation is
essential in addressing a growing number of global challenges.

The Great Slowdown: Impact on Import Demand?

Even if China grows more slowly, the fact that such a slowdown occurs against a very high
base should give ample scope for other countries to tap into rising Chinese import demand.
If indeed, as predicted, China were to gradually halve its growth rate from the 10 percent in
recent decades to 5 percent by 2030 – which lies somewhere in the middle between the low- and
high-growth scenarios described before – it would still be expected to become a high-income
economy and outstrip the U.S. economy by then as well. Despite the slowdown, China’s national
income would rise through this period, and this would add an equivalent of 15 of today’s
Republic of Koreas to the world economy. Of course, due to the size of its massive population,
China’s per capita income would still remain a fraction of richer high-income economies. But the
slower rise of income from a high base should create tremendous opportunities for trade; since in
addition the income elasticity of China’s imports is expected to rise as the country becomes
richer, providing a further boost to import demand. Thus, even if China slows and rebalances, the
intensity of import demand is expected to remain robust.

34
The patterns of China’s import demand are likely to change. China’s recent growth patterns
have brought large benefits to exporters of commodities as well as capital goods—even if China
has itself become a significant exporter of capital goods (Eichengreen, Rhee, and Tong 2004). As
China rebalances and looks more inwardly, it is likely that competition from China in third
would recede and also that new opportunities would open up in China’s domestic market that
could be accessed by these exporters. Such opportunities could be accessed directly through the
export of consumption goods or indirectly by exporting inputs into the production networks
supplying such goods to China, of which a large share are expected to remain located within
China itself. China’s efforts to raise domestic consumption are also expected to raise the demand
for services, part of which again would be produced domestically, but others could be supplied
from overseas.

Erosion of Cost Competitiveness: Whither Low-Cost Manufacturing?

While productivity growth partially explains and absorbs growth in wages, rising labor
costs appear to be eroding China’s external competitiveness (Figure 13 and Figure 14).
While debate continues about whether China has passed the Lewis turning point 4 and data on
labor market developments is hard to come by, anecdotal evidence suggests that it is becoming
increasingly evident that it is no longer possible to tap into a surplus pool of low-wage labor
without raising wages (Lewis 1954). Indeed, for several years now, nominal wage growth has
been persistently robust, translating into significant increases in real wages. Even if the recent
slowdown brought a slight softening of labor market conditions, urban demand-supply ratios
remain at high levels. Whereas rapid productivity growth has to some extent dampened the
impact of these cost pressures somewhat, the rise in manufacturing unit labor costs remains
significant. These developments, as well as the observation of significant foreign direct
investment outflows from China to establish industrial zones in other countries, underpin the
concern that China’s industrial competitiveness in low-cost, labor-intensive manufacturing is
being affected by underlying cost pressures.

However, the pace at which this will play out is highly uncertain. First, not all manufacturing
will be affected. Firms that are less labor intensive (as determined by the share of wages in total
costs) or have more pricing power (and therefore the ability to pass on rising wage to prices) are
likely to be less affected. Competitive industries such as low-value footwear, garments, and toys
are therefore more likely candidates of out-migration, and indeed, some of China’s production in
these sectors has already shifted to countries such as Cambodia, Indonesia, and Vietnam.
Second, the process is also slowed by the fact that rising wage costs cause firms to raise capital
intensity. Recent survey data for the manufacturing-dominated Pearl River Delta suggest that the
primary response (61 percent, Figure 14) of companies to higher wage costs is to invest in capital
equipment (Lau, Narayan, and Green 2013).




    4
       The Lewis turning point refers to the point at which excess labor employed in lower-productivity sectors/subsistence
sectors is fully absorbed into higher-productivity/modern sectors and further reallocation of labor requires wages to rise.

                                                                                                                              35
 Figure 13. Labor productivity growth in China helped                   Figure 14. Wage pressures are triggering labor
 contain the rise of labor costs                                        substitution and relocation

 Growth rate (percent)                                                  Share of respondents (percent) to the question:
     20                                                                 "How do you plan to respond to labor shortages?"
                                                                         100

     15                                                          Q4
                                                                         80
                                                                                                                           2012
     10
                                                                         60                                                2013

      5
                                                                         40
      0
                                                                         20
     -5
                Labor productivity growth in manufacturing industry       0
                Unit labor cost in manufacturing industry                         Raise capital    Move capacity inland    Move capacity
  -10
                                                                                    intensity                                 abroad
     2007        2008         2009         2010         2011
 Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China, CEIC, and World Bank   Source: Lau, Narayan, and Green 2013.
 staff calculations.                                                    Note: Survey of manufacturers operating in Pearl River Delta.



The presumed large-scale out-migration of low-cost, labor-intensive manufacturing is
unlikely to happen overnight and may never fully play out. Indeed, the concern among lower-
income countries is precisely that, while China moves up the value chain and acquires new
comparative advantages, it continues to encapsulate within its borders the wage-sensitive chunks
of the cross-border supply chain. Thus China, being a vast country of multiple regions with
varying endowments, is not only acquiring new comparative advantages, but also keeping its
existing ones, whereby China would straddle the full span of technologies and labor intensities
(Yusuf and Nabeshima 2010).

Other countries would need to have the collective ability to absorb the out-migration of
manufacturing activities from China. It may well be that China’s specific development path
provided the world with a unique and one-off opportunity to productively tap into vast pools of
surplus labor (Chandra, Lin, and Wang 2012). Hence, if other developing countries that are set to
benefit from China’s gradual loss of competitiveness in low-cost, labor-intensive manufacturing
are collectively unable to supplant China’s production capabilities, then what appears the most
likely trend going forward will be a reversal of the ‘China price’ effect and a return to more
expensive final and intermediate manufactured goods.

Moving up the Value Chain: A Surge of Competition?

As China has moved and continues to move up the value chain, the competitive challenge is
increasingly shifting from lower-cost to higher-cost countries. As a result, a new group of
countries characterized by different endowment structures, and therefore different comparative
advantages, is likely to face head-to-head competition from a changing China. To some extent,
this is already happening as evidenced by the increasing technological sophistication of China’s
exports and the increasing share of capital good exports from China. Going forward, however,
the process is likely to intensify if China succeeds in its efforts to drive growth through
innovation (figure 10). As a result, countries that are currently active or aspire to become active
in production, investment, or trade of human capital–intensive and technologically sophisticated
goods and services would likely face significant competitive challenges (Economist Intelligence
Unit 2011).

36
Rising competition in skill- and technology-intensive production is expected to produce
various effects. Some countries may have more difficulties in retaining their overseas market
share and may also experience higher import penetration in their domestic markets. The rise in
competition may also constrain the efforts of other countries to move up the value chain,
dampening the prospects of these countries to generate productivity-led growth and impacting
negatively on global economic growth. At the same time, the rise in competition could trigger
proactive responses from the private sector to boost innovation and move up the value chain so
as to be able to compete with China. It may also lead to a healthy competition in policy
frameworks among similarly endowed economies to ensure that business environments are
conducive to and fully support private sector entrepreneurship and innovation (Schellekens 2011;
World Bank 2011a).




                                                                                             37
                PART 2. BRAZIL’S EVOLVING LINKAGES WITH CHINA

While the economies of Brazil and China were initially hardly linked, they have become
increasingly connected over the last decade. Bilateral trade and investment linkages between
the two countries expanded significantly, with China emerging as Brazil’s most important export
destination and an important foreign direct investor. Conversely, Brazil has played an
increasingly important role as a supplier of natural resources and a contributor to energy and
food security in China. While beyond the scope of this report, the two countries have also
enhanced their ties through enhanced cooperation agreements such as in technical and scientific
areas. Moreover, Brazil and China also developed economic connections in indirect ways, such
as through terms of trade effects, exchange rate developments and growth spillovers.

The importance of these growing connections must be placed in perspective. On the one
hand, while direct linkages grew rapidly, they grew from a low base and their significance
should not be overstated. With respect to trade, for example, Brazil remains a relatively closed
economy that trades with a diversified group of trading partners, thus diluting the importance of
China. On the other hand, the linkages between the two countries are also indirect, such as
through China’s impact on commodity prices, the new consumption possibilities afforded by
lower-priced consumer goods imports from China, and the efficiency enhancements arising from
the availability of cheaper capital goods. It is on account of these indirect effects that the
linkages with China have a greater significance in Brazil, even though domestic market
developments continue to play a key role in Brazil’s economy.

Against this backdrop, the evolution of these linkages as China undergoes structural
change is of key interest to policy makers and the business community in Brazil. However,
the discussion in Brazil about the impact of a changing China has been surrounded by a
considerable degree of, as this report will argue, unwarranted pessimism. In what follows, the
discussion will first focus on the trends and characteristics of Brazil’s economic connections
with China over the last decade. It will then adopt a forward-looking perspective and examine
how these connections could evolve over the next two decades as China slows, rebalances and
moves up the value chain.

         I. LOOKING BACK: FACETS AND CHARACTERISTICS OVER THE LAST DECADE

The economic linkages between Brazil and China have evolved rapidly over the last decade.
Bilateral trade expanded considerably as did to a lesser extent cross-border investment and
cooperation between the two countries. To be able to understand how the linkages between the
two countries may evolve going forward, the key trends and characteristics of the relationship as
it has evolved up to the present are first examined. The economic connections between Brazil
and China are complex as the countries are both strategic partners and competitors. These
characteristics arise from the fact that their economies are simultaneously complementary and
similar, which generates opportunities for beneficial exchange and also challenges manifested by
competition.




                                                                                              39
A. Facets of the Brazil-China Relationship: Trade, Investment and Indirect Effects

China Became Brazil’s Most Important Trading Partner

The value of Brazil’s trade with the world has grown fast over the last decade, but remains
low relative to the size of the Brazilian economy (Figure 15 and Figure 16). Following a
period of relative stagnation during the 1990s, the last decade saw a rapid rise in the value of
Brazil’s external trade. Between 2000 and 2011, export and import values of goods more than
quadrupled, representing an annual growth rate of 15 percent in nominal U.S. dollar terms.
Relative to GDP, however, exports and imports represented a rather small fraction of the overall
economy at about 9-10 percent each in 2011 (although it was much higher in the mid-2000s).

This expansion of exports and imports occurred during a period of rapidly rising
commodity prices and significant exchange rate appreciation (Figure 17 and Figure 18).
Partly in response to the commodity-intensive rise of other emerging markets, including China,
commodity prices grew at unprecedented rates during the period of 2004-2008 as well as
following the global financial crisis until recently. For Brazil, a major commodity producer with
an open capital account, this was associated with a rapidly appreciating exchange rate – both in
nominal and real terms as in effective and bilateral USD terms. These trends were reinforced by
the liquidity-generating policy responses to the global financial crisis by high-income economies
and by the pattern of interest rate differentials that favored emerging markets. The resulting
exchange rate volatility also explains a large part of the variations seen between Figure 15 and
Figure 16.

Against this backdrop, trade with China has grown even faster, albeit from an even lower
base and remaining at a relatively low share of GDP. Although Chinese merchandise exports
and imports comprise only a small share of Brazil’s GDP, China has emerged as an important
partner. Merchandise exports and imports to China were insignificant when compared to GDP in
1991 and by 2000 had increased to only a quarter of a percent. Nevertheless, the average annual
growth rate of exports and imports over this period was 19 percent and 36 percent, respectively.
By 2011, exports to China rose to 2 percent of GDP and imports to 1 percent, corresponding to
growth rates since 2000 of 40 percent and 35 percent. The trade balance with China has been in
surplus for Brazil for over most of the last decade, and continued to be in surplus through 2012.

The increase of exports to China occurred at a time when export growth to the rest of the
world was slowing. While growth in advanced economies was almost nonexistent, China’s
growth continued, and Brazil’s direct trade relationship with China provided resilience on the
export side that helped Brazil whether the period of volatility in 2008. Between 2008 and 2009,
when exports to the rest of the world declined by 27 percent, exports to China grew by 23
percent. However, due to the slow growth of advanced economies, China was making greater
efforts to access the markets of emerging economies. Between 2009 and 2010, when imports
from the rest of the world increased by 39 percent, in part due to the rebound after a fall in 2009,
imports from China increased by 61 percent.




40
Figure 15. During the 2000s, Brazil’s trade with the                  Figure 16. Relative to GDP, however, the increase was
world including China, picked up significantly                        less marked
USD billions (current prices)                                         Share in GDP (percent)
250                     Total exports                                 14                 Total exports
                        Total imports                                                    Total imports
200                     Exports to China                              12                 Exports to China
                        Imports from China                                               Imports from China
                                                                      10
150
                                                                       8

100                                                                    6

                                                                       4
 50
                                                                       2

     0                                                                 0
    91    93  95    97    99   01     03    05     07       09   11      91    93  95    97    99   01      03    05     07           09        11
Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                   Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.


Figure 17. Brazil’s rising trade values occurred against              Figure 18. Commodity price inflation led to significant
a backdrop of commodity price inflation                               exchange rate appreciation

Commodity price index, 1990=100                                       Various indices, 1990=100
400                                                                   250
                                                                                             Real effective exchange rate
                        Energy
                                                                                             Terms of trade
                        Non-energy
                                                                      200                    Export price
300                     Precious metals
                                                                                             Import price
                                                                      150
200
                                                                      100

100
                                                                       50


     0                                                                     0
    90 92 94 96 98 00 02                     04   06   08   10   12       90 92 94 96 98 00 02                      04      06   08        10
Source: World Bank Prospects Group.                                   Source: World Bank Prospects Group.


Figure 19. Among countries, China has become Brazil’s                 Figure 20. China has become Brazil’s second-most
most important export destination                                     important source of imports

Share in total exports (percent)                                      Share in total imports (percent)
40                                                                    35

                                                                      30
30                                                                    25

                                                                      20
20
                                                                      15

                                                                      10
10
                                                                       5

                                                                       0
 0
                                                                               91   95
                                                                                    93    97   99    01     03    05    07  09              11
         91   93    97
                   95    99    01     03    05    07  09     11                       USA                        CHN
                   USA                         CHN
                                                                                      EU27                       South America
                   EU27                        South America
                   KOR                         JPN                                    KOR                        JPN
Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                   Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.




                                                                                                                                                     41
 Figure 21. The rest of the world contributed much more               Figure 22. As to final demand, the US remains above
 to export and especially import growth than China                    China as most important export partner

 Contribution to growth (percentage points)                           Share of Brazilian value-added embodied in foreign final domestic
  30                                                                  demand (percent)
                  92-97    98-03   04-08    09-11
  25
                                                                      Rest of world
     20
                                                                              EU27
     15

     10                                                                        USA

      5
                                                                             China
      0                                                                                                                     2005
                                                                             Japan
     -5                                                                                                                     2009
           China       Rest of world      China       Rest of world
                                                                            Mexico
        Contribution to Brazil export Contribution to Brazil import
                   growth                        growth
                                                                                    0      5      10      15     20      25           30
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
                                                                      Source: OECD Trade in Value-Added (2013); World Bank staff
                                                                      calculations.


The surge in trade elevated China to Brazil’s most important export destination (Figure 19
and Figure 20). China has overtaken the United States that had traditionally been Brazil’s main
trading partner. Although rebounding, exports to the United States and the European Union still
remain below levels achieved in 2008 prior to significant declines in 2009. The importance of
China as an import market grew as well, becoming the second most import destination in 2011,
just behind the United States. However, total exports and imports to the European Union as a
region still remain above any other country, representing some 21 percent of overall trade.

The increased importance of China must be qualified in two respects: first, China
continues to represent only a fraction of total trade (Figure 21). Even though China has
provided resilience to Brazil’s export industries at a time when advanced economies were
slowing in the period following 2009, China’s direct contribution to Brazil’s export growth was
far more limited in the periods prior to that. Perhaps surprisingly, given the highly visible
penetration of Chinese imports into the Brazilian domestic market, this is even more so the case
for Chinese imports, as the rest of the world has contributed far more to Brazil’s import growth
than China.

Second, when considering final demand of Brazilian value added, the United States
remains ahead of China as the most important export destination (Figure 22). Value-added
embodied in foreign final domestic demand shows how industries export value both through
direct final exports and via indirect exports of intermediates through other countries to foreign
final consumers. They reflect how industries (upstream in a value-chain) are connected to
consumers in other countries, even where no direct trade relationship exists. Considering this
indicator, it becomes clear that, while China helped Brazil diversify its export markets, exports
appear to still be quite concentrated across destinations in terms of value added and linkages
through supply chains. The indicator shows that the EU27 and the US are much more important
players in terms of final domestic demand for Brazilian value-added. However, the United
States’ importance in terms of final domestic demand has decreased significantly between 2005
and 2009 while China’s has increased, since final domestic demand there has grown steadily.



42
Investment Flows Have Taken Off From a Low Base

Official FDI flows from China to Brazil have grown from almost nothing to over 100
million dollars annually in recent years. However, official flows only scratch the surface
because a large share of investments (especially for M&A) is recorded through offshore tax
havens. Various sources estimate actual FDI from China to lie somewhere between 10 and 15
billion dollars in 2010; and, the China-Brazil Business Council (CBBC) estimates FDI at just
under 11 billion dollars in 2011. According to Sobeet, Chinese FDI in Brazil amounted to
somewhere between 13 and 17 billion dollars in 2010.

These estimates suggest that China has established itself as an important investor in Brazil.
Overall FDI into Brazil has grown on average 14 percent annually since 2003, reaching a record
of 66.6 billion dollars in 2011 (65.3 billion in 2012), but Chinese FDI grew even faster. As a
result, the importance of China as a foreign direct investor has increased significantly. By value
of FDI, China was the fifth largest investor in 2011, following the United States, United
Kingdom, Japan and France. Depending on the source of the estimates, China accounted for
between 7 and 15 percent of FDI. As a result, the stock of Chinese investments in Brazil,
accumulated over the period 2000-10, may have risen to around 20 billion dollars, while
Brazilian investments in China are estimated to represent around 500 million dollars.


 Figure 23. Chinese outward FDI has grown significantly                       Figure 24. As with trade, the importance of Brazil in
 across a number of destinations                                              FDI flows has increased from a low base

 China’s FDI flows to select destinations (US$ million)                       Percent
 1,600                                                                        3
                                                                                          2.5
            1,343                                                                                                                 03-05
 1,400                                                    03-05

 1,200                                                    09-11               2                                                   09-11
                                                                                                          1.6
 1,000
                         770                                                        1.1
   800                                                                        1
                                                                                                    0.6
                                 544                                                                                                      0.5
   600                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                    0.1            0.1
   400
                                           243      197                       0
          139                  104               121           146                    Share of       Share of        Share of        Share of
   200                                                                   68
                    10                 9                  25         4           Chinese imports     Brazilian     Chinese FDI    Chinese FDI
     0                                                                             from Brazil in exports to China into Brazil in into Brazil in
           USA      Canada Russia      Brazil    Mexico
                                                  South     India                  total Chinese in total Chinese total outward total inward FDI
                                                  Africa                              imports         exports      FDI by China     into Brazil
 Source: UN Comtrade, ITC, Government of China (Ministry of                   Source: UN Comtrade, ITC, Government of China (Ministry of
 Finance)                                                                     Finance)




The scale of outward FDI from Brazil to China is small but has grown. In contrast to
Chinese FDI in Brazil, it is more diversified in terms of companies and industries. Natural
resources sectors dominate Brazil’s exports to China but represent a small share of FDI (21
percent). Most activity is service-related. According to a study by CBBC, half of investors are in
the services sector and most manufacturing FDI is in service activities (e.g. sourcing,
distribution).




                                                                                                                                                   43
                                 Figure 25. Brazilian outward FDI to China has picked
                                 up but remains limited
                                 FDI flows from Brazil to China             China share in Brazilian FDI
                                 (US$ million)                                                 (percent)
                                  200                                                               0.10

                                                                                                   0.08
                                   150

                                                                                                   0.06
                                   100
                                                                                                   0.04

                                    50
                                                                                                   0.02

                                     0                                                             0.00
                                         2001 02     03   04      05   06     07   08   09   10
                                                   Share of Brazil's outward FDI (right axis)
                                                   Annual FDI flows (left axis)
                                                   Three-year moving avg FDI flows (left axis)
                                 Source: Central Bank of Brazil.



Indirect Effects Have Played an Important Role

While the rise of the trade with China has been remarkable, the overall size of external
trade is small relative to the size of the Brazilian economy. The Brazilian economy is
relatively closed, which is not untypical for a large economy but nevertheless uncharacteristic for
most of its peers. As a result, external demand plays only a minor role in overall GDP. On top of
that, Brazil is very well diversified economy, in the sense that its production as well as its global
exports straddle a wide spectrum of the product space and that it exchanges the goods it produces
with a wide range of countries. Thus, not only did overall external demand represent a small
fraction in Brazilian GDP of less than 2.5 percent over the past decade, the importance of China
in overall GDP has been just a tenth of that fraction.5

An assessment of the economic relevance of trade between the two countries must go
beyond national accounting measures of external trade. There are several ways in which
cross-border trade and investment flows can augment the productive capacity of the economy,
either directly by providing inputs or indirectly by enhancing productivity.




     5
      These numbers apply to net exports over nominal GDP over the period 2000-2011. Gross exports and imports to the world
hovered around 11 and 8.5 percent of GDP, whereas those to China were around 0.9 and 0.7 percent.

44
                      Table 4. Directly and indirectly, China’s transformations have
                      created opportunities and challenges for other countries

                                           Opportunities                       Challenges
                                     Chinese demand for other        Displacement of local producers
                                         countries’ exports                by Chinese imports
                       Direct       Cheaper inputs and capital        Displacement of local firms by
                       Effects           goods from China                   Chinese investors
                                     Lower prices for consumer
                                                goods
                                   Rising world commodity prices      Rising world commodity prices
                                          for net exporters                  for net importers
                                    Better integration into global   Competition from Chinese goods
                       Indirect         production networks                   in third markets
                       Effects                                         Diversion of FDI from third-
                                         Growth spillovers
                                                                            countries to China
                                                                         Currency appreciation

                      Source: Adaptation of Jenkins (2012)


More broadly, interaction with China has led to opportunities and challenges that manifest
themselves both directly and indirectly (Table 4). Direct opportunities were created through
China’s demand for exports, but also challenges through import penetration, and increased
domestic competition. In addition, lower prices of capital goods of high quality have created
opportunities for upgrading and productivity improvement. Indirectly, China has created
opportunities for net commodity exporters through increased world commodity prices, massive
terms of trade improvements, pressure of currency appreciation, growth spillovers, as well as
challenges through third market competition both in terms of trade and investment flows. In
addition, China has contributed to global stability and growth and created the ability of countries
to operate is a low inflationary environment with low global interest rates.

One powerful indirect mechanism is China’s impact on commodity prices. China’s resource-
intensive growth and China not being a ‘small economy’ in an economic sense has been a
fundamental driver of the recent global commodity price trends. Prices have risen dramatically
over the past decade across different types of commodities, and particularly since 2005. In fact,
just recently China has overtaken the United States as the world’s largest net oil importer. Not
only has Brazil benefited from greater demand and higher prices of direct trade with China, but
China has indirectly created significant windfalls for Brazil from commodity trade with the rest
of the world.

The favorable external environment, combined with the benefits from earlier macro- and
micro-economic reforms, has helped Brazil expand its ‘consumption frontier’ (Figure 26).
Lower-priced consumer goods imports from China created increased consumption opportunities
for poorer households. Partly as a result, alongside improvements in domestic economic
conditions, ownership of durable goods including telephones, computers, televisions, and
refrigerators increased considerably between 2001 and 2011. In addition, as China remained
resilient through the global financial crisis, it contributed indirectly to macro stability in Brazil
and thus helped generate monetary and fiscal conditions conducive to economic growth and
poverty reduction. China thus has played at least a part in Brazil’s long cycle of consumption -
fueled growth.




                                                                                                       45
               Figure 26. Durable goods ownership has risen over the last decade
               Ownership of durable goods (percent)
               100

                                                                                                                  2001
                80
                                                                                                                  2011

                60


                40


                20


                  0
                        Stove   Refrigerator    TV         DVD   Water filter   Car      Telefone        PC    PC/internet
                                                                                                                access
               Source: IBGE-PNAD




 Figure 27. Commodity prices registered rapid increases                 Figure 28. … which led to currency appreciation and a
 after 2004                                                             terms of trade improvement for Brazil

 Commodity price index, 2004=100                                        Various indices, 2004=100
 400                                                                    200
                                                                                        Real effective exchange rate
                      Energy
                      Non-energy                                                        Nominal USD exchange rate
 300                  Precious metals                                                   Terms of trade
                                                                        150

 200

                                                                        100
 100



     0                                                                    50
     00        02       04       06       08          10    12              00           02      04       06         08        10
 Source: World Bank Prospects Group.                                    Source: World Bank Prospects Group.
                                                                        Note: Upward movement in exchange rate indices denotes
                                                                        appreciation of the BRL.


As the prices of Brazil’s commodity exports increased, so too did the pressure of currency
appreciation (Figure 27 and Figure 28). These trends have created significant terms of trade
improvements for Brazil. Since 2008, export prices have been increasing at a significantly faster
rate than import prices. The terms of trade are additionally influenced by the exchange rate as a
rise in the value of Brazil’s currency further lowered the domestic price of its im ports. Although
many factors can affect a country’s exchange rate, clear correlations exist between the prices of
commodities and the price of Brazil’s currency. When the demand of Brazil’s commodity
exports was high, so too was demand for the currency to pay for those exports. This correlation
is particularly strong for energy prices and precious metals. The significant appreciation of the
exchange rate – which has been somewhat reversed recently – has led to formidable pressures
onto the non-commodity related industries and has also been associated with concerns about
Dutch disease and a construction boom.




46
B. Characteristics of the Relationship: Complementarity and Similarity

Complementarity: Brazil and China as Partners

Brazil and China are Opposite Images in Several Respects

The economic partnership between Brazil and China is largely built on complementary
natural resource endowments (Figure 29 and Figure 30). Brazil and China – as well as the
US – have a similar land mass, but the distribution of agricultural and forest land over this mass
differ markedly and so does the availability of freshwater resources. In addition, there are
differences in climatological conditions. Once population mass is controlled for, the differences
in natural resource endowments are accentuated even further, with Brazil coming out very
positively especially compared with China but also the US and the Latin America and Caribbean
region more generally. These complementary endowment structures generate a strong mutual
interest in the agri-business sector. But there are also other areas, such as in metals and minerals
where there is complementary resource availability.

The structures of production in Brazil and China also exhibit a high degree of
complementarity, which is partly due to differences in stages of development (Figure 31).
Brazil and China are currently at different stages of development. Their economic structure,
however, was much more similar when comparing Brazil in 1961 with China in 1991. Moreover,
in the two decades that followed, the structure on the supply side evolved in almost identical
way: agriculture lost 9 versus 13 percentage points in GDP, industry gained 2 versus 5
percentage points, and services gained 7 versus 8 percentage points, and all from roughly similar
initial levels. What makes the economic structure of both economies so different, and therefore
complementary, is that Brazil saw the services sector take over in the three decades after 1981,
which was accompanied by significant de-industrialization. As a result, Brazil today is a much
more services-oriented economy than China, where industry continues to play a key role. 6 This
then also points to the potential for beneficial mutual exchanges in industry and services – the
former having happened already and the latter expected to take place.

A further source of complementarity exists on the demand side, where different growth
strategies in Brazil and China have led to divergent expenditure patterns (Figure 32).
Throughout the last five decades, Brazil has been a consumption-focused economy with a
correspondingly low share of investment and external demand. China’s pursuit of an investment-
led and export-oriented growth model generated almost opposite results, where investment and
external demand represented a much larger share in total demand and vice-versa for
consumption. In this respect, Brazil and China are almost opposite images of each other and they
are likely to remain so for some time, as the rebalancing agenda for both countries (towards more
investment and external demand in Brazil and more consumption in China) is not likely to be
addressed overnight. Until then, these different patterns will in their present form continue as
drivers of complementarity.




   6
       Differences in the characteristics of these sectors will be discussed later in this report.

                                                                                                     47
 Figure 29. Brazil is well endowed with land for                            Figure 30. In per capita terms, Brazil’s resources are
 agriculture, forests and freshwater resources                              especially abundant when compared to China
 Millions of hectare                             Trillions of cubic meter   Hectare per person               Thousands of cubic meter per person
 600                                                                    6     3                                                               30
                                        agricultural land
                                        forest land                                                      agricultural land
                                        other land                                                       forest land
                                        freshwater (RHS)                                                 other land
 400                                                                   4      2                                                                  20
                                                                                                         freshwater (RHS)




 200                                                                   2      1                                                                  10




     0                                                                 0      0                                                                  0
              Brazil             China              United States                     Brazil         China      United States      LAC
 Source: FAO; WB staff calculations.                                        Source: FAO; WB staff calculations.
 Note: Data for 2011.                                                       Note: Data for 2011. LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean region.


 Figure 31. Services have come to represent a much                          Figure 32. Brazil’s economy has throughout been more
 larger part of GDP in Brazil compared to China                             consumption oriented than China’s
 Share in GDP (percent)                                                     Share in GDP (percent)
  70                                                                         90
     60                                                                       80
                                                                              70
     50
                                                                              60
     40
                                                                              50
     30                                                                       40
     20                                                                       30
                                                                              20
     10
                                                                              10
      0                                                                        0
          Brazil       China   Brazil    China     Brazil      China               Brazil China Brazil China Brazil China Brazil China
            Agriculture            Industry             Services                   Consumption     Investment          Exports     Imports
             1961       1971   1981     1991     2001       2011                         1961    1971    1981   1991      2001   2011
 Source: National authorities; World Bank staff calculations                Source: National authorities; World Bank staff calculations
                                                                            Note: Data for 1961 is missing for China.


Trade and Investment Flows Reflect Complementarities

These three sources of complementarity – in natural resource endowments, structure of
supply and pattern of demand – are reflected in the trade flows between the two countries.
China’s focus on resource-intensive, investment-led growth and exports has resulted in high
demand and rising prices for commodities in which Brazil has a comparative advantage, which
helped support Brazil’s consumption-oriented growth pattern 7 and fueled the demand of
manufactured imports. Indeed, exports to China have become increasingly concentrated in
extractive resources and agriculture, at the detriment of machinery, metals, chemicals, and food
and beverages. Brazil has increasingly imported machinery from China that has replaced imports
of agriculture, food and beverages, and extractive resources.



     7
       Consumption-led growth in Brazil may be fostered by the imports of cheaper manufacture goods imports. In addition,
given the size of its economy, China has been instrumental, at least in the past, in contributing to disinflationary pressure
globally, which has indirectly enabled Brazil to lower structurally high interest rates in an open-capital account environment.

48
The pattern of trade between the two countries suggests that Brazil and China are tapping
into each other’s comparative advantages (Table 5 and Figure 33). The trade flows are
broadly consistent with the claim that Brazil has a comparative advantage in non-manufactures
and vice-versa for China. Comparative advantage should be interpreted strictly in the Ricardian
sense, i.e. both countries may be good at producing manufactures, but one is comparatively
better, which in turn leads to gains of trade for both countries if they specialize according to their
comparative advantage. By examining how a country’s exports share of a particular good
exceeds the global export share of that good, Table 5 demonstrates that the products were Brazil
has developed a ‘revealed’ comparative advantage are products where China is relatively
underrepresented and vice-versa, which again points to the complementarity of trade.
   Table 5. In the top ten sectors where Brazil has the strongest revealed comparative advantage, China is relatively
   weak, and vice versa.
   Revealed comparative advantage

                                                    Sectors in which Brazil has the greatest RCA
    Sector    Sector Description                                                                            RCA of Brazil    RCA of China
      17      Sugars & sugar confectionery                                                                      16.7              0.2
      12      Oil seeds, misc. grains, medicinal plants, straw                                                  12.7              0.2
      26      Ores slag & ash                                                                                   12.4              0.03
       9      Coffee, tea, mate & spices                                                                        11.1              0.3
      47      Pulp of wood, waste & scrap of paper                                                               9.1              0.03
       2      Meat & edible meat                                                                                 8.4              0.1
      23      Residues from food industries, animal feed                                                         6.5              0.3
      24      Tobacco and manufacturing tobacco substitutes                                                      5.4              0.3
      41      Raw hides & skins & leather                                                                        4.8              0.2
      20      Preps of vegetables, fruits, nuts, etc.                                                            4.2              0.9
                                                    Sectors in which China has the greatest RCA
    Sector    Sector Description                                                                            RCA of Brazil    RCA of China
      66      Umbrellas, sun umbrellas, walking sticks, whips, riding-crops & parts                             0.01              6.6
      67      Prepared feathers, human hair & articles thereof, artificial flowers                              0.01              5.7
      95      Toys, games & sports equipment, parts & accessories                                               0.02              5.4
      46      Manufacturing of straw, esparto, or other plaiting materials, basket ware and wickerwork          0.02              5.4
      65      Headgear & other parts                                                                            0.05              4.7
      42      Articles of leather, saddler & harness, travel goods, handbags, articles of gut                   0.07              4.4
      50      Silk, including yarns & woven fabrics thereof                                                      1.1              4.2
      64      Footwear, gaiters & the like                                                                       1.2               4
      62      Articles of apparel & clothing accessories – not knitted or crocheted                             0.02              3.6
      63      Made-up textile articles nesoi, needlecraft sets, worn clothing, rags                              0.3              3.4

   Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
   Note: RCA = revealed comparative advantage = the proportion of the country's exports in a given product category divided by the proportion
   of world exports of that category in total world exports. A comparative advantage is ‘revealed’ if RCA > 1.


Furthermore, trade with China also seems to have changed the overall composition of
Brazil’s trade. Brazil’s worldwide export basket saw large changes over the last decade, where
the direction of these changes was closely correlated with the emergence of trade with China.
Exports of machinery, food and beverages have declined since 2001, even though they continue
to make up a sizeable share. Exports of commodities, extractive as well as and agriculture
resources have seen a marked increase. Brazil’s import structure underwent a less radical
transformation. Despite a significant increase in imports of machinery from China, overall,
Brazil’s imports of machinery have fallen slightly, while imports of extractive resources and
metals have increased.



                                                                                                                                                49
 Figure 33. Brazil’s trade with the world is well diversified across products; trade with China is more specialized in
 natural resource-related products (export side) and machinery (import side).

 Share of exports to the world (percent)                             Share of exports to China (percent)

     100%                                                              100%

                                               Other                                                            Other
     80%                                                                80%
                                               Machinery                                                        Machinery

                                               Metals                                                           Metals
     60%                                                                60%
                                               Textiles                                                         Textiles

     40%                                       Chemicals                40%                                     Chemicals

                                               Extractive                                                       Extractive
     20%                                                                20%
                                               Food & beverages                                                 Food & beverages

                                               Agriculture                                                      Agriculture
      0%                                                                 0%
             1991       2001       2011                                          1991       2001      2011


 Share of imports from the world (percent)                           Share of imports from China (percent)

     100%                                                              100%
                                               Other                                                            Other
     80%                                                                80%
                                               Machinery                                                        Machinery
                                               Metals                                                           Metals
     60%                                                                60%
                                               Textiles                                                         Textiles

     40%                                       Chemicals                40%                                     Chemicals
                                               Extractive                                                       Extractive
     20%                                                                20%
                                               Food & beverages                                                 Food & beverages
                                               Agriculture                                                      Agriculture
      0%                                                                 0%
             1991       2001       2011                                          1991       2001       2011


 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.



These patterns are also evident in foreign direct investment flows (Table 6). A sectorial
breakdown of FDI inflows from China into Brazil indicates that over the period 2004-2010 the
primary sector gained importance mainly at the expense of the tertiary sector, while the
secondary sector remained relatively steady.8 The sectors growing in share show clear evidence
of the commodities boom: mining and metals (7 to 29 percent share in overall FDI) and
petroleum and energy (9 to 17 percent). FDI to manufacturing sectors not linked to natural
resources such as textiles, automotive, electronics, machinery & equipment, and precisions
instruments has been either stagnant or in decline. While the services sector generally declined in
relative importance, FDI inflows to certain subsectors actually increased: finance (6 to 11
percent) and construction (1 to 3 percent).




      8
     Primary sector refers to agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining and extraction of oil and gas; secondary sector refers to
manufacturing and tertiary sector to services.

50
 Figure 34. The patterns of foreign direct investment                        Table 6. FDI in extractive industries and finance has
 have changed over time                                                      picked up significantly
 Percentage shares in overall FDI                                            Percent share in total
  60                                                                                                                               Change
                                                                                                              2004   2007   2010
                  2004                                                                                                             2004-10
                                                                              Mining and Metals                6.8   14.3   28.6       21.8
                  2007
                                                                              Petroleum and energy             8.9   11.7   17.4        8.5
  40              2010                                                        Finance                          6.1   14.5   10.8        4.7
                                                                              Construction                     1.2    2.5    2.6        1.4
                                                                              Trade                            6.8    9.4    6.9        0.1
                                                                              Other mfg                        1.6    2.2    1.1       -0.4
                                                                              Business services                7.0   12.4    5.7       -1.3
  20                                                                          Chemicals, rubber, plastics      7.8    5.2    5.4       -2.4
                                                                              Other services                   6.2    2.2    3.2       -3.0
                                                                              Machinery, auto, equipm.        12.1    7.3    5.9       -6.2
                                                                              Agri, forestry, food, fishing   14.9   11.4    8.6       -6.2
   0                                                                          Transport, storage, comm.       20.6    7.0    3.7      -16.9
              Primary             Secondary                 Tertiary
                                                                             Source: ITC
 Source: ITC.
 Note: Primary sector refers to agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining and
 extraction of oil and gas; secondary sector refers to manufacturing
 and tertiary sector to services.



The type of FDI also sheds light on the sectors that investment is made in.

          The bulk of Chinese investments have been merger & acquisitions of a resource- or
           asset-seeking nature. Chinese investments in Brazil are found to have followed two
           patterns during the recent period of 2010-11: the inclusion of Brazil in the international
           base of suppliers of raw materials for China, and the entry of Chinese products into the
           consumer market and the Brazilian industrial arena. In a review of 25 existing Chinese
           investments in Brazil, CBBC (2011) categorizes 15 of them (60 percent) to be motivated
           by resource or asset seeking, with 10 (40 percent) as market seeking (none were
           categorized as efficiency seeking). While a large majority of overall investment in Brazil
           is greenfield, FDI from China has been dominated by mergers and acquisitions, including
           many partial, minority positions. This is in line with China’s emphasis on accessing
           natural resources, where there are existing, large companies, and its desire to secure
           supplies.

          Most Chinese investment up till now has come from central state-owned enterprises,
           even though this seems to be changing. CBBC (2011) estimates that 93 percent of the
           capital invested by Chinese companies in Brazil in 2010 came from firms classified as
           central state-owned enterprises, which have traditionally focused on natural resource
           sector investments. However, there is increasing evidence of a recent shift towards more
           investment in manufacturing and R&D (CBBC, 2011). This newer wave of investments
           also includes medium-sized and smaller Chinese companies. While these investments are
           likely to remain small relative to the major resource-seeking investments, they may have
           more strategic importance over time given the potential for productivity-enhancing
           spillover effects. In addition, there is some early evidence of investment beginning to
           come into the services sector, in particular financial services. This follows a typical
           pattern of China’s investments in other important markets.




                                                                                                                                              51
Similarity: Brazil and China as Competitors

While complementarities have brought mutual opportunities for Brazil and China,
similarities have produced competitive challenges. As noted before, the Brazilian and Chinese
economies exhibit important complementarities in terms of natural resource endowments as well
as productive and expenditure structure. At the same time, Brazil and China show similarity in a
number of respects, primarily with regard to the types of manufacturing products that they
produce. These similarities have given rise to competition both domestically and overseas in
third markets.

Competition in Third Markets Intensified

Although Brazilian exports are more similar to those of high-income countries, the
commodity boom in the mid- to late 2000s appears to have reduced this similarity
(Appendix D). Compared to China, Brazil’s overall export basket is more similar to the United
States and the countries European Union as well as Argentina, as suggested by the export
similarity index which measures the extent to which two countries are active exporters across
individual product categories. The more limited similarity with China would suggest that Brazil
and China export different baskets of goods and that therefore China is not a major third-market
competitor of Brazil in the sectors where Brazil has a comparative advantage. The limited
similarlity with China comes at no surprise given the complementarity in trade. However, the
Figure also shows that the similarity index between Brazil and the US, EU and Argentina has
declined since 2005. This is likely a reflection of the commodity boom since Brazil’s similarity
with other commodity exporters such as Peru and Chile has remained roughly constant.

To examine the decline in similarity further, it is useful to distinguish how different
product groups have evolved over time (Figure 35). Disaggregating flows into primary,
resource-based, low-, medium- and high-technology groups, the general complementarity is
again born out: Brazil is a diversified economy and trade with China does not reflect trade to the
rest of the world. However, close examination suggests the following pertinent developments:

        The share of Brazil’s low- and high-technology manufacturing exports to the world
         has shrunk since 2001 as primary and resource-based sectors expanded. Most
         striking is the rise of primary products exported to China between 1991 and 2001 (from
         less than 5 percent to 40 percent) and the associated fall in high-, medium-, and low-
         technology manufacture exports to less than 10 percent in 2011.

        The technological content embedded in Brazil’s imports from China has risen
         dramatically, likely at the expense of other trading partners. Brazil’s imports from
         China, previously dominated by primary products and resource-based manufactures, are
         now comprised to almost 90 percent of low-, medium-, and high-technology imports. The
         technological content of Brazil’s overall imports remained relatively constant since 2001,
         suggesting the changing composition of Chinese imports could displace other countries.




52
Figure 35. Brazil’s trade with the world and China according to product group (Lall classification )
Share of exports or imports by Lall classification (percent)

             Brazil’s exports to world                                                Brazil’s exports to China
100%                                                                      100%


 80%                                                                       80%
                                                    High technology                                                        High technology
 60%                                                Low technology         60%                                             Medium technology
                                                    Medium technology                                                      Low technology
 40%                                                                       40%
                                                    Primary products                                                       Primary products
                                                    Resource based                                                         Resource based
 20%                                                                       20%


     0%                                                                        0%
            1991         2001            2011                                        1991         2001            2011

             Brazil’s imports from world                                             Brazil’s imports from China
100%                                                                      100%


  80%                                                                      80%
                                                    Resource based                                                         Resource based

                                                    Primary products                                                       Primary products
  60%                                                                      60%
                                                    Not classified                                                         Not classified

  40%                                               Low technology         40%                                             Low technology

                                                    Medium technology                                                      Medium technology
  20%                                                                      20%
                                                    High technology                                                        High technology


     0%                                                                        0%
            1991         2001         2011                                           1991         2001            2011

Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.




Figure 36. Mercosur becomes more important than the                       Figure 37. The shares of primary and resource-based
US as a market for Brazil’s manufacture exports                           exports however remain relatively constant

Share of Brazil’s low-, medium- and high-technology manufacturing         Share of Brazil’s primary and resource-based manufacturing exports
exports to destination market in total such exports by Brazil (percent)   to destination market in total such exports by Brazil (percent)

                                 European Union                                                          European Union
50                                                                        50
                                 Mercosur                                                                Mercosur
                                 United States                                                           United States
40                                                                        40


30                                                                        30


20                                                                        20


10                                                                        10


 0                                                                         0
   88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06                           08    10          88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06                        08    10
Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                       Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
Note: For definition of Lall categories, see Table 7.                     Note: For definition of Lall categories, see Table 7.




                                                                                                                                               53
To what extent does Brazil’s changing export composition represent a loss of
competitiveness in its manufacturing industries (Figure 36, Figure 37)? A first glance
suggests that Brazil’s changing export composition could be due to loss of market share of
manufacturing in third markets. But a falling share of manufacturing exports could also be driven
purely by primary products and resourced based exports growing at a faster pace, not necessarily
manufacturing losing its competitiveness. Comparing Brazilian versus Chinese exports in foreign
markets according to technological content – using a measure of dynamic revealed competitive
position (DRCP) – sheds light on the extent to which China is a competitor in third markets at a
more detailed level.9

Table 7 analyzes Brazil’s dynamic revealed competitiveness position. The table shows three
destination markets. For each destination market, the average DRCP measure is calculated and
expressed in basis points and classified according to product category. This means for example
the United States registered an increase over the last decade of .17 percentage points in the share
of Brazilian imports in total imports of primary products, whereas China’s share remained
constant. The table also shows the average share in percent over the last decade of the presence
of each country in the destination market for that product category. For example, 1.7 percent of
total US imports of primary products came from Brazil whereras 1.3 percent came from China.


     Table 7. Evolution of Brazil’s dynamic revealed competitive position
     Average dynamic revealed competitive position (basis points) and average share (percent), 2000-11


                          USA market                             EU27 market                             Mercosur+ market

                   Average           Average             Average
         Lall       DRCP              Share               DRCP            Average Share         Average DRCP          Average Share
                Brazil China      Brazil China        Brazil China        Brazil  China        Brazil   China         Brazil   China
         PP       17         0       1.7       1.3        -2         1        2.0       0.8       79            9        11.5        0.9
         RB1        5       65       3.5       7.2         2       14         1.9       1.5      -16           58        16.9        3.4
         RB2       -4       21       2.1       4.1       10          9        1.5       2.0      -46           22        11.3        5.1
         LT1     -11       226       1.1      35.8        -1      145         0.5     18.5       -76         290         12.7      35.1
         LT2       -1      144       0.8      40.0        -1       57         0.3     11.2         -6        166         14.3      20.0
         MT1       -1       27       0.5       2.2        -1       10         0.2       0.6       22           59        25.9        3.8
         MT2      12        42       3.6       7.7         4       12         0.5       1.8        2           95        16.4        5.8
         MT3        0      100       1.1      17.7         0       63         0.3       7.1       10         118         11.8        9.8
         HT1       -1      316       0.4      28.5         0      192         0.1     15.0       -61         353         13.0      17.7
         HT2     -17        13       2.1       4.1        -3         6        0.3       1.4       28           26          6.1       3.0

     Source: UN Comtrade; National authorities; World Bank staff calculations.
     Note: The dynamic revealed competitive position (DRCP) is the change in the market share of a product (group) in an importing market.
     The average DRCP is the average between 2000 and 2011. Lall categories are defined as follows: PP=Primary Products, RB1=Resource
     Based Manufactures 1 (agro-based products), RB2=Resource Based Manufactures 2 (others non-agro based products), LT1=Low
     Technology Manufacture 1 (textiles, garments and footwear), LT2=Low Technology Manufacture 2 (others), MT1=Medium Technology
     Manufacture 1 (automotive), MT2=Medium Technology Manufacture 2 (process), MT3=Medium Technology Manufacture 3 (engineering),
     HT1=High Technology Manufacture 1 (electronic and electrical), HT2=High Technology Manufacture (others).




     9
      DRCP measures the annual change in Brazil’s or China’s market share of a product in a third market. In the analysis, the
product is treated as the aggregate exports within each category, and the DRCPs are then averaged for the period 2000 to 2011 to
capture how the average market share has changed. See Technical Appendix for a discussion and formal presentation of the
DRCP.

54
The analysis of Brazil and China’s DRCP suggests the following:

           China is emerging as an important player in Brazil’s traditional export markets
            (United States, European Union, and Mercosur+).10 China has gained market share
            across the board, in each export category and across each destination market. China is
            most dynamic in each market in low technology manufacturing of textile, garment, and
            footwear (LT1) and high technology manufacturing of electronic and electrical products
            (HT1).

           Although Brazil has lost market share across many product groups, Brazil is more
            dynamic than China in others. Brazil’s most dynamic products in the United States and
            the European Union are non-automotive medium technology manufactures (MT2), as
            well as primary products (PP) in the United States and other resource-based manufactures
            (RB2) in the European Union. In Mercosur+, an important destination for Brazilian
            manufactured products, Brazil is gaining market shares in primary products (PP), other
            high technology manufacturing (HT2), and medium technology manufacturing of
            automotive (MT1). Overall, however, even in those sectors where Brazil expanded its
            market share, China managed to increase its market share by more, especially in
            Mercosur+ and the United States.


 Figure 38. Brazil occupies a large share of the market in              Figure 39. China has penetrated various markets,
 Mercosur+                                                              especially the US
 Brazil’s average market share over 2000-11 in destination market, by   China’s average market share over 2000-11 in destination market, by
 Lall category (percent)                                                Lall category (percent)


                                                               PP                                                                     PP
 Mercosur+                                                     RB1      Mercosur+                                                     RB1
                                                               RB2                                                                    RB2
                                                               LT1                                                                    LT1
                                                               LT2                                                                    LT2
      EU27                                                                   EU27
                                                               MT1                                                                    MT1
                                                               MT2                                                                    MT2
                                                               MT3                                                                    MT3
           US                                                  HT1             US                                                     HT1
                                                               HT2                                                                    HT2

               0          10           20          30     40                          0          10           20          30     40
 Source: UN Comtrade; National authorities; World Bank staff            Source: UN Comtrade; National authorities; World Bank staff
 calculations.                                                          calculations.
 Note: For definition of Lall categories, see Table 7.                  Note: For definition of Lall categories, see Table 7.


Also striking is the size of the market that China has been able to penetrate, although the
Chinese penetration of the European market has been much smaller (Figure 38 and Figure
39). Some markets in Mercosur+ are becoming dominated by Chinese products. For example,
China has maintained a market share of on average 40 percent of other low-technology
manufactures (LT2) imports in the United States and 36 percent in low technology
manufacturing of textile, garment, and footwear (LT1) in both the United States and Mercosur+.
Although most of China’s shares are in low technology manufacturing, China is also making
headway in increasingly sophisticated goods, as indicated by non-trivial market shares in high

     10
          Mercosur+ refers to Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru.

                                                                                                                                            55
technology manufacturing. In contrast, Brazil’s market shares in the United States and the
European Union do not exceed 4 percent overall.

Many of Brazil’s most dynamic products are related to its natural resource base, but
specific manufacturing items are also quite dynamic.11 Aggregating across categories fails to
capture the significant amount of variability within each category at a more detailed product
level. Many products have achieved an average growth in the market share over the last decade
of above 5 percent (especially in Mercosur+). And although many are related to commodities, it
is not necessarily the ‘typical’ commodities like iron ore or soybeans, but instead, for example,
cashew nuts, tobacco, and orange juice. Graders and levelers achieved an average growth in the
market share over the last decade of 7 percent with an average of 60 percent of the US market
and steel products continued to grow in the Mercosur+ market. However, many of Brazil’s most
dynamic exports are concentrated in commodities that China does not consistently export to
these destinations, and this is particularly true in Mercosur+.
 Figure 40. Competition from China remains high                            Figure 41. Brazilian medium-tech manufactures are
 Share of Brazil’s exports where China exerts a direct or strong-partial
                                                                           especially under competition in Mercosur+
 competition over 2000-11, by market (percent)                             Share of Brazil’s exports where China exerts a direct or strong-partial
 80                                                                        competition in 2011, by market and Lall classification (percent)
                                                                                                         PP          RB       LT       MT   HT

 60
                                                                               M+ 1     7            9                         25                4


 40
                                                                            EU27            13           4       5        7        2

 20                     Exports to USA
                        Exports to EU27
                        Exports to Mercosur+                                 USA 2      5        6           9       2
  0
    00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09                            10    11
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                               0        10        20          30           40                    50
                                                                           Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.


To better capture the significance of the competition at a more disaggregated level, an
analysis of competition is conducted (Figure 40 and Figure 41). The analysis that follows is
based on measures of how the dynamic revealed competitive position (DRCP) of Brazil
compares with that of China at a disaggregated product level (HS 6-digit). If the DRCP of Brazil
is negative (meaning that Brazil has lost market share in that product in a given third market)
whereas the DRCP of China is positive, then the product is considered to be subject to direct
competition from China. If the DRCP is positive for both Brazil and China, then the product is
under partial competition, where the partial pressure is strong if the DRCP for China is larger
than Brazil’s. These measures are then aggregated to the higher levels of aggregation shown in
Figure 40 (total exports by destination market) and Figure 41 (exports by Lall category and by
destination market).




      11
           See Appendix for a list of Brazil’s most and least dynamic prod ucts in each market.

56
The analysis suggests ongoing competition with respect to manufacturing exports to
Mercosur+ and the US and primary and resource-based exports to the EU.

         China continues to exert strong competition on Brazil’s exports to key destination
          markets. The competition (direct and strong-partial) is highest with respect to Brazil’s
          exports to Mercosur+, where over 45 percent of all products are under pressure. This is
          followed by the EU (29 percent) and then the US (21 percent).12

         Overall, competition has however diminished greatly. Interestingly, across all
          markets, competition was much higher in the past, especially in Mercosur+. Back in
          2000, the EU and US faced similar pressures but by 2011 this subsided more in the US,
          which reflects the fact that import penetration from China has already worked its way
          much more extensively in the US than in the EU (see also Figure 39). The decline is also
          partly due to the commodity boom in Brazil, as Brazil is exporting more commodities to
          these countries that China does not export.

         Manufactured products have been subject to most competition, especially in
          Mercosur+. Some 82 percent of exports under pressure in the Mercosur+ market are
          manufactured exports.13 These numbers are even more significant when considering the
          importance of manufacturing exports to Mercosur+, as 64 percent of Brazil’s exports to
          this destination are manufactures. A similar story occurs in the US market, where 69
          percent of exports under pressure are manufactured exports. The competition seems to be
          somewhat lower in the EU market, where Brazil’s exports of primary products face
          increased competition.

         Exports of medium-technology manufacturing accounted for the greatest share
          under competition in Mercosur+ and US markets. However no one product stands out
          in accounting for this type of pressure. In Mercosur+, the top shares under competition
          related to vehicles, mechanical shoves, polyethylene, and footwear. In the United States,
          the top shares subject to competition tended to be machinery and mechanical appliances.

         In contrast, primary products and resourced-based manufacturing accounted for
          the majority of exports under competition to the European Union. Some 61 percent
          of all exports under pressure in 2011 reflected primary and resource-based goods. The
          significance of this pressure is even more striking when considering the importance in the
          export basket of the European Union. Primary products and resource-based
          manufacturing accounted for 24 percent of exports and 17 percent were under pressure.
          Two products, soybean oil cake and soybeans, accounted for 13 percent.



     12
        The numbers tell the share of exports at risk, but not the intensity of that risk. For example, a product is considered to be
under direct and strong-competition when China’s average market share between 2000 and 2011 has increased b y more than
Brazil’s. However, what is measured does not take into account the intensity of the change or the extent to which China’s share
increases more than Brazil’s. In addition, any changes in the share of products under direct and strong -partial pressure are driven
entirely by compositional changes in exports.
     13
        Some 45 percent of all exports to Mercosur+ are under competition and 35 percent of all exports are manufactured exports
under pressure.

                                                                                                                                  57
Competition in Brazil’s Domestic Market Also Increased

Brazil faces increased competition from China not only in overseas markets but also at
home in the domestic economy. Domestic industries have to compete with the import of
overseas products from countries around the world. China’s growing importance in the world
economy, as well as in the Brazilian economy, has meant that the demand for low-cost
manufactures from China has increased tremendously. While this has afforded Brazil with
benefits in the form of access to cheaper intermediate and final goods, it at the same time implied
greater competition for firms that produce and sell such goods domestically.

The general picture is one where Brazil’s tendency to import has increased since 2003,
whereas its proclivity to export has somewhat diminished (Figure 42). The import
penetration coefficient, or the share of imports on apparent consumption, has risen significantly,
from 12 to 22 percent between 2003 and 2011. The export coefficient, or the export share of
Brazilian industrial production, on the other hand steadily increased up until 2006, peaking at 20
percent before dropping to 18 percent in 2011. One possible explanation for the declining export
coefficient is that Brazilian producers have lost competiveness in international markets.
However, the financial crisis of 2008 and sluggish recovery in the global economy may have
reduced demand for Brazilian products as well. A third possible explanation is that increased
internal demand may be absorbing some of the production exported in the past (Canuto,
Cavallari and Reis, 2013).
 Figure 42. Import penetration is rising while export              Figure 43. The extractive and machinery industries
 coefficient is falling                                            experienced opposite patterns

 Percent                                                           Percent
 25                                                                100              Extractive industry: export coeff.
                                                                                    Extractive industry: import coeff.
 20                                                                 80              Machinery industry: export coeff.
                                                                                    Machinery industry: import coeff.

 15                                                                 60


 10                                                                 40


  5                          Export coefficient                     20
                             Import penetration coefficient

  0                                                                  0
    96     98     00    02       04       06      08          10       96     98    00       02      04      06      08   10
 Source: FUNCEX                                                    Source: FUNCEX


These patterns however differ greatly across industries, where for example the contrasting
developments of extractive industries and machinery are instructive (Box 1). The extractive
industries appear to be more integrated into the global economy as evidenced by much higher
import penetration and export coefficients compared to machinery manufacturing. And the
export coefficient of extractive industries has been high and steadily increasing since 2000, in
contrast to a declining and low coefficient in machinery manufacturing since 2005. It thus
appears that, even if Chinese manufactured goods have penetrated many of Brazil’s markets,
import penetration has been more likely in sectors where Brazil is a less inclined to export. See
Box 1 for more details on the machinery industry and how the China trade has affected the entire
iron ore-steel-capital goods supply chain.

58
The patterns also differ greatly when one considers the geographical dimension (Box 2).
Box 2 documents how the impact of greater competition has differed significantly across states
in Brazil, depending on whether these states have a complementary relationship with China that
helps them offset some of the negative impacts of increased competition. The analysis suggests
that the majority of Brazilian states seem to have benefited from trade linkages with China, while
the states that have been affected the most by the penetration of Chinese imports are, as
expected, São Paulo, Santa Catarina, Amazonas, Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná, which export
similar goods vis-à-vis China.




Box 1. Partnership and Competition: The Iron Ore, Steel, and Capital Goods Supply Chain

The characteristics of partnership and competition can be observed even within the narrow
confines of a single supply chain. A good example is the iron ore, steel and the capital goods
supply chain. Traditionally, Brazil’s domestic supply chain used domestically sourced iron ore
that was then transformed into steel to be used for assembly of capital goods. But the rise of
China fundamentally altered these relationships and has created both opportunities and
challenges for domestic participants in the supply chain.

Consider first the iron ore producers. Following the rise of China and in tandem with the
associated commodity boom, iron ore producers such as Vale (the largest mining company in the
world for iron ore) have increasingly oriented themselves externally towards satisfying the rising
demand from overseas. As a result, between 2001 and 2011, the value of Brazil’s agglomerated
and non-agglomerated iron ores and concentrates to China increased by 3,358 percent.

Consider next the machinery & equipment industry in Brazil, which has faced considerable
competitiveness challenges in the face of rising competition from China, an appreciating
exchange rate as well as domestic factors that have hampered competitiveness. These factors
have coalesced to dampen the demand in Brazil for domestically produced machinery and
equipment goods, as evidence by rising Chinese import penetration. They have also reduced the
export potential of this industry in third markets as evidenced by the analysis of competition,
which shows that manufacturing is especially subject to Chinese competition in Mercosur+ and
the United States.

The implications for the domestic steel industry are even more significant. As noted, China
increasingly exports capital goods and many of these capital goods embody significant amounts
of steel. So not only has the competition with China displaced some of the domestic production
of machinery and equipment but the domestic demand for steel is also being reduced by the
displacement of those products with steel content. Ironically, the steel is being produced
primarily with iron ore from Brazil.




                                                                                               59
Box 2. Partnership and Competition: The Subnational Dimension

The characteristics of partnership and competition in the Brazil-China relationship are
also observed at the subnational level. Given that Brazil’s exports are highly diversified, the
country’s productive structure is both complementary and similar to China’s. This multi-faceted
aspect of the Brazil-China relationship is also borne out at the subnational level: 17 out of the 27
Brazilian states have limited similarity in their export bundles with respect to China (Blasquez-
Lidoy et al, 2006), giving therefore rise to greater complementarity and hence opportunity for
partnership; other states have a much more similar export bundle, including São Paulo, Santa
Catarina, Amazonas (which is dominated by the Zona Franca de Manaus), Rio Grande do Sul
and Paraná. These latter states tend to export medium and high technology manufactured goods
and are therefore more likely to be subject to competition from China.

The degree of complementarity with China seems to have been associated with the
economic growth performance at the state level. Libânio (2012) finds that the growing
demand for agricultural commodities and minerals led to above-average growth over 2000-2009
in states producing and exporting such products. These states also recovered more quickly from
the effects of the economic crisis in the late 2000s.
  Figure 44. Index of trade competition: China and   Figure 45. Exports by Region (2010) according to Lall’s
  Brazilian States                                   classification

                                                     100%
     0.5


     0.4                                              80%

                                                                                                       HT
     0.3                                              60%
                                                                                                       MT

     0.2                                                                                               LT
                                                      40%
                                                                                                       RB
     0.1
                                                                                                       PP
                                                      20%
     0.0
             MT
             TO




             MS




             MA




             MG
             AP




             PA
              PI

             ES

             AC
             SE

             PB



             BA
             PE
              AL




             PR



             SC
             SP
             RR
             DF




             RN

             CE




             RS

             AM
             RO




              RJ




           Brazil
             GO




                                                       0%
                                                                 N        NE         SE   S    CO
  Source: Libânio (2012); MDIC and Intracen
  Note: Average for 2002-2010.                       Source: Libânio (2012); MDIC.



The interactions with China have affected Brazilian states quite differently due to
differences in export mix and their similarity with China. The South and Southeast regions
are more diversified and export a larger share of manufactures. The North and Northeast are
more concentrated on natural resources, whereas the Midwest region—the important agricultural
frontier—concentrates 80 percent of its exports in primary products. As such, while the China
effect is felt nationwide, China’s demand for Brazilian commodities, the penetration of Chinese
manufactured goods and additional displacement in third markets has different effects for
Brazilian states depending on their export similarity or complementarity with the Chinese
economy. Libânio’s analysis suggests that most Brazilian states benefit from trade linkages with
China, while more similar states have recorded a strong competitive impact as in São Paulo,
Santa Catarina, Amazonas, Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná.


60
               II. LOOKING AHEAD: IMPACT OF A CHANGING CHINA ON BRAZIL

China’s successful economic development is expected to continue but is likely to change, as
the Chinese economy slows down, rebalances and moves up the value chain. These
transformations are anticipated as China enters a new stage in its development towards a high-
income economy. While there is considerable uncertainty about the pace and extent of these
changes, it is nevertheless useful to think ahead and prepare for the eventualities that China’s
changes may entail, particularly in terms of their effects on other countries. This is especially the
case for economies that have developed closer ties with China as well as economies that are
expected to be influenced in a significant way by China’s prospective changes – where Brazil is
thought to belong to both categories.

This section examines mainly how China’s changes would affect trade – the most
prominent facet of the Brazil-China interaction – and how Brazil might be affected.
Simulations are presented on the basis of the multi-regional, multi-sectorial Envisage model that
was used earlier to analyze China’s domestic transformations. Here, however, the Envisage
model simulations discussed in the previous sections will be used to analyze the trade patterns
between nations and groups of nations, allowing for a more detailed discussion about the impact
on Brazil.

A. Changes in China: A More Detailed Analysis

Chinese Import Growth Is Expected to Remain Healthy

The illustrative scenarios suggest that, despite the anticipated slowdown, Chinese import
demand will continue growing at a healthy rate for an economy the size of China’s (Figure
46). The two scenarios that were simulated in the earlier section capture the structural slowdown
and rebalancing of the Chinese economy, where Chinese GDP growth slows to 3.5 percent by
2025-30 in the low-growth scenario and 6.9 percent in the high-growth scenario and where a key
difference between the two scenarios derives from the rate of growth of productivity in services.
As the GDP base of the Chinese economy has become very large and the share of imports in
GDP is rising in both scenarios as China rebalances, the rate of growth of import volumes should
remain rather healthy regardless of the slowdown (6 percent in the slow-growth scenario and 9
percent in the high-growth scenario).

However, the structure of this demand is set to evolve quite differently in the two scenarios
(Figure 47), where in the low-growth scenario:
       The share of services in total imports almost doubles. There are three main factors
        behind this. First, as Chinese consumers become richer their demand for services
        increases relatively faster than for goods (income elasticity of demand is greater than
        one). Secondly, with productivity in services lagging behind, their relative prices
        increase. While domestic prices of services increase by 77 percent relative to the 2004
        base year, the increase of import prices of services is much lower (Figure 52), which
        leads to a shift in demand towards imports. Finally, as countries grow richer their
        integration with the global markets typically deepens leading to a further growth of trade
        as a share of output in all sectors.


                                                                                                  61
 Figure 46. Import demand of agriculture & food, energy                                    Figure 47. ... which would lead to a change in the
 and services is expected to grow quickly …                                                structure of Chinese import demand
 Growth rate of import value, 2010-30 (annualized, percent)
                                                                                           Change in value share in total imports, by sector (percentage points)

                                                   6
                      Total                                                                                                                         9
                                                            9                              Agriculture and food           low
                                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                 10                                                       high
     Agriculture and food
                                                                               17                                                          2
                                                                                                         Energy
                                                       7                                                                                        6
                    Energy
                                                                  11
                                                                             low                                   -31
                                       3                                                         Manufacturing
              Manufacturing                                                  high                                 -32
                                               5

                                                                 10                                                                                          20
                   Services                                                                            Services
                                                            9
                                                                                                                                           0
                              0            5                10          15            20
                                                                                                                  -40      -20         0                20             40
 Source: World Bank staff simulations.
 Note: Simulations with Envisage for 2010 and 2030 in low- and high-                       Source: World Bank staff simulations.
 growth scenarios.                                                                         Note: Simulations with Envisage for 2010 and 2030 in low- and high-
                                                                                           growth scenarios.


 Figure 48. Plenty of scope exists in expanding the                                        Figure 49. … which has on the import side played a
 services trade …                                                                          much smaller role in China than in Brazil
 Nominal GDP, 2011 (current prices, USD, log)
  31
                                                                             China
                                                                             Brazil        Value share of services imports in total (percent)
     29
                                                                                           30

     27
                                                                                           25
     25
                                                                                           20
     23
                                                                                           15
     21
                                                                                           10
     19
          0          20           40                   60              80           100                                                                      Brazil
                                                                                            5
                      Share of services in total trade, 2011                                                                                                 China
 Source: UNCTAD; WDI; World Bank calculations.
 Note: Trade = exports plus imports.                                                        0
                                                                                             1980     1985   1990     1995      2000      2005                    2010
                                                                                           Source: UNCTAD; World Bank staff calculations.



               As the share of services in total imports rises, their share in absorption14 doubles
                from the level of 2010 but remains relatively low at 10 percent in 203015. In addition,
                when considering the level of development and the share of services in total imports, it is
                notable that several countries with similar levels of GDP have relatively high share of
                services trade in total trade (Figure 48). Considering just services imports, the
                comparison with Brazil suggests that there is plenty of remaining scope in China to boost
                the share of services imports (Figure 49).




      14
       Absorption is defined as domestic production - exports + imports.
      15
       In the rest of East Asia region the share of imported services in domestic absorption is projected to increase from 13
percent in 2010 to 18 percent in 2030.

62
         Imports of agricultural and food products and their share of total domestic
          absorption increase dramatically in the low-growth scenario. Prices of imports of
          food and agricultural products decrease over time due to productivity gains and
          production shifts to locations with comparative advantage in the production of
          agriculture such as e.g. the US, Europe16, but also Brazil.

         The manufacturing sector is subject to much faster productivity growth than
          agricultural production. This leads to a fast expansion of production and increased
          price competitiveness, resulting in a relatively slow growth of imports of manufacturing
          products and therefore halving of their share of total imports in the low-growth scenario.

In the high-growth scenario, the share of services imports remains roughly constant
whereas the share of agriculture and food imports rises considerably. With a faster growth
of productivity of services the price of domestic production decreases relative to imports and
therefore the demand for imports of services is growing in line with total imports. The increase
in the price of Chinese agricultural and food products is faster in this scenario due to stronger
demand stemming from expanding income. Faster economic growth along with a relatively
significant increase of agri-food prices stimulates demand and leads to a further increase of
imports of agri-food products.

Changing Patterns Are Bound to Affect Global Markets and Prices

The scenarios result in a continued and significant increase in China’s share of global
imports and imply a continued trend of rising Chinese import dependence on critical
commodities (Figure 50 and Figure 51). From a global perspective, China is expected to
continue expanding its market share in import markets, even in the low-growth scenario. The
market share for China is expected to increase from 10 percent in 2010 to 16 percent of global
imports in 2030 in the low-growth scenario and to 19 percent in the high-growth scenario. From
a Chinese perspective, the scenarios point to further global integration and hence increased
import dependence. As China continues to grow, the share of imports relative to absorption is
likely to increase dramatically in certain sectors, particularly in the high-growth scenario and
especially in the agriculture & food and energy & mining sectors as well as services.

Even though China’s market share in global agricultural and food imports rises to high
levels, such a substantial increase would not disrupt global food and agricultural markets.
These goods have historically been much less traded than manufacturing products and remain
broadly so throughout the simulations. The increase of the share of global imports of agri-food
products only represents a shift away from self-sufficiency on the part of China and a substantial
opening to imports of agri-food products. In the realm of the simulation model where producers
and consumers only respond to relative prices, such a shift away from domestic production and
towards imports is perfectly feasible. Whether this outcome would be politically feasible in the
future remains to be seen. Concerns about commodity security (especially in food and energy)
are likely to lead to some resistance towards the significant increase in China’s dependence on
overseas products and may therefore dampen somewhat the model-based trajectories.

     16
        The modeling exercise assumes that agricultural productivity grows at 2.5 percent per annum for all countries/regions.
Consistently with past trends the productivity growth in manufacturing and services in high income countries is slower than in
agriculture. Rapid productivity growth in agriculture makes these countries more competitive on international markets.

                                                                                                                                 63
 Figure 50. China’s market share in world imports rises                              Figure 51. China’s domestic dependence on overseas
 considerably in several sectors                                                     markets may rise depending on scenarios

 Value share of China’s imports in world imports (percent)                           Value share of imports over absorption (percent)
     Agriculture & food              14                                                  Agriculture & food            9
                                                        41                                                                                                  27
                                      11                                                                                                      13
  Low-growth




                                                                                     Low-growth
                 Energy & mining                  20                                                Energy & mining                                   19
                                      10                           2010                                                                  10                      2010
                   Manufacturing     8                                                                Manufacturing              6
                                       11                          2030                                                         5                                2030
                         Services                      26                                                     Services                   10
                            Total     10                                                                          Total                 9
                                             16                                                                                          10
                Agriculture & food          15                                                     Agriculture & food                   9
                                                                           57                                                                                           42
  High-growth




                                                                                     High-growth
                 Energy & mining      11                                                            Energy & mining                              14
                                                       27                                                                                              21
                   Manufacturing      10                                                              Manufacturing                         11
                                       11                                                                                           6
                         Services    9                                                                        Services          4
                                             17                                                                                 3
                            Total     10                                                                          Total                 9
                                              19                                                                                        9
                         0    10      20    30     40    50     60                                           0       10       20       30        40
 Source: World Bank staff simulations                                                Source: World Bank staff simulations
 Note: Values for both 2010 and 2030 are simulated with Envisage.                    Note: Values for both 2010 and 2030 are simulated with Envisage.
                                                                                     Absorption defined as production plus imports minus exports.



                                             Figure 52. Services become more expensive in the low-
                                             growth scenario than when growth is high
                                             Global relative price indices 2030 (2010=100)
                                                                                                         94
                                              Agriculture and food
                                                                                                              107

                                                                                                                    128
                                                  Energy and mining
                                                                                                                        136

                                                                                                         96         2030 low
                                                       Manufacturing
                                                                                                         97         2030 high

                                                                                                                  119
                                                            Services
                                                                                                            102

                                                                       0        50                    100               150
                                             Source: World Bank staff simulations.
                                             Note: 2030 values in low- and high-growth scenarios are simulated
                                             with Envisage.


Since the Chinese economy is very large, changes in its import demand are expected to
affect global prices (Figure 52). 17 With China accounting for above 15 percent of global
imports and above 20 percent of global exports by 2030, one would expect that an increased
demand for services (especially in the low-growth scenario) and to a lesser extent of agricultural
products (in the high-growth scenario) would contribute to the growth of their relative prices.
Indeed the world price of services increases by 22 percent relative to their benchmark (2004)
level in the low-growth scenario, while it remains roughly constant in the high-growth scenario
(increase of 3 percent). In the high-growth scenario global prices of agricultural products
increase more than the price of services or manufacturing products. With the same fast
productivity growth in manufacturing and now also faster productivity growth in services in the
     17
        The global model foresees relative price developments which are a function of differential growth rates in the regions,
changes in the demand patterns, relative sectoral productivity growth rates, differential factors of production growth trends,
global trade patterns etc. These results should not be treated as a price forecast rather as a relative development compared to the
model's numéraire which is an index of OECD exports of manufacturing products. The model only captures the real phenomena,
not monetary phenomena, therefore the prices only reflect relative changes in global demand and supply.

64
high-growth scenario, agricultural products with their relatively slow productivity growth and
strong demand from, among others, China, become relatively more expensive. At a global level
the prices of energy and mining record relatively slow growth i.e. 1.6 percent per annum in the
low-growth scenario and 1.8 percent per annum in the high-growth scenario.

B. Implications for Brazil: Rising Complementarity, Changing Similarity

As the total volume of Chinese imports is seen to grow at an average of 6 to 9 percent per
year in both scenarios, Brazil is expected to be among China’s fastest-growing import
suppliers (Table 8). Over the next two decades China is expected to import more products from
developing countries. In both scenarios their share is expected to increase about 4 percentage
points to 32 percent of total imports. Latin America and the Caribbean is expected to see its
exports increase at an average 7 or 11 percent per year over 2010-2030 (in the low- and high-
growth scenarios, respectively), at the same speed or faster than the average developing country
(in the high-growth scenario) or many other developing regions. Only imports from the US
increase at a slightly faster rate in both scenarios. The share of LAC products in total Chinese
imports increases by 10 percent, but it remains rather low at around 4 to 6 percent in 2030.
 Table 8. China’s imports from Brazil are expected to grow among the fastest in the world
 Growth rate of China’s import value, 2010-30, by geographical source (annualized, percent)
                                                   Average growth rate                              Value share in imports
                                                         Low        High                   Low                               High
                                                     2010-30     2010-30        2010       2030      Change      2010        2030   Change
    World total                                           6.2        8.7
    High income countries                                 5.9        8.1            72.4   68.1          -4.3     72.0       64.6      -7.3
       United States                                      8.0       12.9            10.7   15.1           4.4     10.9       23.2     12.3
       EU27 & EFTA                                        7.5        8.0            17.6   22.5           4.9     16.5       14.5      -2.0
       Japan                                              2.2        4.4            13.5      6.3        -7.2     13.9        6.2      -7.8
       Rest of high-income                                5.0        6.6            30.5   24.1          -6.4     30.7       20.8      -9.9
    Developing countries                                  7.0       10.0            27.6   31.9           4.3     28.0       35.4      7.3
       Latin America & Caribbean, excl Brazil             6.2        9.8             2.4      2.4         0.0      2.5        3.0      0.5
       Brazil                                             8.0       12.0             1.4      2.0         0.6      1.5        2.6      1.2
       East Asia                                          6.9       10.0            13.5   15.5           2.0     13.7       17.3      3.6
       South Asia, excl India                             7.7       10.2             0.3      0.4         0.1      0.3        0.4      0.1
       India                                              7.5       10.0             1.5      1.9         0.4      1.4        1.8      0.4
       Europe & Central Asia, excl Russia                 5.8        9.3             0.7      0.6        -0.1      0.7        0.8      0.1
       Russia                                             3.1        6.1             3.2      1.8        -1.4      3.4        2.1      -1.3
       Middle East & North Africa                         6.9        9.6             2.0      2.3         0.3      2.0        2.3      0.3
       Sub-Saharan Africa                                 9.8       12.5             2.6      5.0         2.5      2.6        5.1      2.5
 Source: World Bank staff simulations.
 Note: 2030 values in low- and high-growth scenarios are simulated with Envisage.



Brazil Is Poised to Gain From Increased Complementarity

Even if growth in China decelerates, it slows from a high base, while the rebalancing of the
Chinese economy is expected to offer significant opportunities for Brazil going forward.
China’s shifting away from domestic investment-led growth and export-led growth to domestic
consumption-led growth will increase the share of consumption over GDP, causing consumption
to grow at levels higher than GDP. And the implications on Brazil’s exports to China are
arguably greater under the scenario of rebalancing than had China continued on its current
development path, given Brazil’s export basket.

                                                                                                                                              65
Rebalancing in China offers room for Brazil to deepen the complementary trade
relationship and grow the commodity sector in which it has a well-established comparative
advantage. Three separate factors will come together to boost this result. First, China’s
consumption growth creates a significantly larger response in Brazil’s commodity exports than
China’s GDP growth. Second, most of Brazil’s exports to China are classified as commodities
according to this definition. And third, consumption growth rates are expected to be higher than
other components of GDP.

Brazil’s abundant endowments of natural resources make the country well suited to take
advantage of China’s rising demand for agricultural and food products. The Brazilian
agribusiness sector in particular is expected to benefit from the anticipated changes in China.
Increased protein demand from China is expected as Chinese food habits change, creating higher
demand for soybeans and meat. Brazil has a comparative advantage in production of these
products and is among the best suited to respond to rising Chinese demand. The rise in Chinese
demand is thus expected to generate many new opportunities for Brazil to widen the economic
impact of the natural resource-related part of its economy.
 Figure 53. Agriculture & food and manufacturing                               Figure 54. China’s market share in world exports
 exports to China are expected to grow most rapidly                            continues to rise in manufacturing

 Growth rate of Brazii’s export volume to China, 2010-30 (annualized,          Value share of China’s exports in world exports (percent)
 percent)                                                                          Agriculture & food      3
                                                                                                          2
                                              8.0                                                                 2
                                                                               Low-growth




                Total                                                                         Energy & mining     1
                                                               12.0                                                         19                  2010
                                                                                                Manufacturing                         32
                                                             11.1                                                 2                             2030
 Agriculture and food                                                                                 Services    1
                                                                    12.9                                               13
                                                                                                         Total              19
                                    4.4                                 low
                                                                                             Agriculture & food    3
              Energy                                                                                              1
                                                       9.9              high
                                                                               High-growth




                                                                                              Energy & mining      2
                                                                                                                  1
                                                          10.7                                                              18
       Manufacturing                                                                            Manufacturing                              38
                                                                 12.5
                                                                                                      Services     3
                                                                                                                   3
                                            7.3                                                                        13
            Services                                                                                     Total                   23
                                                    9.3
                                                                                                       0    10      20    30     40     50    60
                        0          5              10                  15       Source: World Bank staff simulations
 Source: World Bank staff simulations.                                         Note: Values for both 2010 and 2030 are simulated with Envisage.
 Note: 2030 values in low- and high-growth scenarios are simulated
 with Envisage.


Commodities such as iron ore may benefit comparatively less if China’s investment-led,
resource-intensive growth model is decelerating. Yet interestingly, this also provides an
opportunity. Whereas demand for many commodities such as soy is related directly to
consumption, commodities such as iron ore can be used for both consumption (for steel to make
cars) and investment (construction or machinery). Therefore, more iron ore and steel will be
needed if there is to be, for example, increased demand for cars as China develops its internal
market.




66
As Similarity Changes, Competition is Likely to Alter

China’s integration with the world economy is expected to continue on the export side but
the composition of its export basket is expected to change significantly (Figure 54). Both the
low- and high-growth scenarios in China foresee that the market share of Chinese exports in
global exports continues to rise. By 2030, China exports could present between 19 and 23
percent of the global exports. Much of the increase is driven by an increase in manufactured
goods, a sector in which China has long held a comparative advantage. Within the manufactured
goods sector, however, large changes are expected in terms of the type of products and, even
more importantly, the underlying processes used to produce them.

Another dimension of world trade concerning Brazil and other countries is the future
volume and structure of Chinese exports. Despite increased competition from low-income
countries and relatively slower growth in high income countries, there will be still opportunities
for China to further expand its exports in existing and new markets. The fast-growing emerging
markets will provide a new source of demand for Chinese products. As China's population
becomes better-educated, its workers more skilled and the wage competitiveness diminishes over
time, the incentives for the Chinese firms to expand investment abroad and acquire new
technologies will become stronger. Globalization of Chinese firms will create new opportunities
as they move to higher value added segments of the global markets. The simulations indicate that
several skilled labor intensive sectors would be likely to expand, with some of the fastest growth
likely to occur in the exports of chemicals, rubber and plastics; motor vehicles and transport
equipment along with other manufactured products.

A fast increase of exports of manufactured products is seen to allow for a further expansion
of the share of Chinese exports in global exports (Figure 54). Further growth of the Chinese
contribution to global trade is feasible in the foreseeable future. China is rapidly becoming the
biggest economy in the world, expected to overcome the US in the next two decades, with a
population four times as big as that of the US. The US, for example, used to account over 30
percent of global exports of professional and scientific instruments or transport equipment in the
1990s, which serves as a reminder that a single country’s world market share can reach high
levels providing it produces competitively. It is possible that taking advantage of economies of
scale and new technologies China might further expand its exports in several manufacturing
subsectors in the future.

As China continues to expand its market share and redefines the source of its comparative
advantage in manufacturing, competition with Brazil is likely to remain intense. China
moving up the value chain may make it more difficult going forward for Brazilian manufacturing
firms to compete domestically and internationally. As China carves out new niches to retain its
global competitive advantage in manufacturing, the knowledge intensity and sophistication of
Chinese manufacturing is expected to significantly increase. Given that China is expected to
increasingly make inroads into such higher-end activities, the competition with Brazil in these
segments is likely to intensify further.




                                                                                               67
A fresh wave of competition from China could produce further consolidation in Brazil’s
industrial sector. Increased competition at home and in third markets may continue to affect the
industrial sector. Yet, while some further consolidation may be inevitable and necessary, it is
also clear that industry will have a continued role to play in the domestic economy. Domestic
demand will continue to grow given the rising middle class, which may carve out niches for
industry to respond to. In addition, just like certain segments of the Chinese manufacturing sector
are less vulnerable to rising wage pressures and the associated erosion of external
competitiveness, there are similarly segments in the Brazilian manufacturing sector that are more
resilient to competition than others. For example those for which the proximity to final demand
is critical due to logistics costs or the benefits to innovation from being close to the customer
base.

Although Brazil today exports mostly commodities to China rather than differentiated
products, future opportunities also exist for Brazilian manufacturing exports. To the extent
that the Chinese economy will continue to add large increments of external demand to the global
economy, the Brazilian manufacturing sector could tap into at least two types of opportunities:
First, as the Chinese economy undergoes rebalancing, the increased focus on the domestic
market may diminish some of the competition abroad and Brazil could regain some of the market
share lost domestically but also internationally. Second, rebalancing in China offers
opportunities for Brazilian firms to develop new niches and to tap into new opportunities to
respond to changing needs of Chinese consumers.

The changes in China also present an opportunity for Brazil to improve the efficiency of its
services sector and expand its international reach. While the Brazilian services sector would
remain propelled by rising consumption demand through the ongoing development of the
domestic market, the inefficiency of certain services subsectors (such as logistics) pose a
productivity constraint to the commodity and manufacturing sectors. By addressing these
inefficiencies, Brazil could enhance the external competitiveness of these other sectors, allowing
them to respond more effectively to the opportunities and challenges posed by China. Moreover,
to the extent that China’s domestic economy shifts into services but low productivity growth in
services constrains domestic supply, significant future opportunities may materialize in the
international services trade with China. The simulations suggest that higher-income countries
would be most likely to tap into this demand, with services exports to China from the US, Japan,
Europe and other high income countries expected to rise in the order of 10 to 11 percent annually
over 2010-2030.




68
                      PART 3. POLICY IMPLICATIONS FOR BRAZIL

The report has thus far highlighted how structural change in China is likely to turn out
broadly positive for Brazil, bringing plenty of opportunities while also few new challenges.
The report identified three transformations of the Chinese economy – structurally slower growth,
a rebalancing on the demand and supply side, and a move up the value chain. The implications of
these anticipated changes were examined with respect to Brazil and the report discussed how the
slowdown and rebalancing of China may present new opportunities, even if China’s progression
up the value chain is likely to present new challenges as well. Industrial and especially
agricultural commodities are set to benefit despite the slowdown and rebalancing of the Chinese
economy. New opportunities will present themselves for the services sector given the projected
excess demand for services in China. The continued development of China’s domestic market
will also present new opportunities for manufacturing even though China’s moving up the value
chain will likely lead to intensified competition in higher-end products.

The subject of this final part is how the changes in China could contribute to economic
growth in Brazil. The recent slowdown has raised attention about Brazil’s underlying capacity
to grow and unfinished structural reform agenda. In this context, the question has arisen whether
Brazil could leverage its external connections to infuse growth momentum into its economy and
thereby complement the growth dynamic of the internal market. The report reflects on three
questions about Brazil’s ongoing integration into the global economy: (i) Has Brazil become too
outward oriented?, (ii) Did its trade structure become too concentrated in terms of products or
markets, and (iii) Has trade become too oriented towards commodities? The report will argue
that there is sufficient space for Brazil to broaden and deepen its external orientation and
leverage on these linkages to generate growth and productivity. In this respect, the report
identifies domestic policy areas as well as issues in the cross-border trade and investment
environment that could beneficially contribute to this agenda.

                    I. GROWTH EXPECTATIONS AND STRUCTURAL REFORM

Brazil has experienced episodes of successful economic and social development. In the post-
war era, Brazil joined the ranks of upper-middle income countries at remarkable speed and
developed a large internal market and sophisticated business community. Following a period of
macro instability, the country re-established the foundations for a resumption of growth. Over
the course of the last decade, Brazil has also recorded significant successes on the social front,
where it has managed to reduce poverty and to a lesser extent also inequality. It has raised over
20 million people out of poverty since 2003 and was able to overcome the 2008/9 crisis
successfully. Brazil is making progress toward environmental sustainability and deforestation in
the Amazon is on a downward trend. Child health outcomes have improved, and access to basic
education is now almost universal.

Following the recent growth slowdown, however, Brazil’s growth challenges and its
unfinished structural reform agenda have come into sharper focus. Amidst concerns that
Brazil’s recent slowdown reflects a decline in the underlying structural growth capacity, the need
to reenergize growth and productivity through structural reforms has become more apparent. The
authorities have launched a series of measures to boost productivity (as under the Plano Brasil
Maior), which represent welcome steps towards the objective of accelerating growth.

                                                                                               69
A. Recent Developments: Muted Growth Expectations

Brazil’s post-war era is marked by a prolonged episode of fast-paced growth, intermittent
bouts of macro instability, and – until recently – a period of renewed growth momentum
(Figure 55). Between 1947 and 1980, Brazil grew at an annual average rate of 7.5 percent.
Rivaling the likes of South Korea, Brazil reached upper-middle income status on the back of a
sophisticated business community and one of the world’s largest internal markets. The following
two decades saw much slower growth (2 percent between 1981 and 2003), with the Latin
American debt crisis of the early 1980s setting off a period characterized by macro instability
and stabilization efforts. Inflation was brought under control with the Real plan in 1994, which
led to a brief pick-up in growth, which was however interrupted again by the currency crisis of
1999. Subsequently, Brazil introduced inflation-targeting and strengthened its fiscal policy
framework. Over the last decade, Brazil experienced a period of renewed growth momentum,
starting in the mid-2000s (4.8 percent between 2004 and 2008), which in recent years has lost
some of its strength (2.7 percent between 2009 and 2012).
                            Figure 55. Brazil’s growth and inflation patterns
                            were markedly different before and after 1980

                            Decennial GDP growth rate                  Decennial inflation rate
                            (annualized, percent)              (annualized, percent, log scale)
                             10                                                               1000
                             9
                             8
                             7
                                                                                              100
                             6
                             5
                             4
                                                                                              10
                             3
                             2             GDP growth (LHS)
                             1             Inflation rate (RHS)
                             0                                                                1
                                 57   62   67   72   77   82   87   92   97   02    07   12
                            Source: World Development Indicators; World Bank staff
                            calculations.



Underlying Brazil’s growth patterns over the last six decades was a rapid acceleration of
productivity growth followed by a dramatic collapse and an incomplete recovery (Figure
56). This is most evident when comparing the post-war period through 1980 and the period
afterwards up till now when labor productivity grew annually by 4.1 and 0.3 percent,
respectively. The sharp decline was due to the pace of capital deepening and total factor
productivity growth coming to a virtual halt. Following macroeconomic stabilization, labor
productivity started to grow again – albeit at a modest pace – due to growth total factor
productivity as well as, to a lesser extent, capital accumulation (Bacha and Bonelli, 2012). Total
factor productivity levels have yet to recover fully relative to their earlier levels as well as the
patterns observed in other economies.




70
   Figure 56. Labor productivity was also dampened by a slow rate of capital deepening
   Contribution to growth of output per worker (percentage points, period averages)
        6
                                                                                                                Capital deepening
        5
                                                                                        2.4                     Productivity enhancement
        4

        3                   2.5                      2.7

                                                                                                    2.7
        2
                1.4                                                                     3.3                                                 0.6
                                                                      1.8                                                             0.2
        1                                            1.7
                            1.6                                                                                                             1.4
                0.9                     0.3                                                         0.9                      0.5      1.0
                                                                      0.5                                        0.3         0.3
        0
                                        0.0
                                                                                                                -1.0
       -1
              1948-11   1948-80     1981-11      1948-62    1963-67     1968-73     1974-80      1981-92     1993-99     2000-11    2005-11
   Source: Bacha and Bonelli (2012).
   Note: Capital deepening = growth rate of capital employed per worker (multiplied by capital share); productivity enhancement = total factor
   productivity growth.


Meanwhile, with the tailwinds of the 2000s receding, headline growth in Brazil has slowed.
Following the years of rapid growth associated with a buoyant domestic market and favorable
external conditions, economic growth slowed to 2.7 percent in 2011 and a lackluster 1.0 percent
in 2012. The slowdown was driven by domestic and external factors. A tighter policy mix aimed
at curbing earlier overheating pressures helped rein in domestic demand growth, whereas
external demand was dampened by protracted weakness and uncertainty in advanced economies
and slowing growth in major emerging economies such as China. While the slowdown was felt
across the board, industry on the supply side and investment on the demand side were affected
the most.
                                       Figure 57. Following 2012, market expectations
                                       about longer-term growth in Brazil have moderated
                                       Evolution of growth forecasts for two years later (daily median
                                       GDP forecast averaged over the year, percent)
                                       4.5
                                                                                      4.5 4.5

                                        4.0                                                   4.1         4.2
                                                                                        4.1
                                                                                  3.9
                                                    3.8         3.7         3.7
                                        3.5
                                              3.5         3.5         3.5


                                        3.0
                                                                                                                3.0
                                                                                                                       2.8
                                        2.5
                                              01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
                                  1.
                                       Source: Central Bank of Brazil; World Bank staff calculations


Amid the recent slowdown, the question has arisen whether Brazil’s underlying growth
capacity has declined (Figure 57). Despite cyclical weakness, inflation has approached the
upper levels of the inflation target range. The elevated inflation rate in combination with a
buoyant labor market suggests the economy is operating close to potential, even if the growth
rate currently is well below what it has typically been over the last few years. Market participants


                                                                                                                                                  71
have interpreted this development as indicating that Brazil’s underlying growth capacity has
declined. Since 2012, growth forecasts of medium-term growth have progressively deteriorated,
reflecting increasing pessimism of the median forecaster about potential growth (assuming that
output at these horizons remains at potential). Whereas median growth forecasts two years out
were between 4 and 4.5 percent in the beginning of 2012, these declined significantly to under 3
percent by 2014.

The need of increasing productivity growth has become more pressing, particularly in light
of changing demographics. The growth of Brazil’s working-age population has seen a steady
decline over the last decade (reaching about 1.2 percent from earlier high levels of 3 percent in
the 1970s) and the expected continuation of this decline is reducing the demographic growth
dividend that Brazil had enjoyed previously. Similarly, much of the growth contribution arising
from a rising participation of the working-age population in the labor force has already occurred
(approaching 80 percent from previously low levels around 55 percent in the 1970s). Given these
demographic factors, generating growth will require additional emphasis to raise labor
productivity growth. This would among other factors require accelerating the rate of capital
accumulation (both human and physical) as well as improving the overall efficiency with which
inputs are combined – i.e. strengthening total factor productivity.

B. Structural Reform: The Unfinished Agenda

While significant progress has been made in various areas, the structural reform agenda
remains unfinished. In addition to the macroeconomic reforms that contributed to macro
stabilization, Brazil liberalized significant parts of the economy during the 1990s. External trade
was liberalized further through tariff and non-tariff reductions, and domestic liberalization
occurred through privatization and the institution of independent regulatory agencies. Social
programs were reformed by expanding coverage of healthcare and education. During the 2000s,
Brazil’s reform momentum continued, particularly in the financial and social sectors. However,
important bottlenecks continue to exist, particularly in labor markets and the tax systems and the
structural reform process may have lost some of its momentum as the urgency of addressing
difficult supply-side issues lessened in the wake of buoyant consumption, an external commodity
boom and an international environment of low global interest rates (Table 9; Ter-Minassian,
2012). With growth slower now and the external environment more competitive, the urgency to
press ahead with the reform agenda has increased.




72
Table 9. Brazil has improved the investment climate, but important challenges remain

Country rankings (1-144)

                        Brazil's Global Competitiveness Index: Total Ranking 48 in 2012/13 (66 in 2006/07)

                                       73                                             38      Innovation and                39
 Basic requirements                             Efficiency enhancers
                                      (84)                                           (51)     sophistication               (36)

 Primary education                    106       Competition                          133      Innovation                   49
                                                Quality of higher education and
 Public institutions                  80                                             108      Business sophistication      33
                                                training
 Transport infrastructure             79        Labor market flexibility             105
                                                Quantity of higher education and
 Health                               75                                             64
                                                training
 Electricity and telephony
                                      63        ICT use                              54
 infrastructure
                                                Financial market trustworthiness
 Private institutions                 62                                             51
                                                and confidence
 Macroeconomic
                                      62        Quality of demand conditions         46
 environment
                                                Efficient use of talent              46
                                                Technological adoption               43
                                                Financial market efficiency          38
                                                On-the-job training                  32
                                                Foreign market size                  24
                                                Domestic market size                  7

                               Brazil’s Global Competitiveness Index: Subcategories with Rankings > 99

 Basic requirements                             Efficiency enhancement                        Innovation and sophistication

 Burden of government                                                                         Availability of scientists
                                    144         Extent and effect of taxation       144                                    113
 regulation                                                                                   and engineers
 Wastefulness of
                                    135         Imports as a percentage of GDP      144
 government spending
 Quality of port
                                    135         Exports as a percentage of GDP      140
 infrastructure
 Quality of air transport
                                    134         No. days to start a business        139
 infrastructure
 Quality of primary                             Quality of math and science
                                    126                                             132
 education                                      education
 Quality of roads                   123         Total tax rate, %                   131
 Business costs of crime                        No. procedures to start a
                                    122                                             130
 and violence                                   business
 Organized crime                    122         Burden of customs procedures        129

 Diversion of public funds          121         Trade tariffs, %                    123

 Public trust in politicians        121         Flexibility of wage determination   118
 General government                             Legal rights index (financial
                                    109                                             118
 debt, %                                        market development)
 Quality of overall                             Quality of education system
                                    107                                             116
 infrastructure                                 (higher education and training)
 Quality of railroad
                                    100         Hiring and firing practices         114
 infrastructure
 Malaria cases/100,000
                                    100         Prevalence of trade barriers        103
 pop.

Source: World Economic Forum (2012).




                                                                                                                                  73
A key objective is to re-energize growth through faster productivity improvements. Raising
the rate of labor productivity growth – the main driver of long-term economic growth – will be
key in this respect. Labor market reforms to promote flexibility and lower the structural rate of
unemployment would not only produce transitory gains in growth momentum, but also enhance
productivity by strengthening efficiency in labor market allocation. In addition, while Brazil has
made tremendous progress in improving the access and quality of human capital, more remains
to be done to bring the skills base in line with the goal of accelerated long-term growth (Figure
58). There is scope to further increase the average length of schooling (which now stands at
about 7.25 years) as well as the quality of education, which will help raise living standards and
productivity growth. In addition, there is a need to raise public and private investment, to address
growing infrastructure bottlenecks and lay the foundations for innovation-led growth. Further
key challenges relate to the importance of developing a private long-term capital market and a
more agile business environment that enhances internal competition and external
competitiveness.
                            Figure 58. Human capital per person has improved
                            significantly but remains comparatively low
                            Index of human capital per person, based on years of schooling
                            and returns to education
                             4.0



                            3.0



                            2.0


                                                                              Brazil
                            1.0                                               China
                                                                              Japan
                                                                              South Korea
                                                                              United States
                            0.0
                               1950     1960       1970    1980     1990       2000     2010
                            Source: Penn World Tables version 8.0; Feenstra, Inklaar and
                            Timmer (2013); Barro and Lee (2012); Psacharopoulos (1994);
                            World Bank staff calculations.


The Brazilian authorities have launched several efforts to raise productivity. The Plano
Brasil Maior (2011-2014) by the Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade (MDIC) aims to
boost the competitiveness of the Brazilian economy by tackling cross-cutting bottlenecks as well
as providing sector-specific support. The plan aims to reduce business costs, accelerate
productivity growth and strengthen Brazil’s external competitiveness in the global marketplace.
In addition, recent initiatives were launched to stimulate private investment in infrastructure and
to reduce electricity costs. The plan demonstrates the authorities’ increased emphasis on (i)
boosting investment (in addition to consumption) as a means for accelerating the economic
recovery, (ii) strengthening the foundations for sustained medium-term growth (not just the
short-term recovery) and (iii) enhancing private sector participation in infrastructure
development, complementing the limited fiscal space for rapidly expanding public investment.




74
                      II. SCOPE FOR ENHANCING GLOBAL INTEGRATION

With growth having slowed, the question of how Brazil could position itself to a changing
external environment has become more pertinent than before. Brazil will likely remain an
economy propelled mainly by its internal market. At the same time, the growth acceleration
during the 2004-2008 and subsequent deceleration were not just related to internal factors but
also to external ones. Chinese economic developments played a nontrivial role. Going forward,
as China undergoes structural change, new opportunities will avail themselves. It is clear that the
way in which Brazil responds to these will have implications that go beyond the confines of the
Brazil-China relationship. For example, to the extent that heightened competition from China in
high-end manufacturing fuels innovation effort in Brazil, this would not only benefit Brazil’s
external competitiveness with respect to China and other countries but also infuse productivity
improvement into the domestic growth dynamic.

The real significance of Brazil’s changing linkages with China is the extent to which the
evolving connections contribute to transforming the supply side of the Brazilian economy.
The boom period of 2004-2008 occurred against the backdrop of favorable demand-side
pressures, which originated both domestically and externally and led to an acceleration of
headline growth. Once the tailwinds started to recede, however, Brazil registered a significant
growth deceleration and, as mentioned earlier, concerns have arisen about whether the
underlying trend growth of the Brazilian economy has indeed declined. In other words, to the
extent that the windfalls of the boom years contributed predominantly to the expansion of
domestic consumption as opposed to investment, the result has been a pick-up in headline
growth but not in the capacity of the economy to deliver more rapid growth on a sustained basis
and in a non-inflationary manner. Looking ahead, the transformations anticipated in China are
expected to play out in Brazil’s favor to a large extent, generating therefore a new window of
opportunity to leverage on the external connections and enhance underlying growth.

But is there additional scope for Brazil to leverage on its external environment and in
particular on its connections with China? The evolving links with China have sparked a
discussion in Brazil about the extent and nature of the dependence of the economy on external
demand, particularly from China. Three questions in particular have arisen: (i) Have growing
connections with China made Brazil’s economic structure too outward oriented?, (ii) Has the
trade with China made Brazil’s trade structure too concentrated in terms of products or markets
and (iii) Has the trade with China caused Brazilian trade to be primarized and has this reflected
negatively on the future opportunities for growth? These questions will be addressed in turn.

A. Has Trade with China Made Brazil Too Outward Oriented?

One key question is whether Brazil should slow the pace of global integration or rather
should step it up in new areas. China, with other developing countries, is expected to continue
growing twice or three times as fast as high-income countries (Table 3). More than ever before
the developing world will present opportunities for mutually beneficial exchanges in the areas of
trade, investment and cooperation. As the discussion below will suggest, Brazil’s trade openness
remains low in international perspective. There is scope for more participation in cross-border
production networks and broader participation by firms in external trade.


                                                                                                75
Brazil’s Trade Openness Remains Relatively Low

While large economies tend to rely more on the domestic market, even among large
economies Brazil stands out in terms of its low share of external trade in GDP. Brazil’s
share of exports in GDP was merely 12 percent, compared to (simple) average of 28 percent for
the world’s 9 other largest economies as well as for the other BRICs. The import share in GDP
stood at 13 percent in 2011, compared to an average of 28 percent for the 9 other largest
economies and 26 percent for the other BRICs. Thus, while larger economies tend to be more
dependent on their domestic markets, even when compared to the 9 largest economies and the
other BRICs, Brazil is an economy that is rather closed as measured by the importance of
external trade in GDP.
 Figure 59. Among the world’s largest economies                       Figure 60. Brazil also ranks the lowest in terms of its
 (including BRICs), Brazil ranks lowest on export share               import share
 Share of exports in GDP, in 2011 (percent)                           Share of imports in GDP, in 2011 (percent)
     Germany                                                     50       Germany                                                  45
           UK                                       32                          UK                                            34
       Mexico                                       32                      Mexico                                            33
        China                                      31                       France                                       30
 Russian Fed.                                      30                         India                                      30
       France                                 27                             China                                  27
         India                           24                           Russian Fed.                             22
        Japan                     15                                            US                        18
           US                  14                                            Japan                       16
        Brazil               12                                              Brazil                 13
                0        10        20         30    40      50                       0        10        20          30    40      50
 Source: WDI; World Bank staff calculations.                          Source: WDI; World Bank staff calculations.
 Note: Largest 10 economies were chosen in terms of 2011 GDP          Note: Largest 10 economies were chosen in terms of 2011 GDP
 (PPP-adjusted current international dollars).                        (PPP-adjusted current international dollars).


Brazil’s Connections to Global Production Networks Are Limited

Brazil’s low trade openness is partly explained by the extent and nature of its connections
to global production networks. Brazil does not appear to be as connected to global production
networks as other countries particularly in East and South East Asia (Canuto, Cavallari and Reis,
2013). There are certainly important exceptions, such as Brazil’s aircraft industry which, more
than any other industry, relies on the global sourcing of parts and components and due to the
still-limited scale of Brazil’s domestic market for this product needs to orient itself outwardly to
access a larger customer base. In other activities, Brazil is integrated into global production
networks, but plays an upstream role – such as in the case of the commodities trade – where the
scope for parts and components trade is more limited.




76
                      Figure 61. Compared to China, Brazil adds lots of domestic
                      value to total exports
                      Share of total domestic value added in exports (percent)
                          Russian Fed.
                       Rest of the World
                                    Brazil
                          United States
                                Australia
                                 Norway
                               Indonesia
                                    Japan
                            South Africa
                                      Chile
                          New Zealand
                                 Canada
                                   Turkey
                                      India
                                    China
                                  Mexico
                                        EU
                                     Israel
                                  Iceland
                                    Korea
                                      0        20      40      60       80      100
                      Source: OECD Trade in Value-Added Database; World Bank staff calculations.


Rather than tapping into cross-border supply chains, Brazil has predominantly relied on
developing vertically integrated industries within its national borders. This approach was
advocated as Brazil industrialized its economy and relied on import substitution to initiate
virtuous cycles of backward and forward linkages that would help the country in creating value-
added through competitive industrial clusters. While the import substitution industrialization
approach yielded mixed results and resulted in some distortions, it did also produce considerable
growth and industrial diversification. However, because of the vertical integration of many of its
industries, Brazil’s participation in cross-border production network has been limited (except
perhaps for the regional supply chains for the car industry).

The relative lack of cross-border integration is noticeable in the large share of domestic
value-added in Brazil’s exports. Compared to other countries, Brazil’s exports contain a lot of
domestic value. This partly derives from the nature of Brazil’s exports, as commodity-based
exports such as iron ore and soybeans naturally have higher value added. Within the
manufacturing sectors, Brazil’s value-added export ratio is also higher than in other countries.
This is particularly so for food products, beverages and tobacco; transport equipment;
manufacturing and recycling; and machinery and other equipment. In comparison, China adds
much less domestic value in all of these industries. Thus, while one avenue for Brazil to enhance
trade openness will be to participate more fully in cross-border production networks, this is
likely to lead to lower levels of vertical specialization and domestic value-added on the one hand
but may contribute to greater productivity and scale on the other hand.




                                                                                                   77
 Figure 62. Considering just manufacturing, the same results holds true
 Share of total domestic value added in exports (percent)

                   Food products, beverages and tobacco                                          Transport equipment

         Brazil                                                                   Brazil
     Indonesia                                                                    Japan
         Japan                                                                Indonesia
      Australia                                                           United States
 United States                                                                 Australia
        Turkey                                                                     Israel
  South Africa                                                                   Turkey
        Mexico                                                                    China
 New Zealand                                                                        Chile
          Israel                                                                Norway
       Canada                                                                    Mexico
         China                                                                    Korea
       Norway                                                             New Zealand
           Chile                                                                      EU
             EU                                                                 Canada
         Korea                                                             South Africa
              0         20       40          60        80      100                      0        20       40        60        80        100
        Manufacturing (not elsewhere classified) and recycling                     Machinery and equipment (not elsewhere classified)

         Brazil                                                                   Brazil
 United States                                                                    Japan
     Indonesia                                                            United States
         Japan                                                            New Zealand
       Norway                                                                    Turkey
      Australia                                                                Australia
  South Africa                                                                  Norway
         China
                                                                                  China
 New Zealand
                                                                                Canada
           Chile
       Canada                                                                     Korea
        Turkey                                                                     Israel
             EU                                                                       EU
         Korea                                                                   Mexico
        Mexico                                                                      Chile
          Israel                                                              Indonesia
                   0       20       40        60          80   100                          0     20       40        60        80       100

 Source: OECD Trade in Value-Added Database; World Bank staff calculations.


Firm-Level Participation in External Trade Remains Low and Uneven

Based on a new database of exporter dynamics, it is possible to compare the participation
of Brazilian firms involved in export activities internationally. The Exporter Dynamics
Database is the first database providing measures of exporter characteristics and dynamics across
45 countries across all geographic regions and income levels. The Exporter Dynamics Database
contains close to 100 measures covering the basic characteristics of exporters, their distribution
by size, the diversification in their products and markets, their dynamics in terms of entry, exit
and survival, and the average unit prices of the goods they export (Cebeci et al, 2012).

International comparison suggests that export participation among firms is low, with low
entry rates and high survival rates. Given its per capita income level, Brazil stands out as
having a relatively low number of exporting firms per capita, a result which carries through
during both the 2001-05 and 2006-10 periods. For a given number of firms that export, the entry
rate is relatively low. Interestingly, Brazil has about the same number of export firms as Norway,
but has a markedly lower rate of new entrants into the export business. While this could be
explained by factors of economic geography, it does suggest that the export sector shows less
dynamism. While the entry rate is low, the survival rate is relatively high. While it is therefore
less likely for new firms to enter the export business in Brazil, it is more likely that once they do
they continue to export in the years that follow.

78
The low entry rate of exporters in Brazil is a cause for concern. Studies in other contexts,
such as Clerides, Lach and Tybout (1998) for Colombia, Mexico and Morocco and Bernard and
Jensen (1999) for the United States, show that new exporters are on average more efficient than
firms that do not export. Low entry rates can be attributed to low productivity at the firm level
and/or high costs to export. This is an area that requires further analysis to guide policy actions
(Canuto, Cavallari and Reis, 2013).

Brazilian firms are more dynamic with respect to China as importers rather than
exporters. While the number of Brazilian firms that export to and import from China has risen
steadily over the period 2001-2011, the increase in the number of importing firms has been much
more rapid than that of the number of exporters. Among the Brazilian firms that import
worldwide, more than half imported from China by 2011. This contrasts with Brazilian firms that
export worldwide, of which only a tenth exported to China.

Brazilian exporters to China have registered lower entry and survival rates than those who
import from China. The reason thus why growth in the number of exporters to China has been
more muted than what happened on the import side is a combination of two factors. First, the
export entry rate has been much lower than the import entry rate, with exception of the initial
period prior to 2004. Second, those that import from China are more likely to remain importers
than those that export.

Brazilian firms’ trade with China is characterized by average export values per firm
greatly exceeding average import values. This is consistent with the observation that fewer
firms are exporting than importing, while both aggregate export and import values have
increased significantly. This result is despite the fact that an increasing number of the largest
exporting firms are also importing from China.




                                                                                                79
Figure 63. Compared to the rest of the world, Brazil stands out as having a relatively concentrated export base,
characterized by low entry and relatively high survival rates.

Exporters per capita versus GDP per capita: 2001-05                                                   Exporters per capita versus GDP per capita: 2006-10
Ln number of exporters per capita                                                                     Ln number of exporters per capita
 -4.0
                                                                                                       -4
  -5.0
                                                                                     SWE
                                                                 EST        NZL                        -5
  -6.0                                                            BGR                      NOR
                                                              MUS           ESP                                                                                                              EST
                                                             MKD
                                                                                     PRT                                                                                     MUS                   ESP SWE
                                                                                                       -6                                                                   BGR
  -7.0                                                        BWA
                                                             SLV
                                                                                                                                                                      LBN MKD                             KWT
                                                                                                                                                                       BWA
                                                                      CHL                              -7
                                                 JOR                                                                                                                 CRI
  -8.0                                          DOM
                                              NIC             CRI         MEX
                                                                                                                                                            JOR                    CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                 TUR
                                                             PER                                       -8                                                     SLV
                                                                                                                                                             DOM                   MEX
  -9.0                                                              BRA                                                                                  GTM               COL
                                      PAKMAR                                                                                  KEN
                                                                                                                                                            ECU              IRN
                                      CMR                                                              -9                                                  MAR
                        SEN                                                                                                                                                  BRA
 -10.0                          KHM                                                                                                 KHM
                                                                                                                                                CMR
                      BFA                                                                                             MWI             LAO
               MLI    BGD                                                                             -10                         BFA
 -11.0                                                                                                               MLI
                                                                                                                                   BGD             YEM
                                                                                                      -11         NER
 -12.0
           6           7                     8          9                       10               11   -12
                                              ln GDP per capita                                              6                    7               8           9                          10                11
                                                                                                                                             ln GDP per capita
Entry rate versus total number of exporters: 2001-05                                                  Entry rate versus total number of exporters: 2006-10
Entry rate                                                                                            Entry rate
0.6                                                                                                   0.6
                                      UGA

                                                                                                                                          MWI                     KWT
                                                                                                                                                   CMR
 0.5                           CMR
                                                                                                      0.5             NER
                                             BWA                          BGR                                                     LAO                    TZA
                                                                                                                                          BFA                  EST
                                     TZA           DOM                                                                      MLI                    DOM          IRN
                       SEN                                    PER                                                                               BWA                                                       ESP
                                 JOR                                                                                                                ECU KEN
 0.4                                               MKD                NOR
                                                                                  MEX                 0.4                                                                          BGR
                                                                                                                                                     JOR
                                 NIC             CRI                                                                                                     LBNMKD CHL
                                                                PAK                                                                   KHM         ALB
                     KHM                               SLV                ZAF        TUR                                                                                                       MEX
                                       ALB                                                                                                                            MAR
                                                                                                                                                               MUS
                                                 GTM          NZL                                                                                                                                   TUR
 0.3                                                                                                  0.3                                                      GTM
                                             MUS                                  SWE                                                                 CRI                  COL
                                                                    PRT                                                                                                                  SWE
                                                         EST
                                                                          BRA
                                                                                                                                                                      BGD         BRA

 0.2                                                                                                  0.2
       4                   6                8              10                                    12         4                         6                8              10                                     12
                               Ln total number of exporters                                                                               Ln total number of exporters

Survival versus entry rate of new exporters: 2001-05                                                  Survival versus entry rate of new exporters: 2006-10
Survival rate                                                                                         Survival rate

 0.6                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                            BGD             KHM
                                PAK        TUR                                                                  BRA                          TUR
                                                                                                                             EGY
                     BRA                                                                                                                           JOR
 0.5                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                        CRI                                                      LAO
                      NZL                   MKD                                                                                           MUS           MLI BFA
                                      JOR     PER                         BWA                                                                   ALB MKD
                         MUS ZAF    CRI                                                                                                     MAR
                     PRT    KHM    NIC MEX
 0.4                                        TZA                                                       0.4                                          BWA
                                                                                                                                               MEXECU
                                                                                                                                                       DOM
                      GTM
                         SWE      SLVNORSEN                                                                                           COL
                                                                                                                                       GTMLBN
                                                                                                                                                           IRN
                      EST       ALB
                                               DOM                                         UGA                                                    CHL
                                                                                                                                                KEN
                                                                                                                                                               ESP
                                                               CMRBGR
 0.3                                                                                                  0.3                                                                   EST        TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                         MWI
                                                                                                                                                                            NER          CMR

 0.2                                                                                                  0.2
       0.2             0.3                      0.4                       0.5                0.6            0.2                       0.3                   0.4                    0.5                     0.6
                                             Entry rate                                                                                               Entry rate


Source: World Bank Exporter Dynamics Database; World Bank staff calculations.




80
Figure 64. Brazilian firms that import from China have                    Figure 65. Half of all importers import from China,
multiplied compared to those that export                                  whereas only a tenth of exporters export to China
Number of Brazilian firms trading with China                              Share of firms that trade with China
25,000                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                   Export
                    Exporting firms
                                                                          0.5                      Import
20,000
                    Importing firms
                                                                          0.4
15,000
                                                                          0.3
10,000
                                                                          0.2

 5,000
                                                                          0.1

      0                                                                   0.0
         2001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10                          11            2002 03       04     05    06   07     08    09    10   11
Source: Brazilian Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade             Source: Brazilian Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade
(MDIC); World Bank staff calculations.                                    (MDIC); World Bank Exporter Dynamics Database; World Bank staff
                                                                          calculations.

Figure 66. Following 2003, the import entry rate                          Figure 67. The import survival rate has trended up
exceeded the export entry rate                                            whereas the export survival rate trended down
Entry rates of new Brazilian firms exporting to or importing from China   Survival rate of Brazilian firms exporting to or importing from China
(percent)                                                                 (percent)
70                                                                        60

60
                                                                          50
50
                                                                          40
40
                                                                          30
30

                                                                          20                                      Export survival rate
20                                       Export entry rate
                                                                                                                  Import survival rate
10                                       Import entry rate                10

 0                                                                         0
     2002 03       04      05    06    07    08    09    10   11               2003 04         05       06    07    08     09     10    11
Source: Brazilian Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade             Source: Brazilian Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade
(MDIC); World Bank staff calculations.                                    (MDIC); World Bank staff calculations.

Figure 68. Average export values per firm are much                        Figure 69. Some 60 percent of Brazil’s top exporters
higher than average import values                                         import from China

Average value of trade with China per Brazilian firm (thousands of US     Share of Brazil’s top 250 exporters worldwide that import from China
dollars)                                                                  (percent)
                                                                           70
25,000
                          Average export value
                                                                          60
20,000                    Average import value
                                                                          50

15,000                                                                    40

                                                                          30
10,000
                                                                          20
 5,000
                                                                          10

      0                                                                    0
         2001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10                          11           2001 02      03     04    05   06   07    08    09    10      11
Source: Brazilian Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade             Source: Brazilian Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade
(MDIC); UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                       (MDIC); World Bank staff calculations.




                                                                                                                                                  81
B. Has Brazil’s Trade Structure Become Too Concentrated?

A second question that is prominent in the discussion on Brazil-China linkages is whether
Brazil has become too dependent on China. This question arises in the context of an evolving
relationship that has through its multiple facets manifested itself in various demand-side
impulses and supply-side pressures. On the export side, the concern is that increased exposure to
China has raised the vulnerability of Brazil to a potential Chinese slowdown. On the import side,
the concern relates to the proliferation of Chinese imports in the domestic market in Brazil. In
what follows, both of these questions will be addressed by analyzing the developments in market
and product concentration of Brazil’s trade flows with China and the world and also comparing
these with indicators on the relationship between China and its trading partners.

This report suggests as a response to this question that Brazil remains highly diversified in
terms of markets and products. Indeed, it is thanks to the rising trade with China that market
diversification has increased. As a result, Brazil has become one of the most market-diversified
economies in the world. On the product side, while the trade with China is highly concentrated in
commodities, Brazil’s overall export bundle remains highly diversified.

Market Diversification Has Improved Thanks to Rising Trade with China

Although Brazil remains a relatively closed economy, it trades with a diversified range of
overseas partner. 18 The stronger trade relationship with China helped promote market
diversification of imports and exports. As shown in Figure 19 and Figure 20, the rapidly growing
trade between Brazil and China diminished the relative importance of its traditional high-income
trading partners – the EU and the US – in total exports and imports, while the share of its Latin
American trading partners remained roughly unchanged. This has resulted in a more balanced
export and import structure, reducing as a result the extent to which trade is concentrated with
respect to markets.
                                    Figure 70. Rising trade with China made Brazil more
                                    diversified in export and import markets
                                    Herdindahl-Hirschman index of concentration (squared formulation)
                                     0.11               Export market concentration
                                                        Import market concentration
                                     0.10

                                     0.09

                                     0.08

                                     0.07

                                     0.06

                                     0.05

                                     0.04
                                         91    93     95   97    99    01   03    05    07    09   11
                                    Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
                                    Note: A higher index corresponds to higher concentration.




     18
          See Technical Appendix for a formal presentation of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of market concentration.

82
Brazil has become one of the most market-diversified exporters in the world. Brazil was in
fact already a rather diversified economy before the growth in bilateral trade with China
occurred. However, after China established itself as a major trading partner, Brazil’s export and
import structure became even more diversified. The China trade turned Brazil into one of the
most diversified economies in the world in terms of markets. In this respect, Brazil and China
exhibit similarity as they are both more highly diversified in terms of both export and import
markets than the world average. Interestingly, Brazil is slightly more diversified in terms of
export markets, whereas China is somewhat more diversified in terms of import markets.
 Figure 71. Export destination concentration compared                   Figure 72. Import source concentration compared
 Herfindahl-Hirschman index of export destination concentration, 2011   Herfindahl-Hirschman index of import sources concentration, 2011
 (square root formulation)                                              (square root formulation)
  1.0                                                                    1.0

  0.8                                                                    0.8

  0.6                                                                    0.6

  0.4                                                                    0.4

                       China           Brazil
  0.2                                                                    0.2
                                                                                              China          Brazil


  0.0                                                                    0.0
        1                      10                         100                  1                      10                         100
                 GDP per capita (current USD in thousands, logs)                        GDP per capita (current USD in thousands, logs)
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                    Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.



While increased diversification lessens the vulnerability to shocks in overseas markets, this
benefit should not be overestimated. Brazil’s expansion of the trade with China provided some
resilience recently when demand from high-income economies turned sluggish. While these
benefits exist, they should not be overstated. First, a significant share of China’s import demand
relates through the processing trade to final demand in high-income economies. Viewed from
this angle, the importance of Brazil’s traditional trading partners continues to exceed that of
China, even though China is catching up quickly in the value-added trade as it develops its own
domestic market (Figure 22). Second, given the scale and connectivity of the Chinese economy,
the vulnerability of Brazil to a slowdown is raised through the ripple effects that could be
transmitted onto third markets. Such correlated risks would diminish the benefits of market
diversification.

In sum, Brazil does not appear to have a ‘market concentration problem’ as a result of the
rise of the Brazil-China trade relationship. To the contrary, trade with China has allowed
Brazil to develop a more diversified interaction with the world in terms of its export destinations
and import origins. Whether the contribution of China to higher market diversification in Brazil
has also reduced Brazil’s trade vulnerability remains to be seen. In any case, the impact on
Brazil’s overall economy is mitigated not only by market diversification but also by the low
share of external trade in the economy as a whole.




                                                                                                                                           83
Product Diversification Remains High, With Asymmetry in Trade with China

Brazil’s trade structure is highly diversified in terms of the range of products it exchanges
with the rest of the world. 19 Brazil is in fact more diversified on both the export and the import
side than countries with a similar per capita income level. China is also highly diversified on the
product side, especially in terms of exports where it stands out as one of the most diversified
exporters in the world. On the import side, while China is less diversified than Brazil, it is
nevertheless not more concentrated than other countries at similar per capita income levels.
 Figure 73. Brazil is well diversified in its export                     Figure 74. Brazil is also well diversified in its import
 products to the world                                                   products from the world
 Export product concentration (total exports), Herfindahl-               Import product concentration (total imports), Herfindahl-
 Hirschman index of concentration, 2011 (square root formulation)        Hirschman index of concentration, 2011 (square root formulation)
     1.0                                                                   1.0


     0.8                                                                   0.8


     0.6                                                                   0.6


     0.4                                                                   0.4

                                                                                                 China
     0.2                                                                   0.2
                         China
                                       Brazil                                                                  Brazil
     0.0                                                                   0.0
            1                  10                         100                    1                     10                         100
                 GDP per capita (current USD in thousands, logs)                       GDP per capita (current USD in thousands, logs)
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                     Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.


 Figure 75. Export product concentration to China is                     Figure 76. As elsewhere around the world, Brazil
 high, but this is not unique to Brazil                                  imports a diversified range of products from China
 Export product concentration (exports to China), Herfindahl-            Import product concentration (imports from China), Herfindahl-
 Hirschman index of concentration, 2011 (square root formulation)        Hirschman index of concentration, 2011 (square root formulation)
     1.0                                                                   1.0

     0.8                                                                   0.8

     0.6                                                                   0.6
                                        Brazil


     0.4                                                                   0.4

     0.2                                                                   0.2

                                                                                                                Brazil
     0.0                                                                   0.0
            1                  10                         100                    1                      10                         100
                 GDP per capita (current USD in thousands, logs)                       GDP per capita (current USD in thousands, logs)
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                     Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.




       19
            See Technical Appendix discussion and formal presentation of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of product concentration.

84
Brazil’s trade with China exhibits an asymmetry between a high degree of product
concentration on the export side and a low degree on the import side. Brazil’s exports to
China are much more product-concentrated than those to the world. In contrast, Brazil’s imports
from China however, are even more diversified than Brazil’s imports from the wo rld. China has
thus permeated the Brazilian domestic market with a broad spectrum of products.

The asymmetry in the trade relationship with China is, however, not unique to Brazil and,
in fact, is quite moderate in international comparison. Brazil is less diversified in its entire
export bundle to China than to the rest of the world, while imports are significantly more
diversified. However, this phenomenon is not unique to Brazil. Other countries are having the
same experience with China. An international comparison shows export products being more
heavily concentrated to China than imports from China. Nearly all countries in the world
maintain a diversified import basket from China and a concentrated export basket to China. In
fact, Brazil is slightly more diversified on both accounts than other countries given its income
level.


 Figure 77. Brazil’s top five export products to China            Figure 78. Brazil’s top five export products to the world
 represent 80 percent of total exports to China                   represent a much smaller share
 Share of top five products in total exports to China (percent)   Share of top five products in total exports to the world (percent)
                                                                  100
 100        Raw cane sugar                                                      Raw cane sugar
            Iron ores (aggl.)
                                                                   80          Iron ores (aggl.)
  80        Petroleum oils
                                                                               Petroleum oils
            Soya beans
                                                                   60          Soya beans
  60        Iron ores (non-aggl.)
                                                                               Iron ores (non-aggl.)

  40                                                               40


  20                                                               20


    0                                                                0
             1991                2001                      2011               1991                2001                       2011
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.              Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.



In the case of Brazil, the high degree of export product concentration is accounted for by
five commodity products. The top five products accounted for over 80 percent of Brazil’s
exports to China in 2011. All of these were commodity-related: non-agglomerated iron ores and
concentrates (41 percent), soybeans (25 percent), and petroleum oils (11 percent), agglomerated
iron ores and concentrates (4 percent), and raw cane sugar (3 percent). To the world, together
these five products account for 35 percent of exports. Comparing 2001 with 2011, the
concentration ratios for Brazil’s top five export products have risen significantly, both with
respect to China and the world. In contrast, the top five products imported by Brazil from China
comprise only 15 percent of overall imports from China – and just 12 percent when considering
the world’s total imports from China (not shown in chart). These top five import products were
all machinery or electrical equipment.




                                                                                                                                       85
 Figure 79. Brazil’s export product mix remains very                    Figure 80. Trade with China has made Brazil’s overall
 diversified despite trade with China                                   import product mix even less concentrated
 Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HS 6-digit products, squared               Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HS 6-digit products, squared
 formulation)                                                           formulation)

          World                                                                 World
                                                       1991                                                                 1991
           USA                                         2001                      USA                                        2001

                                                       2011                                                                 2011
          EU27                                                                  EU27


          China                                                                 China


     Argentina                                                             Argentina

            0.00     0.05     0.10       0.15        0.20        0.25              0.00     0.05     0.10       0.15        0.20        0.25
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                    Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.



 Figure 81. Both Brazil and China trade with the world a                Figure 82. In terms of the trade between them, however,
 very broad spectrum of products                                        there is an asymmetry
 Number of products traded at 6-digit HS level                          Number of products traded at 6-digit HS level
 5000                                                                   5000

                                                                                               Maximum
 4000                                                                   4000
                                                                                               Exports China to Brazil
                                                                                               Exports Brazil to China
 3000                                                                   3000
                                 Maximum
                                 Exports China to world
 2000                                                                   2000
                                 Imports China from world
                                 Exports Brazil to world
 1000                            Imports Brazil from world              1000


      0                                                                     0
        88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06                       08   10            88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06                       08   10
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                    Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.



This contrast in product concentration of trade embodies an asymmetry that also stands
out when comparing Brazil’s trade across major trading partners. When considering an
index of product concentration, exports to China have becoming exceedingly concentrated over
the past twenty years while imports from China have become extremely diversified. Whereas
trade with China has increased Brazil’s diversification of export markets, it has increased
Brazil’s concentration of export products. On the import side, however, an increase in
diversification is observed both in terms of markets and products.

Although China has contributed to rising product concentration, Brazil’s overall well-
diversified export structure somewhat dampens the exposure to Chinese commodity
demand. Exports are far less concentrated to other export destinations than to China. On average
over the last decade, Brazil’s top five exports to the European Union accounted for 34 percent of
total exports, to the United States 24 percent, and to MERCOSUR 15 percent. 20 Thus, the

     20
          See the Appendix for a list of top export products to each destination based on their average share between 1997 and
2011.

86
increased concentration of exports to China is somewhat offset by a more diversified export
portfolio elsewhere, which should help dampen somewhat the vulnerability to a near-term
sudden slowdown in Chinese demand. Yet, to the extent that commodities are correlated, the
impact would be expected to be larger. On the flipside, Brazil is also expected to be significantly
exposed to the longer-term structural developments in China which, as argued before, are
expected to impart a positive impact.

The asymmetric trade relationship also becomes apparent when comparing the number of
products Brazil and China trade with each other as opposed to the world. Both Brazil and
China trade with the world a very broad range of products, which attests to the diversified nature
of their tradable sectors. However, when it comes to the bilateral trade between Brazil and
China, a striking asymmetry pops up in terms of the broad range of products China exports to
Brazil and the narrow range Brazil exports to China.

The asymmetry is apparent in a broad range of product categories which Brazil exports to
the world but not to China (see Appendix). As elsewhere in the world, China is present in
nearly everything that is imported by Brazil but especially in manufacturing. Although Brazil
could be importing the same product from different countries, the analysis suggests there is
likely some substitution across import destinations as the total number of imports in these
categories has changed little. In addition, even within primary products and resource-based
manufacturing, the number of exports to China is limited compared to what is exported to the
rest of the world.

The asymmetrical structure of the Brazil-China trade relationship points to opportunities
for further bilateral diversification. While the finding of asymmetrical breadth is consistent
with the earlier analysis of product concentration, it also suggests that for both countries,
although especially for Brazil, there appears to be a significant gap in the number of products
that could potentially be traded. This then leads to the question whether trade policies have
affected the patterns of trade in accentuating the existing asymmetry.

C. Has Brazil Become Too Specialized in Commodities?

A third question is whether the Brazilian economy is too strongly oriented towards
commodities. The simultaneously similar and complementary relationship between the two
countries seems to have contributed to such a direction, as the commodity sector seems to have
benefited to a greater extent from the rise of China through both volume and price effects,
whereas the manufacturing sector has visibly suffered from heightened competition in domestic
and third markets. This development has sparked concerns about the respective contribution of
commodities and manufacturing to economic growth and development. It has also led to
concerns about de-industrialization in Brazil and its assumed consequences for the country’s
capacity to continue climbing up the income ladder through sustained and inclusive growth.




                                                                                                87
The response to this question is that while Brazil has become more oriented towards
commodities, this is not a reason for concern per se. Measures of export ‘sophistication’,
which reflect export similarity with higher-income countries, suggest declining sophistication
both with respect to Brazil’s overall export bundle and manufactured exports. As will be
discussed below, however, what matters more for development than sophistication is
productivity and as long as the development of the commodity sector – in which Brazil has a
well-established comparative advantage – does not come at the expense of other sectors, the
pursuit of natural resource wealth could impart an overall positive contribution to growth and
development.

The Overall Sophistication of Brazil’s Export Bundle Has Declined

One way to address this question is to examine how the product sophistication of Brazil’s
external trade has evolved. While sophistication may convey different meanings in different
contexts, here it refers to the similarity of a country’s export (or imports) bundle to what is
typically exported by (imported from) higher-income countries.21 Thus, if a country exports a
high share of high-technology products, these products are considered sophisticated not because
they are high-technology per se but because high-income countries tend to be more likely to
produce and export them. The presumption therefore is that commodity exports are less
sophisticated in the sense that they are less frequently exported by high-income countries, from
which it then is inferred that too strong a reliance on ‘unsophisticated’ products may hamper a
country’s efforts to develop into a high-income economy.

Brazil’s exports to China are less sophisticated than those exported to other destinations, as
they bear less resemblance to what high-income countries typically export. The United
States and Mercosur+ are contributing the most in terms of Brazil’s similarity towards higher
income countries’ exports. Brazil’s export basket to Mercosur+ is the most sophisticated of
Brazil’s main destinations and is associated with an average level of development of $16,000
constant 2005 international dollars. This is followed by the US, Europe, and China is the least
sophisticated, at only $8,000.

Due to rising exports of less sophisticated products to China, overall export sophistication
has declined as well, especially in recent years. The sophistication of Brazil’s overall export
bundle to China is low and has been declining since 2003, suggesting that Brazil has been
increasingly exporting products associated with a lower level of development. The evolving
characteristics of trade with China have also been driving a decline in Brazil’s overall export
sophistication to the world since 2006, after having increased between 1997 and 2000 and
remaining steady through 2005. This is due not only to the average level of sophistication of
Brazil’s exports to China falling, but also to the share of total exports to China increasing. Only
for Europe did the sophistication of exports increase throughout the period. China therefore
contributed to diminishing the similarity in Brazil’s exports with those of advanced economies.


      21
         The notion of export sophistication is based on Rodrik (2007) and Hausman, Hwang and Rodrik (2007), who propose a
measure denoted by EXPY that measures the export-weighted level of GDP per capita associated with a country’s export bundle.
The index is derived on the basis of the PRODY for a particular product which is the GDP per capita level of the typical country
that exports that good. See Technical Appendix for a discussion of the different measures of export sophistication used in this
report.

88
 Figure 83. Overall export sophistication of Brazilian                Figure 84. Including imports, Brazil’s seems to have
 exports has declined, due to exports to China                        built up a ‘sophistication deficit’ in recent years
 EXPY for Brazilian exports by destination (GDP per capita in         EXPY2 for Brazilian exports by destination (GDP per capita in
 thousands of constant 2005 PPP-adjusted international dollars)       thousands of constant 2005 PPP-adjusted international dollars)
                                                                        5
 17
                                                                       3
 15
                                                                       1
 13
                                                                      -1

 11                                                                   -3

  9                                                                   -5

  7                                                                   -7
      97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11                         97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11
            China                   EU27                  Mercosur+              China                  EU27                Mercosur+
            USA                     World                                        USA                    World
 Source: World Bank staff calculations.                               Source: World Bank staff calculations.
 Note: For a formal presentation, see the Technical Appendix.         Note: EXPY2=EXPY of exports – EXPY of imports. For a formal
                                                                      presentation, see the Technical Appendix.


Taking into account import product characteristics as well, Brazil’s net trade with the
world seems to have built up a ‘sophistication deficit’ in recent years. Across destinations, it
is clear that Brazil’s trade with Mercosur+ is the most sophisticated on a net basis, in the sense
that what it exports to the region is more sophisticated than what it imports. The largest deficit in
sophistication is observed in the trade with China, which results from the increasing share of
commodities on the export side and capital goods on the import side. Over time, the decline in
net sophistication with respect to China is striking. This trend has also contributed to a decline in
Brazil’s overall net sophistication with respect to its trade with the world, which suggests that
over time Brazil’s net export bundle is bearing less resemblance to the typical trade patterns of
high-income countries.

The profile of Brazil’s exports varies considerably across export destinations (Appendix).
Mercosur+ it is the only destination where Brazil’s export basket is associated with richer
countries exports. Comparing the sophistication of exports across product categories shows that
this is resulting from exports of medium-technology manufacturing versus commodities. In
contrast, primary products and other resource-based manufactures (RB2) are contributing most to
Brazil’s level of export sophistication to the world, China, and the European Union. The profile
of exports to the United States is also different than those of other destinations, with agro-based
manufacturing (RB1) and other high technology manufacturing playing a larger role.




                                                                                                                                       89
Manufacturing Exports Have Become Less Sophisticated

Controlling for composition effects by focusing on manufacturing only, it appears that the
sophistication of manufacturing exports has declined as well. The sophistication of Brazil’s
exports of manufactured goods to the world increased between 1997 and 2000 but then gradually
decreased over the ten years that followed back to approximately the level of 1997. Across
export destinations, it is notable how the level of sophistication of exports to China is much
higher when considering only manufactured exports. Although the most sophisticated
manufactured goods remain destined for Mercosur+, manufacturing exports to China are just as
sophisticated as those to the European Union and the United States, and all are only slightly
below Mercosur+.
 Figure 85. Export sophistication of manufactures                   Figure 86. Brazil has registered a steadily rising
 declined after 2000                                                sophistication surplus in the trade of manufactures
 EXPY for Brazilian manufacturing exports by destination (GDP per   EXPY2 for Brazilian manufacturing exports by destination (GDP per
 capita in thousands of constant 2005 PPP-adjusted international    capita in thousands of constant 2005 PPP-adjusted international
 dollars)                                                           dollars)
 22                                                                  3

 21
                                                                     2
 20

 19
                                                                     1
 18

 17                                                                  0
 16

 15                                                                 -1
       97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11                      97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11
                 China               EU27                Mercosur               China                 EU27               Mercosur
                 USA                 World                                      USA                   World
 Source: World Bank staff calculations.                             Source: World Bank staff calculations.
 Note: For a formal presentation, see the Technical Appendix.       Note: EXPY2=EXPY of exports – EXPY of imports. For a formal
                                                                    presentation, see the Technical Appendix.


Taking also into account the import side, it is clear that Brazil’s manufacturing sector runs
a sophistication surplus with respect to its main trading partners.22 This is especially the
case for Brazil’s manufacturing trade with China and Mercosur+, where thus the sophistication
of Brazil’s exports exceeds that of its imports from these destinations by a considerable margin.
The difference is less considerable for the EU and the United States, however. Another
interesting development is that Brazil’s net trade in manufactured goods has seen rising
sophistication since the mid-2000s in China, the EU and the United States, whereas it remained
roughly constant in Mercosur+. Considering Brazil’s manufacturing exports to the world, the
sophistication surplus has steadily increased.




      22
       Thus, while sophistication of manufacturing exports has declined, manufacturing exports have remained more
sophisticated than manufacturing imports.

90
Productivity Matters More for Development than Sophistication

While Brazil’s export bundle may bear decreasing resemblance to that of high -income
economies, this is not necessarily a bad thing. Several caveats therefore apply to the
interpretation of the analysis above.

      Brazil’s commodity exports are far from technologically unsophisticated. Although
       Brazil’s overall export sophistication is reduced by the commodities trade with China, it
       should be noted that the concept of sophistication should be interpreted in the narrow
       context of product similarity with high-income countries. The adopted analysis of
       sophistication fails to distinguish between a product and the process or factor intensity of
       its production. In addition, a change in the indicator does not necessarily entail a change
       in the technological content of exports. In fact, for Brazil, many of these commodities are
       produced in very sophisticated manners – some of the most sophisticated in the world.

      Brazil’s revealed comparative advantage in the natural resource sector has been
       well-established. Although the analysis simply indicates the average level of
       development of economies that have a comparative advantage in exporting a particular
       product, the export basket of Brazil does reflect the endowments or technological
       capabilities that have allowed Brazil to develop a comparative advantage in commodity
       exports. Every country is different, and regardless of whether this would imply a different
       development path than one typically pursued by high-income countries in a different era
       and a different context, it would appear self-evident that for Brazil not to tap into its
       natural resource wealth and realize the productive opportunities in this sector would
       amount to undermining the country’s overall development potential.

What matters more for development than sophistication is the capacity of the commodity
sector to contribute to the creation and sustained growth of value-added. The challenge is
not to pursue similarity with advanced economies, but to produce and grow value added. In this
respect, the merits of the pursuit of commodity wealth need to be evaluated against whether the
commodity sector contributes to productivity growth within the sector and also generates broader
economy-wide benefits that stimulate development. Even if these benefits and spill-overs may
have been limited so far, the desirable approach would be not to dismiss the commodity sector
due to a lack of sophistication but to identify instead how the sector can realize its counterfactual
potential and make sure that any demand-side windfalls arising from strong commodity demand
translate into supply-side improvements that sustainably raise the growth capacity of the entire
economy.

Brazil’s strong commodity base should not imply that it cannot or should not develop a
competitive edge in other sectors. As the analysis of a changing China in a changing world has
suggested, there will be substantial opportunities in other sectors going forward. Brazil can build
on its established manufacturing sector and carve out innovative niches in which it can develop
global brands and establish a presence in China or elsewhere. In addition, China’s demand for
tradable services is expected to rise significantly which should provide opportunities to Brazil as
well.



                                                                                                  91
From a supply-side perspective, opportunities to enhance productivity growth exist in all
sectors of the Brazilian economy. Manufacturing and especially services hold significant
potential to boost efficiency. In the commodity sector itself there are plenty of opportunities left
to raise productivity and respond more efficiently to demand that is expected to remain strong
going forward. Moreover, there are important inter-linkages between sectors, where the
competitiveness of one sector depends on that of another sector. Consider for example the
inefficiencies in Brazil’s logistics industry which are spilling over into diminished
competitiveness and productivity of the commodity and manufacturing sectors.

In sum, the discussion of whether Brazil has become too specialized in one sector or
another is best framed in the context of maximizing the productivity potential that exists in
every sector. Opportunities exist in all sectors to respond to rising demand going forward.
Similarly, all sectors hold significant potential to do better in terms of their productivity
performance. Moreover, the performance any single sector has come to depend more than ever
before on the performance of other sectors. Therefore, the question of which sector to promote is
best reframed in terms of how the untapped potential at the firm level can be boosted regardless
of what sector the firm belongs to.




92
                   III. LEVERAGING EXTERNAL CONNECTIONS WITH CHINA

The previous sections suggested there is scope for Brazil to further develop its connections
with China. This is indicated by the result that the Brazilian economy remains relatively inward-
oriented and therefore there is potential for continued integration into the global economy
alongside ongoing efforts to further develop and integrate the domestic market. In addition, it
was suggested that Brazil does not have a ‘concentration problem’ with respect to its external
orientation to the world either in terms of markets or products. However, an asymmetry stands
out in terms of the relations with China, where Brazil is much less diversified in terms of
products on the export than on the import side. While this result carries through to other
countries, it does point to opportunities going forward to broaden and deepen linkages. Finally,
while Brazil’s exports to China are concentrated on natural resource-related commodities, there
is nothing intrinsically wrong with commodities per se, provided efforts are made to ensure that
the natural resource sector contributes to the economy more broadly and that its development
does not come at the expense of other sectors.

The discussion below lays out in broad terms what efforts Brazil could consider to leverage
its connections with China. In what follows the discussion will focus on trade and investment –
the two dominant facets of the Brazil-China relationship. The analysis points to static as well as
dynamic benefits. Statically, adjustments could be made to develop greater mutual benefits from
the existing structure of the interaction between the two countries. Dynamically, as the
interaction changes following the broad directions outlined earlier, there will again be scope for
both countries to engage so that greater mutual benefits can be derived from changing patterns of
trade and investment.

A. Tackling Home-Grown Supply-Side Constraints

Further productivity-enhancing reforms would not only contribute to home-grown
economic growth; it would also allow Brazil to better leverage its evolving connections with
China. Important areas were further structural reform effort would be welcome include the
investment climate (ranging from reducing the administrative burden of the state, improving the
quality and profile of public spending, strengthening the goods and labor market) as physical and
human capital accumulation (strengthening logistics and enhancing the skills base of the work
force). Progress in these areas would help Brazil accelerate growth. A better investment climate
and more investment in infrastructure and skills would also position Brazil better to tap into
Chinese demand. It would also position the country better to meet increased competition in
higher-end manufacturing.

Brazil faces opportunities to enhance productivity and take full advantage of its
connections with China in all sectors of its economy. Opportunities exist in all sectors to
enhance productivity and respond to rising demand going forward. Similarly, all sectors hold
significant potential to do better in terms of their productivity performance. Moreover, the
performance of any single sector has come to depend more than ever before on the performance
of other sectors given that products have become bundles of value-added derived from different
sectors. Therefore, the objective of raising productivity would favor a comprehensive approach
that tackles bottlenecks across sectors. In what follows, the discussion will briefly discuss the
opportunities that avail themselves in different sectors.

                                                                                               93
Natural Resources: Widening Economic Impact

Despite slower growth in China, global demand for Brazil’s natural resources is expected
to remain strong. As noted elsewhere in this report, overall commodity demand should remain
strong in light of China’s ongoing process of urbanization and given that the capital stock
remains only a fraction of the U.S. level. The composition of that demand may be affected
however by the rebalancing of China’s growth model in that natural resources related to
consumption demand may grow more strongly than those related to investment demand. Among
the former, for example, agricultural products should remain in high demand, particularly given
that the rise in the middle class should also lead to a rise in protein demand. Among the latter,
metals and minerals might be more significantly affected by the slowdown in investment, even if
continued residential construction demand, as well as demand for durable goods such as
automobiles, caps some of that slowdown (Yu 2011). Brazil’s natural resource sector is also
expected to benefit from the continued growth of the developing world outside of China.

The challenge going forward will be to respond to this robust demand by enhancing the
economy-wide productivity potential of the natural resource sector. The potential pitfalls of
natural resource-related growth are well understood. If not properly managed, there is a risk that
the pattern of specialization into natural resources can result in negative side effects. These
include the prospect of real exchange rate appreciation that may render the manufacturing sector
uncompetitive, the risk of becoming trapped in low-value structures that limit the scope for
vertical or horizontal links, and the possibility of heightened volatility due to commodity price
fluctuations (Chandra, Lin, and Wang 2012; IMF 2011; De Cavalcanti, Mohaddes, and Raissi
2012). The appropriate response to these potential negative effects is not to limit commodity
exports or to erect costly import barriers to protect domestic industries, but rather to alleviate
demand and supply constraints on productive activity by improving infrastructure, creating a
favorable investment climate, and facilitating private sector access to capital, skills, technology,
and markets (IMF 2011).

The recent discovery of vast offshore oil reserves in Brazil provides new opportunities and
challenges to raise productivity. Conservative estimates by the U.S. Energy Information
Administration suggest that Brazilian oil production may expand by between 70 and 90 percent
between 2010 and 2020, reaching at least 3.4 million barrels of oil equivalent per day. As a
result, Brazil may turn into a large net energy exporter. Brazil’s newfound oil wealth offers
opportunities to raise investment and savings and alleviate long-standing infrastructure
bottlenecks in the country. The new resources could also be used to raise consumption,
particularly to assist the poor in a well-targeted manner.23 The technical complexities associated
with extracting pre-salt oil also offer opportunities to upgrade the country’s knowledge base
(Fajnzylber, Lederman and Oliver, 2013).




     23
       Care must be given to ensure that any rise in public and private consumption and indebtedness is based on conservative
projections for oil production growth, else slower-than-expected growth could result in painful adjustment.

94
Manufacturing: Strengthening Competitiveness

Insofar as China will remain a competitor, Brazil’s competitiveness challenge in
manufacturing will likely be accentuated by the projected changes in China. If growth in
China continues to slow as its economy rebalances and redefines its competitive advantage
towards higher-value products, then Brazil may well face a situation where it enters tougher
competition with China on the supply side (particularly with respect to higher-end
manufacturing) even though market opportunities on the demand side will continue to multiply.

The prospect of more intense competition from China underscores the need for Brazil to
redouble its efforts to foster innovation and strengthen competitiveness. While innovation
and competitiveness enhancements would benefit all sectors, it appears that the manufacturing
sector may stand to benefit the most due to the perceived erosion of industrial dynamism.
Systemic shortcomings in the investment climate that relate to conditions outside the factory
floor – such as infrastructure, logistics, red tape, tax burden – will require attention from the
relevant government agencies where possible in partnership with private investors. However, to
the extent that inefficiencies occur within the factory gates, Brazilian businesses will need to do
their part to respond to the potential of intensified competition. And this will require upgrading
of products, processes and organizational forms so as to carve out new competitive niches.
 Figure 87. Capital accumulation has slowed and                      Figure 88. Investment has hovered at low levels in
 scope remains for further deepening                                 GDP, financed primarily by domestic savings
 Capital stock at constant 2005 national prices per worker (2005
 US$ thousands)                                                      Share in GDP (percent)                   Share in GDP (percent)
 1000                                                                25                                                             10
                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                     20                                                            6
                                                                                                                                   4
  100
                                                                     15                                                            2
                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                     10                                                            -2
   10                                                                                                                              -4
                                                     Brazil                                          Current account balance (RHS)
                                                     China            5                                                            -6
                                                                                                     Total investment
                                                     Japan
                                                     South Korea                                     Gross national savings        -8
                                                     United States    0                                                            -10
    1
      1950    1960     1970      1980      1990     2000      2010     1980             1990               2000            2010
 Source: Penn World Tables version 8.0; Feenstra, Inklaar and        Source: IBGE; World Bank staff calculations.
 Timmer (2013); World Bank staff calculations.


Upgrading human and physical capital will enable Brazil to better tap into emerging
opportunities in the Chinese market. The evolving nature of China’s import demand suggests
that there is scope for upgrading in Brazil, especially in manufacturing. The human and physical
capital intensity of Brazilian manufacturing exports to China as well as to the rest of the world
appears to be considerably lower compared to what China imports from the world. This
difference in revealed factor intensity does not seem to apply to Brazil’s commodity exports to
China: even though these exports appear to be somewhat less physical capital intensive than
China’s commodity imports from the rest of the world, the human capital intensity and especially
the land intensity of Brazilian commodity exports is higher.




                                                                                                                                   95
Figure 89. Human and physical capital upgrading in Brazil would open up opportunities in China

                 Revealed human capital intensity:                                            Revealed human capital intensity:
                 manufacturing (standardized value)                                           commodities (standardized value)
 0.7                                                                          0.7

 0.6                                                                          0.6                       Brazil's Exports to China
                                                                                                        China's Imports from World
 0.5                                                                          0.5                       Braizl's Exports to World
 0.4                                                                          0.4

 0.3                                                                          0.3

 0.2                                                                          0.2
                           Brazil's Exports to China
 0.1                       China's Imports from World                         0.1
                           Braizl's Exports to World
     0                                                                          0

 -0.1                                                                        -0.1
         95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11                         95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11

                 Revealed physical capital intensity:                                         Revealed physical capital intensity:
                 manufacturing (standardized value)                                           commodities (standardized value)
 0.8                                                                          0.8


 0.6                                                                          0.6                       Brazil's Exports to China
                                                                                                        China's Imports from World
 0.4                                                                          0.4                       Braizl's Exports to World


 0.2                                                                          0.2


     0                                                                          0
                          Brazil's Exports to China
 -0.2                     China's Imports from World                         -0.2
                          Braizl's Exports to World
 -0.4                                                                        -0.4
         95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11                         95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11

                     Revealed land intensity:                                                    Revealed land intensity:
                 manufacturing (standardized value)                                           commodities (standardized value)

 1.3                                                                          1.3
 1.1                          Brazil's Exports to China                       1.1
 0.9                          China's Imports from World                      0.9
                              Braizl's Exports to World
 0.7                                                                          0.7
 0.5                                                                          0.5
 0.3                                                                          0.3
 0.1                                                                          0.1
 -0.1                                                                        -0.1
                                                                                                        Brazil's Exports to China
 -0.3                                                                        -0.3                       China's Imports from World
                                                                                                        Braizl's Exports to World
 -0.5                                                                        -0.5
         95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11                         95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11

Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
Note: Vertical axis is measured as a trade-weighted standardized value (the indicator’s value minus the mean divided by the standard deviation).
See Appendix for a formal presentation. The product-based type of analysis examines the endowment profile of countries that typically export the
product in question, but there is no control for supply chains. Thus, a country with moderate levels of human capital can be associated with
exporting sophisticated electronics goods while the domestic value added consists merely of assembly.




96
Continued structural reform in Brazil is therefore needed to meet the challenge of
changing competition as well as to tap into opportunities in the Chinese market. To take
fully advantage of the opportunities created by its relationship with China, Brazil will need to
build its endowments of human and physical capital in order to develop comparative advantages
in manufacturing products that China imports intensively. Upgrading human capital will increase
the skill base and allow Brazil to gain a comparative advantage on knowledge intensive products.
The same is true with the physical capital intensity of production in Brazil. As China imports
products from countries with a high physical capital stock, tapping into Chinese demand in the
future will require augmenting factors such as machinery and infrastructure.

Services: Raising Efficiency

While the need to raise productivity growth is relatively well understood, the role of the
services sector is often over-looked. Indeed, much of the debate in Brazil, both in academic and
policy circles, has focused on such issues as whether to promote commodities or manufacturing,
how to protect the erosion of industrial competitiveness through industrial policy, how to
leverage the opportunities afforded by pre-salt, and how to boost the opportunities in the all-
important agri-business sector. As good as absent in these discussions is the role played by the
services sector, which nevertheless accounts for the majority of value-added and employment.

Large segments of the services sector are expensive and of poor quality. Services inflation
has outpaced that of other sectors.24 Given the labor intensity of services, services inflation has
been closely related to rapid wage inflation, which has contributed to rising unit labor costs that
have dampened industrial competitiveness (Pastore, Gazzono and Pinotti, 2012). 25 Arbache
(2012) attributes the rise in real wages between 2005 and 2011 to the heating up of the economy,
skills shortages and a demographic slowdown of the working-age population. Canuto, Cavallari
and Reis (2013) note that the services sector has been the largest beneficiary of favorable terms
of trade and accommodated larger wage increases.

Improving the efficiency of services would bring large benefits to the Brazilian economy.
Services play a key role in generating economic growth and job creation. Improvements in the
productivity, quality and range of services produced in an economy contribute to economic
growth directly but also indirectly in the form of spillover effects through the role of services as
inputs into other sectors (such as agriculture, mining and manufacturing), particularly given the
increased dependence of industrial enterprises on service providers and outside services
(Arbache, 2012). There are further reasons, why services are critical to Brazil’s longer-term
development objectives. Increased job creation in services, along with real wage growth through
productivity gains, can contribute to poverty alleviation; and, enhanced service delivery in the
areas of education and health can also promote human capital development to the benefit of
longer-term growth prospects.


     24
         The surge of non-tradable inflation over tradable inflation is a relatively recent phenomenon in the era of Brazil’s new
macroeconomic framework. Non-tradable inflation consistently exceeded tradable inflation from the beginning of the Real Plan
until 1999. Following the introduction of an independently floating exchange rate and an inflationary targeting regime in 1999,
Brazil consistently registered lower inflation in non-tradables than tradables. In 2004, however, and ever since afterwards, non-
tradable inflation systematically surpassed tradable inflation.
      25
         While exchange rate appreciation has affected the competitiveness of Brazil’s exporters, Bonelli and Pinhei ro (2012) find
that sluggish industrial sector productivity performance and higher real wages are more important factors.

                                                                                                                                97
B. Enhancing the External Environment for Trade and Investment

In addition to advancing the domestic reform agenda, Brazil could consider further
improvements to the external environment for trade and investment. Given their importance
in the bilateral relationship, the discussion focuses on trade and investment. While the report also
offers perspectives on how China could contribute, the focus will be on the Brazilian perspective.
Finally, the trade and investment agenda is closely related to Brazil’s domestic agenda of
generating productivity growth and therefore needs to be seen in conjunction with the previous
section.

Greasing the Wheels of Trade

While significant progress has been made to reduce tariffs during the past two decades,
tariff barriers in both Brazil and China remain high from an international perspective
(Figure 90). Brazil has lowered the simple average tariff including preferences by 20 percentage
points between 1990 and 2011 while China has decreased the rate by 34 percentage points
between 1992 and 2011. Although China has reduced tariffs to levels below Brazil’s, both
countries rank low when benchmarking against others. Brazil and China ranked in the bottom 20
out of a sample of 92 countries according to their simple average applied tariff including
preferences in 2009.
 Figure 90. China has lowered tariffs to levels below                Figure 91. Tariffs are higher on each other’s
 Brazil’s                                                            comparative advantages
 Average tariffs (import-based, percent)                             Weighted-average tariffs (export-based, percent)
 16                                                                              Tariffs imposed by Brazil on China
 14                                                      Brazil                    Tariffs imposed by China on Brazil
                                                                     20
 12                                                      China
 10                                                                  16

  8
                                                                     12
  6
  4                                                                   8

  2
                                                                      4
  0
      Simple average Trade-weighted Simple average Trade-weighted
                                                                      0
                        average                       average
                                                                                Total         Agri/food          Mineral        Remaining
       Applied including preferences           MFN applied                                     products         products         products
                                                                     Source: UNCTAD; UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
 Source: UNCTAD; World Bank staff calculations.                      Note: Weighted average applies MFN tariff that the importing country
 Note: Simple average across all product lines with non-zero trade   imposes on the exporting country, weighted by share of exports in
 flows to any country in the world. Trade-weighted average with      total exports of the exporting country to the world at the product level
 country’s import shares as weights.                                 (as such it weights the importing country’s tariff by the structure of the
                                                                     exporting country’s comparative advantage). Agri/food covers HS 01-
                                                                     24 and minerals HS 25-27.


Both countries impose higher tariff barriers on products where the other has a revealed
comparative advantage (Figure 90 and Figure 91). The lower trade-weighted than simple
average tariff of both countries to the world suggests that each country imposes lower tariffs on
the products that are more heavily imported. Yet China imposes higher tariffs on the sector
where many of Brazil’s comparative advantages exist, and the same is true vice versa. This can
be seen by incorporating the export structure of the trading partner when calculating the trade-
weighted average tariff by placing higher weights on the products for which the other country


98
has a comparative advantage. As illustrated, China imposes higher tariffs on agriculture and food
products while Brazil imposes higher tariffs on non-commodity based products.

Tariff structures in part determine the trade patterns between the countries, but the
impact on diversification differs between Brazil and China. This result likely influences the
asymmetry in the number of products Brazil exports to China versus the rest of the world.
However, as shown above, it has not prevented China from exporting a significant amount of
manufactured products to Brazil. Differences in regional tariff structures are a further factor that
have shaped trade patterns. In this respect, Baumann and Ceratti (2012) point to competitive
pressure onto Brazilian manufacturing exports to China’s regional neighbors arising from
preferential concessions to the region.

Brazilian exports of higher value-added products to China have been relatively limited
compared with such exports to other countries (Figure 92). Although Brazil produces many
commodities, commodities themselves may contain significant amounts of value-added
potential. To some extent, Brazil has reaped that potential already, but in many respects there
remain plenty of opportunities that could be tapped into. For example, Brazil exports green
coffee beans but is absent in the export of processed coffee; Brazil exports iron ore but is
struggling to export steel; Brazil exports soybeans but to a much lesser extent soy oil. While
domestic factors in Brazil affecting external competitiveness may offer a partial explanation,
China-related factors regarding access seem to matter as well, as suggested by Brazil’s exports of
processed versus unprocessed food to the Chinese market standing in stark contrast to other
countries in the world.
 Figure 92. In contrast to elsewhere, Brazil exports of              Figure 93. Tariff escalation exists in Brazil’s main food
 food products to China are mostly unprocessed                       exports
 Brazil’s exports of food and beverages: primary and processed, by   Simple average MFN applied tariff (percent)
 destination in 2012 (millions USD)
        China                                                        Vegetable Oil
     Germany
        Spain
                                                Primary                      Sugar
         USA                                    Processed
  Netherlands
                                                                                                                      First stage
        Japan                                                              Chicken
                                                                                                                      Second stage
          Italy
                                                                                                                      Third stage
      Belgium                                                                  Beef
 Russian Fed.
    Venezuela                                                                        0       10       20       30       40       50        60
                                                                     Source: UNCTAD; World Bank staff calculations.
        Egypt
                                                                     Note: Examples taken from USITC (2001). Processing stages for
   Hong Kong                                                         vegetable oil: soya beans (1), soya bean meal (2) and crude and
                                                                     refined soya bean oil (3); sugar: raw (1), refined (2) and containing
                  0   2000   4000    6000    8000      10000 12000   added flavor or coloring (3); poultry: whole birds (1) , poultry cuts (2)
                                                                     and processed poultry products (3); beef: cattle (1), beef carcasses
 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.                 (2) and fresh or frozen boneless beef (3).


Tariff escalation in China may be one underlying reason why Brazil has been unable to
diversify its exports to China into more value-added products (Figure 93). The literature has
documented that China pursues a policy of tariff escalation that discriminates against products
with higher value-added (WTO Trade Policy Review 2010). This policy is aimed at keeping the
processing content low and impedes foreign companies from accessing opportunities in the

                                                                                                                                                 99
Chinese market. China applies higher tariffs to the more processed form of some of Brazil’s most
important export commodities to China. For example, a low tariff is applied to raw sugar (stage
1), but then jumps to nearly 50 percent when sugar is refined (stage 2) or contains added flavor
or coloring (stage 3). The same is true for vegetable oils, with lower tariffs applied to soybeans
(stage 1), but higher on soybean meal (stage 2) and crude and refined soybean oil (stage 3). In
beef, higher tariffs are applied to beef carcasses (stage 2) and fresh or frozen boneless beef (stage
3) than cattle (stage 1).

The services trade between both countries is relatively unencumbered by trade policy
limitations, but openness varies by supply mode (Figure 94). Brazil is an open economy with
respect to services trade but with some minor restrictions. China allows entry and operations but
imposes restrictions that are neither trivial nor stringent. Domestic policy constraints in services
may, however, dampen competition and create an anti-export bias. In addition, openness in
services trade is linked with the performance of the sector. For example, it has been shown that
economies that are more open in logistics services perform better across a range of logistics
performance indicators. For Brazil, most of the restrictions are through limits on cross-border
supply of services. The professional services sector, which includes accounting, auditing, and
legal services, faces the highest barriers to trade, with cross-border supply entirely closed.
Telecommunications and retail, on the other hand, are completely open. In China, professional
services are also the most restricted, with restrictions through commercial presence.


                           Figure 94. The services trade between both countries is
                           relatively open, but openness varies by supply mode
                           Services trade restrictiveness index (0-100, 100 most restrictive)
                            80

                            70                                       Brazil
                                                                     China
                            60

                            50

                            40

                            30

                            20

                            10

                             0
                                    Overall        Mode 1         Mode 3          Mode 4
                           Source: World Bank Services Trade Restrictiveness Index (2012).
                           Note: Mode 1=cross-border supply, Mode 2=consumption abroad,
                           Mode 3=commercial presence, Mode 4=presence of a natural
                           person.


Further reduction of tariffs, in particular in agriculture, will benefit both Brazil and China.
On the multilateral agenda, both Brazil and China would benefit from continued progress on
multilateral negotiations. The removal of subsidies to agriculture in the advanced economies like
the United Sates and the European Union would be in Brazil’s interests, as these regions are
competitors of Brazil in the sectors in which Brazil has comparative advantages. China could
consider addressing policies such as tariff escalation to grant greater market access to Brazil,
which would also have domestic benefits by lowering the price of food for the poor.


100
The scale and scope of non-tariff measures is extremely high in Brazil and China. Non-tariff
measures (NTMs) can be a significant obstacle to trade, as the cost of compliance of such
measures is high and can erode countries’ competitive advantage. Yet these types of indirect
policies are increasingly replacing tariffs to hinder free trade between countries. India, China,
Indonesia, Argentina, Russia, and Brazil together accounted for nearly half of all new NTMs
imposed worldwide between 2008 and 2011 (Cadot, Malouche and Sáez 2012). China imposed
at least one type of NTM in 100 percent of its products in 2012, while for Brazil NTMs affected
about two thirds of the product lines and corresponding import value in 2008 (albeit all were
partial coverage).

Non-tariff measures are important barriers to trade in both countries, but more so in
Brazil. Taking into account NTMs, Brazil’s uniform equivalent applied tariff including
preferences in 2009 jumped to 20.33 percent, whereas in China it increased to 9.83 percent. In
addition, Brazil has increased the use of NTMs in recent years, including local content
requirements, import licensing and quotas, and export incentives.
 Figure 95. Non-tariff measures are applied across the                 Figure 96. Non-tariff measures are more targeted in
 board in China                                                        Brazil
 Application of NTMs on China’s imports (percent)                      Application of NTMs on Brazil’s imports (percent)
    Machinery                                       Quantity control      Machinery                                        Quantity control

  Base metals                                       Price control       Base metals
                                                                                                                           Price control
      Textiles
                                                    TBTs                     Textiles
                                                                                                                           TBTs
       Rubber
                                                    SPS measures
                                                                             Rubber
                                                                                                                           Pre-shipment
     Chemical                                                                                                              inspection
                                                    Pre-shipment
                                                    inspection             Chemical
        Food                                                                                                               SPS measures

                                                                               Food
                0    20     40      60    80  100
 Source: UNCTAD; UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
 Note: TBTs=technical barriers to trade; SPS=sanitary and                             0    20     40      60    80  100
 phytosanitary standards.                                              Source: UNCTAD; UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
                                                                       Note: TBTs=technical barriers to trade; SPS=sanitary and
                                                                       phytosanitary standards.


While China applies non-tariff measures across the board, Brazil targets food products and
chemicals, where many of its comparative advantages exist (Figure 95 and Figure 96).
These tend to materialize in the form of sanitary and phytosanitary standard (SPS) measures and
technical barriers to trade (TBTs), however quotas are also important in these sectors. Tariff rate
quotas are applied to agricultural goods, where low ‘in-quota’ tariffs are applied to a limited
volume of imports, after which high ‘off-quota’ tariffs are applied. TBTs are also applied to over
half of machinery and equipment imports, a domestic sector that has been under pressure from
Chinese imports.

China’s non-tariff barriers affect a large percent of what Brazil exports to the rest of the
world (Table 10). All of Brazil’s exports to China are affected by SPS measures and TTBs. To
put this in perspective, this accounts for almost one fifth of Brazil’s exports to the world, due to
China’s importance as an export destination for Brazil. While the bilateral coverage ratios for
China’s exports to Brazil are also high, for example over 40 percent from TTBs, as a share of


                                                                                                                                           101
world exports they are much smaller, due to Brazil being a less important destination of China’s
exports.

Streamlining NTMs could assist to increase private sector productivity. While many NTMs
are justified on the basis of health and safety standards, they can also act as barriers to trade.
Given the complexity and variety of NTMs, when poorly designed they can hurt competiveness
through high costs of compliance and hurt consumers by raising prices. Identifying which NTMs
are particularly burdensome for firms at the country level through consultations with the private
sector would be beneficial as a focal point for streamlining. After this process, regulatory
improvements could be adopted through careful analysis and private/public dialogue so as to
increase transparency of regulations and reduce the compliance costs for firms.
                       Table 10. Non-tariff measures have a broad impact on trade partners’
                       exports
                       Coverage, 2008 (percent)

                       Non-tariff measures (NTM)          Share of China’s NTMs on    Share of Brazil’s NTMs on
                       classification                        Brazil’s Exports…            China’s Exports
                                                          …to China     …to World     …to Brazil     …to World
                       Sanitary & phyto-sanitary
                                                             100           19.1          10.5           0.2
                       standards
                       Technical barriers to trade           100           19.1          43.3           0.6
                       Pre-shipment inspection &
                                                             0.8           0.1            1.9           0.03
                       other formalities
                       Price control measures                100           19.1            4            0.06
                       Licenses, quotas, prohibitions &
                                                             100           19.1          30.4           0.45
                       other quantity control measures
                       Charges, taxes & other
                                                            0.01          0.002            0             0
                       para-tariff measures
                       Anti-competitive measures             100           19.1           0.3          0.004

                       Intellectual property               <0.001        <0.001            0             0

                       Export-related measures              42.9           8.2             0             0

                       Source: UNCTAD; UN Comtrade; Nicita and Gourdon (2012); World Bank staff calculations.
                       Note: For Brazil, all NTMs are partial coverage.


The use of temporary trade barriers has increased somewhat between 2001 and 2011,
creating additional frictions in the trade environment between the two countries. After the
global financial crisis of 2008/9, many developed and developing countries increased the use of
temporary trade barriers (TTBs) to protect domestic industries, and China and Brazil are not
exceptions.26 Most TTBs have appeared as anti-dumping investigations, but recently there have
also been a few instances of countervailing duties being initiated in both countries. China
increased the share of import product lines subjected to at least one import-restricting TTB from
0.3 percent to 1.4 percent between 2001 and 2011. In Brazil, the share increased from 1.2 percent
to 1.9 percent. This corresponds to 3.2 percent of Chinese imports and 1.7 percent of Brazilian
imports being affected by TTBs in 2011.

      26
        Temporary Trade Barriers include anti-dumping duties, safeguard measures, and countervailing duties. Anti-dumping
duties are allowed to be imposed on goods that are deemed to be dumped (sold below the price in the exporting market) and
harming producers of competing products in the importing country. Safeguard measures are actions taken in the importing
country to protect a specific industry from an unexpected build-up of imports. Countervailing measures are actions taken by the
importing country, usually in the form of increased duties, to offset subsidies given to producers or exporters in the exporting
country.

102
Brazil and China could work together to improve the trade environment. This would
involve lowering tariff rates and eliminating other types of TTBs like subsidies, tax benefits for
particular sectors, and local content requirements as these would contribute to sustained
productivity growth by enhancing the exposure to competition. At the same time, the concerns
underlying these measures would need to be addressed and this would involve concomitant
efforts to boost firm level capabilities so as to boost their international and domestic
competitiveness. Similarly, in the case of demonstrated unfair trade practices, these would need
to be resolved as well.

Expanding Foreign Direct Investment

Brazil has a highly liberal policy regime for foreign direct investment . Except for domestic
air transport and media, almost all other primary, manufacturing and services industries allow
full (100 percent) of equity ownership by foreign investors. According to the World Bank
Group's FDI Regulations database (published in 2010 as the Investing Across Borders indicators
and updated in 2012), the domestic air transport sector permits only a maximum of 20 percent of
foreign equity ownership. Among the 104 economies assessed, this is the most restrictive rule in
place with the exception of Iraq and Ethiopia, and comparable to Canada (25 percent). 27 In
newspaper publishing and television broadcasting, Brazil restricts foreign equity ownership to 30
percent.28 Most sectors are fully open: indeed, even within transport, industries covering freight
by road, rail or internal waterways, port operation and courier activities permit full foreign
participation. Following constitutional amendments in 1995, there is no discrimination in the
legal treatment of foreign and national capital under equal circumstances (WTO, 2013).

In contrast to the liberal de jure provisions, the de facto process of setting up a foreign-
owned subsidiary in Brazil is relatively cumbersome (Table 11). It takes, on average, 16
distinct procedures and 152 days to set up a foreign subsidiary in Brazil’s largest commercial
city (World Bank, 2010). Among the 15 countries examined in Latin America and the Caribbean
region, only Venezuela fared worse (17 procedures and 325 days on average) in its ability to
facilitate a swift process for foreign investors to set up subsidiaries. Among BRICS nations, the
average number of days it takes to establish a foreign subsidiary in Brazil is longer by a factor of
2.5 than in China. While government approval is not required, foreign investments must be
registered with the Brazilian Central Bank and only a few entities are entitled to hold a foreign
currency bank account (World Bank, 2010). Brazil is also one of the slowest countries in the
world, and certainly among BRICS, in enforcing arbitral awards in cases of commercial disputes
involving foreign investors. The number of days it takes between the filing of a request for
arbitration to the constitution of the arbitral tribunal is much longer than in China and Russia, but
comparable to India and South Africa. For recognition and enforcement of any foreign arbitral
award, the delay in Brazil again stands out. However, on measures of openness to FDI by sector,
Brazil fares better than China, India and South Africa, and is almost as open as Russia.




    27
       It is worth noting that both Brazil and Canada have two of the world’s most successful regional jet manufacturing
companies, Embraer and Bombardier, respectively.
    28
       Naturalized citizens with 10 years of residence in the country can manage newspapers, magazines, and other publications
as well as radio and TV networks; cable TV services are completely open (WTO 2013, p. 36).

                                                                                                                          103
        Table 11. Compared to other BRICS, setting up shop in Brazil is de jure highly liberal but de facto
        relatively cumbersome

                         Investing across sectors      Starting a foreign business   Arbitrating and mediating disputes
                                                                                      Length of             Length of
                         Average foreign equity
                                                       Number of        Number of     arbitration        recognition and
                          ownership permitted
                                                       procedures         days       proceedings           enforcement
                               (percent)
                                                                                        (days)         proceedings (days)
          Brazil                   93                      16              152           560                  2325
          China                    75                      17               63           164                   420
          India                    81                      15               35           569                  1654
          Russia                   94                       9               19           119                   138
          South Africa             88                       8               57           528                  1178

        Source: World Bank Group (2010), with updated data from 2012


Brazilian businesses hold potential for broadening and deepening FDI into China,
especially in services (Figure 97). To the extent that sectoral restrictions on foreign equity
ownership matter for FDI inflows, there is much room and likelihood of China further opening
up its key services industries. This includes the sub-sectors of fixed line and wireless
telecommunications, life and health insurance, some forms of transportation, water supply, and
electricity transmission and distribution. Brazilian companies engaged in outward FDI in China
are highly diverse; but about half of the investors are services-related and most manufacturing
FDI is also related to services activities such as sourcing, distribution and sales (China-Brazil
Business Council, 2012). From this perspective, Brazil’s outward FDI is not trade-substituting:
as there is scope for barriers to both imports and FDI in services to continue to fall in China, both
trade and investment from Brazil can broaden and deepen. This is because productivity growth in
services will be a growing priority for China to sustain its high growth and to support a more
sophisticated move up the manufacturing value chain. For this, greater exposure of the services
sector to international competition is inevitable.

The growing impetus for outward FDI from China will also benefit Brazil. China’s export
success over the past three decades was built in large measure on the strength of inward FDI that
brought with it new technologies, business practices and world markets.29 Increasingly, however,
China will need to encourage outward FDI – and greater globalization of its firms – to seek
higher value-added segments of global production, as well as to skirt the scarcity of low-skilled
labor availability within China. Brazil is well placed to receive more market-seeking FDI from
China given its large base of middle-income consumers. In addition, the country’s complete
policy openness to FDI in almost all sectors of interest to China is a plus, particularly when
China continues to face high-profile market access restrictions in several Western economies.30
A shift away from the extractive sector will also temper any impressions about Chinese FDI
being tempted merely by natural resources.




    29
       Today, China hosts 700,000 partly foreign-owned companies that account for 22 percent of tax revenues, 55 percent of
exports and 50 percent of technology imports (World Bank 2012, p. 385).
    30
       This includes, in the 2000s, the failure of China National Offshore Oil Corporation to take over the California-based
Union Oil Corporation, and that of the Aluminium Corporation of China (Chinalco) to bid for a stake in Rio Tinto, an Australian-
based iron ore producer.

104
      Figure 97. Brazil’s permits a higher share of foreign equity ownership than China across a range of sectors

      Permitted foreign equity ownership share by sector (percent)
                                                                                                                      Brazil   China
                                             Agriculture and
                                                 forestry                                       Agriculture and
                                                                                                                       100     100
                                              100                                               forestry
                                                                     Mining, oil and
                             Education
                                                                          gas                   Mining, oil and gas    100     100
                                                75
                                                                                                Manufacturing          100     100
                   Accounting                   50                             Manufacturing
                                                                                                Electricity            100      80
                                                25                                              Waste management
                                                                                                                       100      75
                                                                                                & water supply
                 Financial
                                                 0                                Electricity
                 services                                                                       Transportation         87       75

                                                                                                Tourism                100     100
                                                                                  Waste         Media                  30       0
                     Telecom                                                   management &
                                                                                water supply    Telecom                100      49

                                                                                                Financial services     100      67
                                 Media                               Transportation
                    Brazil
                    China                        Tourism                                        Accounting             100      99

                                                                                                Education              100      99
      Source: World Bank Group (2010), with updated data from 2012



The composition of Chinese FDI into Brazil is expected to diversify. So far, Chinese
investment into Brazil has been primarily motivated by securing access to natural resources
(particularly oil and metals). There is, however, emerging anecdotal evidence of a shift towards
more investment in services as well as manufacturing. Examples include Huawei (R&D),
Foxconn (screens), and ZTE (telecoms plant), Chery Automobile (cars), and others in steam
turbines, construction machinery, and soybean processing. The newer generation of investments
also includes medium-sized Chinese companies, not just large SOEs. In terms of geographic
concentration, Chinese FDI initially followed the presence of resources (oil and gas in Rio and
Minas Gerais for mining). The smaller investments in the auto, electro-electronic and other
manufacturing sectors are more dispersed throughout the country, a trend likely to continue.

Finally, Brazil and China also have an opportunity to craft a new South-South model for a
Bilateral Investment Treaty. The two countries differ significantly in their approach to signing
Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs). BITs are designed for the reciprocal encouragement,
promotion and protection of investments in their territories. Most also contain a powerful
international arbitration mechanism that allows investors to bring claims directly against the host
state alleging violations of these protections under international law. China has well over 100
BITs in effect, whereas Brazil has signed 14, none of which are in force. The two countries also
do not have a BIT with each other. Reconciling the legitimate development concerns of countries
like Brazil with the urgency for China’s outward FDI to receive National Treatment (assuring
Chinese investors and others to be treated alike),31 the two countries can craft a new model of
South-South BIT that is worthy of emulation by other developing countries. Such a model treaty
could enshrine in its preamble broad development objectives and guard policy space in pursuit of
legitimate public welfare measures and regulations that an agreement which is silent on


    31
       The most recent Chinese BITs do allow for the continuation of provisions that discriminate against existing foreign
investors, subject to a “best effort” commitment to roll back such measures over time (World Bank 2012, p. 389).

                                                                                                                                       105
development objectives may occasionally undermine.32 Indeed, now that countries like Brazil
and China are engaged in significant outward FDI, the issue of whether there is a need for an
overarching Multilateral Investment Agreement (in lieu of the hundreds of overlapping bilateral
investment treaties) deserves consideration (Berger, 2013).




      32
        For more on these issues, see Halle and Peterson (2005). As an example, they cite the 2003 Korea-Chile FTA which sets
forth a broad range of goals in the treaty preamble, including that the agreement “s hould be implemented with a view toward
raising the standard of living, creating new work opportunities, and promoting sustainable development in a manner consistent
with environmental protection and conservation” as well as in a manner “promoting the public welfare.”

106
                                      REFERENCES

Acioly, Luciana, Eduardo Costa Pinto, and Marcos A.M. Cintra. 2011 “As Relações Bilaterais
   Brasil-China - A Ascenção da China No Sistema Mundial e Os Desafios Para o Brasil.”
   Mimeo, IPEA.

Agenor, P.-R., and O. Canuto. 2012. “Middle-Income Traps.” World Bank Policy Research
   Working Paper 6210, Washington, DC.

Arbache, Jorge. 2011. “The Siren’s Song: A Study of the Economic Relationship between Brazil
   and China.” Draft paper presented at an international seminar Brazil and China for the
   Reordering of International Relations: Challenges and Opportunities, Itamaraty Palace, Rio
   de Janeiro, June 16-17.

———. 2012. Is Brazilian Manufacturing Losing its Drive? Working Paper, BNDES and
  University of Brasilia.

Arnold, J, B Javorcik, M Lipscombe, and A Mattoo. 2010. “Services Reform and Manufacturing
   Performance: Evidence from India”, CEPR Discussion Papers, 8011, Washington, DC.

Arnold, J, B Javorcik, and A Mattoo. 2011. “Does Services Liberalization Benefit Manufacturing
   Firms? Evidence from the Czech Republic”, Journal of International Economics 85(1),136–
   46.

Arnold, J, A Mattoo, and G Narciso. 2008. “Services Inputs and Firm Productivity in Sub-
   Saharan Africa: Evidence from Firm-Level Data”, Journal of African Economies 17(4), 578–
   99.

Bacha, Edmar and Regis Bonelli. 2012. Accounting for the Rise and Fall of Post-WW-II Brazil’s
   Growth. IEPE / CdG . Discussion Paper No. 25, July.

Baldwin, Richard. 2006. “Multilateralizing Regionalism: Spaghetti Bowls as Building Blocs on
   the Path to Global Free Trade,” CEPR Discussion Papers No. 5775.

———. 2011. “Trade and Industrialisation after Globalisation's 2nd Unbundling: How Building
  and Joining a Supply Chain Are Different and Why It Matters.” NBER Working Paper
  17716, Cambridge, MA.

Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee. Forthcoming. "A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in
   the World, 1950-2010." Journal of Development Economics.

Baumann, Renato and others. 2010. O Brasil e os demais BRICs. Comercio e Politica.
   CEPAL/IPEA.

Baumann, Renato, Raquel Araujo and Jhonatan Ferreira. 2012. As Relacoes Comercais do Brasil
   com os demais BRICs. Textos para Discussao CEPAL-IPEA 26.



                                                                                          107
Baumann, Renato and Rubem Ceratti. 2012. A Politica Comercial dos BRICS com seu Entorno e
   Efeitos para o Brasil. IPEA Discussion Paper 1745. June .

Berger, Alex. 2013. “The Futile Debate over a Multilateral Framework for Investment.”
   Columbia FDI Perspectives No. 102. August.

Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen. 1999. “Exporting and Productivity.” National Bureau of
   Economic Research Working Paper 7135, Cambridge, MA.

Bonelli, R., and A. C. Pinheiro. 2012. “Competitividade e Desempenho Industrial: Mais Que só
   Câmbio.” XXIV Fórum Nacional Rumo ao Brasil Desenvolvido.

Blazquez-Lidoy, J et al. 2006. “Angel or Devil? China’s trade impact on Latin American
   emerging markets”, OECD Development Centre Working Paper n.252, Paris: OECD.

Bruns et al. 2012. LAC Regional Study on Teacher Quality. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Bosworth, Barry, and Susan M. Collins. 2008. “Accounting for Growth: Comparing China and
   India.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (1) Winter.

Cadot, O., M. Malouche, and S. Sáez. 2012.. Streamlining Non-Tariff Measures: A Toolkit for
   Policy Makers. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Cai, Fang, and Yang Lu. 2013. “Population Change and Resulting Slowdown in Potential GDP
   Growth in China.” China and the World Economy. Special Issue: Demographic Dividend and
   Socio-Economic Development 21 (2) March-April.

Canuto, Otaviano, Matheus Cavallari, and Jose Guilherme Reis. 2013. Brazilian Exports.
   Climbing Down a Competitiveness Cliff. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6302.
   January.

Cardoso, Eliana and Vladimir Kuhl Teles. 2010. A Brief History of Brazil’s Growth. Escola de
   Economia de Sao Paulo. Textos para Discussao. 241. January.

Cebeci, T., Fernandes, A., Freund, C. and M. Pierola. 2012. "Exporter Dynamics Database,"
   World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6229.

Chandra, Vandana, Justin Yifu Lin, and Yan Wang. 2012. “Leading Dragons Phenomenon: New
   Opportunities for Catch-Up in Low-Income Countries.” World Bank Policy Research
   Working Paper 6000, Washington, DC.

China-Brazil Business Council. 2011. “Chinese investments in Brazil”. May.

———. 2012. “Brazilian Companies in China: Presence and Experience.” June.

Clerides, S., S. Lach, and J. Tybout. 1998. “Is Learning by Exporting Important? Micro -
   Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico and Morocco.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
   113 (3): 903–47.

108
De Cavalcanti, Tiago, Kamiar Mohaddes, and Mehdi Raissi. 2012. “Commodity Price Volatility
   and the Sources of Growth.” IMF Working Paper 12/12, Washington, DC.

Decreux, Y. and Valin, H. (2007) "MIRAGE, Updated Version of the Model for Trade Policy
   Analysis with a Focus on Agriculture and Dynamics", CEPII Working Paper no. 2007-15.

Duggan, V, S Rahardja, and G Varela. 2013. “Service Sector Reform and Manufacturing
   Productivity: Evidence from Indonesia”, Policy Research Working Paper 6349, World Bank,
   Washington, DC.

Economist Intelligence Unit. 2011. Heavy Duty: China’s Next Wave of Exports. Report.

Eichengreen, Barry, Donghyun Park, and Kwanho Shin. 2011. “When Fast Growing Economies
   Slow Down: International Evidence and Implications for China.” NBER Working Paper No.
   16919, Cambridge, MA.

Eichengreen, Barry, Yeongseop Rhee, and Hui Tong. 2004. “The Impact of China on the Exports
   of Other Asian Countries.” NBER Working Paper No. 10768, Cambridge, MA.

Fajnzylber, Pablo, Daniel Lederman, and Julia Oliver, 2013, Pre Salt Oil Discoveries and the
   Long-Term Development of Brazil, World Bank Economic Premise Number 113. April.

Fernandes, A M, and C Paunov. 2012. “Foreign Direct Investment in Services and
   Manufacturing Productivity: Evidence for Chile”, Journal of Development Economics 97(2),
   305–21.

Gibbs, Murray and Swarnim Waglé. 2005. “The Great Maze: Regional and Bilateral Free Trade
   Agreements in Asia,” UNDP Regional Center in Colombo.

Gillson, I. and J.D. Reyes. 2011. Harnessing Regional Integration for Trade and Growth in
    Central Asia. International Trade Department, Poverty Reduction and Economic
    Management, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Halle, Mark and Luke Erik Peterson. 2005. “Investment Provisions in Free Trade A greements
   and Investment Treaties: Opportunities and Threats for Developing Countries.” UNDP
   Regional Center in Colombo.

Hausman, R., J. Hwang, and D. Rodrik. 2007. “What You Export Matters.” Journal of Economic
   Growth 12: 1–25.

Hertel, T.W., Ed., 1997. Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications. Cambridge
   University Press, Massachutes, USA

Hoekman, B. 2006. “Trade in Services at 25: Theory, Policy, and Evidence”, Mimeo, World
   Bank, Washington, DC.

IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2010. “Ten Years After the Take-off: Taking Stock of
   China-Latin America and the Caribbean Economic Relations.” Washington D.C.

                                                                                        109
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2011. New Growth Drivers for Low-Income Countries: The
   Role of BRICS. Washington, DC.

Jenkins, Rhys. 2012. “China and Brazil: Economic Impacts of a Growing Relationship.” Journal
   of Current Chinese Affairs 41 (1): 21-47.

Krugman, P. 1996. “Making Sense of the Competitiveness Debate.” Oxford Review of
   Economic Policy 12: 17–25.

Lau, Kevin, Chidambarathanu Narayan, and Stephen Green. 2013. “Global Research Note.”
   Standard Chartered Bank, Hong Kong, March 14.

Lewis, Arthur W. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour.” The
   Manchester School 22 (2) May.

Libânio, Gilberto. 2012.”O comércio Brasil-China em uma perspectiva regional: análise e
   implicações para o desenvolvimento”. BNDES Working Paper n.42.

Malkin, Israel, and Mark Spiegel. 2012. “Is China Due for a Slowdown?” Federal Reserve Bank
   of San Francisco Economic Letter.

Park, K. 2011. “New Development Partners and a Global Development Partnership.” In H.
   Kharas, K. Makino, and W. Jung, eds., Catalyzing Development: A New Vision for Aid.
   Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Pastore, C., M. Gazzano, and M. Pinotti. 2012. “Por Que a Produção Industrial Não Cresce
   Desde 2010?” Mimeo.

Pereira, Carlos and Joao Augusto de Castro Neves. 2011. Brazil and China: South-South
   Partnership or North-South Competition? Brookings Institution. Policy Paper. 26, March.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1994. “Returns to investment in education: A global update” World
   Development, 22(9): 1325–1343.

Roache, Shaun. 2012. “China’s Impact on World Commodity Markets.” IMF Working Paper
   12/115, Washington, DC.

Rodrik, D. 2007. Industrial Development: Stylized Facts and Policies; Industrial Development
   for the 21st Century. New York: UN.

Roland Berger. 2011. “The End of the China Cycle? How to Successfully Navigate the Evolution
   of Low-Cost Manufacturing.” Mimeo.

Schellekens, Philip. 2011. “Growth through Innovation.” Malaysia Economic Monitor, Bangkok,
   World Bank.

———. 2012. “A Changing China: Implications for Developing Countries.” Presentation for
  country authorities in Brazil, Cambodia, Indonesia, and Malaysia.

110
Silva, Joana. 2013. Brazil: Skills and Jobs. Mimeo. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Subramanian, Arvind and Martin Kessler. 2013. “The Hyperglobalization of Trade and Its
   Future,” Peterson Institute of International Economics Working Paper 13-6.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston. 1991. “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded
   Set of International Comparisons, 1950–1988” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2): 327–
   68.

Ter-Minassian, Teresa. 2012. Structural Reforms in Brazil: Progress and Unfinished Agenda.
   Policy Brief 158. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank. May.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2004. World Investment
  Report: The Shift Towards Services, New York and Geneva.

van der Mensbrugghe, D. (2010), The Environmental Impact and Sustainability Applied General
   Equilibrium (Envisage) Model,

van der Mensbrugghe, Dominique. 2010. The Environmental Impact and Sustainability Applied
   General Equilibrium (ENVISAGE) Model, Version 7.1, Technical Reference Document,
   December, The World Bank.

World Bank. 2002. Brazil: The New Growth Agenda. Report 22950-BR. Washington, DC:
  World Bank. December

———. 2008a. Brazil: Evaluating the Macroeconomic and Distributional Impacts of Lowering
  Transport Costs. Report 40020-BR. Washington, DC: World Bank. July.

———. 2008b. Knowledge and Innovation for Competitiveness in Brazil. WBI Development
  Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2009. “China's and India's Challenge to Latin America : Opportunity or Threat?”,
  Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2010. “Investing Across Borders 2010: Indicators of Foreign Direct Investment
  Regulation in 87 Economies.” Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2011a. Moving up the Value Chain: A Study of Malaysia’s Solar and Medical Device
  Industries. Mimeo. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2011b. The Changing Wealth of Nations: Measuring Sustainable Development in the
  New Millennium. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2012a. How to Decrease Freight Logistics Costs in Brazil. Transport Papers. TP-39.
  Washington, DC: World Bank. April.

———. 2012b. Sustaining Growth. China Quarterly Update Series. Beijing: World Bank.



                                                                                        111
———. 2013. “A Fine Balance.” East Asia and Pacific Economic Update. Washington, DC:
  World Bank. .

World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council (China). 2013. China 2030:
  Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative Society. Washington, DC: World Bank.

WEF (World Economic Forum). 2012. Global Competitiveness Report 2012/13. Geneva: WEF.

World Trade Organization (WTO). 2013. “Trade Policy Review of Brazil: Report by the
  Secretariat.” Geneva, March.

Yu, Yongzhen. 2011. “Identifying the Linkages Between Major Mining Commodity Prices and
   China’s Economic Growth—Implications for Latin America.” IMF Working Paper 11/86,
   Washington, DC: IMF.

Yusuf, Shahid, and Kaoru Nabeshima. 2009. Tiger Economies Under Threat: A Comparative
   Analysis of Malaysia's Industrial Prospects and Policy Options. Washington, DC: World
   Bank.

———. 2010. Changing the Industrial Geography in Asia: The Impact of China and India.
  Washington, DC: World Bank.




112
                                                       APPENDICES

A. Main Features of the Envisage Model

The long-term scenarios described in this paper are based on the World Bank’s Envisage
model – a recursive global dynamic computable general equilibrium (CGE) model. This
section covers the main features of the Envisage, a full description is provided in van der
Mensbrugghe (2010). At its core the ENVISAGE model is a relatively straightforward recursive
dynamic CGE model. A simple climate module has been incorporated in the model that links
economically-generated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to changes in global mean
temperature. The climate module then generates (generally negative) feedbacks on the economy
through damage functions. ENVISAGE is therefore in the class of models known in the literature
as Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs). The current version of ENVISAGE largely relies on
release 7.1 of the GTAP database. 33 The data base allows for a flexible aggregation of 112
countries/regions and 57 sectors. For computational and analytical purposes the version
employed in this study includes 14 countries/regions34 and 20 sectors.

The core specification of the model replicates largely a standard global CGE model. 35
Production is specified as a series of nested constant elasticity of substitution (CES) functions for
the various inputs—unskilled and skilled labor, capital, land, natural resources (sector-specific),
energy and other material inputs. The structure of the CES nest aims to replicate the substitution
and complementary relations across inputs. ENVISAGE uses a vintage structure of production
that allows for putty-semi putty capital. In addition, it is assumed that old capital is less flexible
than new capital. This implies that countries with relatively high rates of investment, such as
China, will tend to have more flexible economies as their share of new capital tends to be higher.
ENVISAGE allows for a multi-input/multi-output structure. Hence production from multiple
activities can be combined to produce a single output (for example the electricity sector has a
single output that is the combination of different generation technologies). And a single activity,
can in principle, produce multiple outputs. In the labor market we introduce market segmentation
by allowing rural to urban migration to be a function of relative wages. Aggregate land supply
follows a logistic curve with an absolute maximum available supply calibrated to FAO data.

Domestic demand has four components—intermediate demand, a single representative
household, government current expenditures and investment. Household demand is
implemented with a consistent demand system. Envisage allows for four different specifications:
LES/ELES (extended/linear demand system), CDE (Constant differences in elasticity) and
AIDADS (An Implicitly Directly Additive Demand System). LES/ELES have poor Engels
behavior, which makes it unsuitable for the long term simulations. CDE has more flexibility, but
is also restrictive in a dynamic setting. AIDADS allows for the marginal budget shares to change
with income providing more plausible Engels behavior, but its estimation and calibration in the
model are much more complex than of other demand system and is still a focus of research.

     33
         The GTAP database is developed and maintained by the Global Trade Analysis Program based at Purdue University
(www.gtap.org).
      34
         The regions included in this applications: Japan, rest of high income countries, United States, EU27, China, Rest of East
Asia, India, Rest of South Asia, Russia, Rest of Europe and Central Asia, Middle East and North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa,
Brazil, Rest of Latin America and the Caribbean.
      35
         The model is a derivative the World Bank’s Linkage model (van der Mensbr ugghe, 2001). Other well-known models in
this class include the GTAP model (Hertel 1997) and CEPII’s Mirage (Decreux and Valin, 2007).

                                                                                                                               113
Demand by each domestic agent is specified at the so-called Armington level, i.e. demand
for a bundle of domestically produced and imported goods. Armington demand is aggregated
across all agents and allocated at the national level between domestic production and imports by
region of origin. A top level CES nest first allocates aggregate (or Armington) demand between
domestic production and an aggregate import bundle. A second level nest then allocates
aggregate imports across the model’s different regions thus generating a bilateral trade flow
matrix. Each bilateral flow is associated with three price wedges. The first distinguishes producer
prices from the FOB price (an export tax and/or subsidy). The second distinguishes the FOB
price from the CIF price (an international trade and transportation margin). And the third
distinguishes the CIF price from the user price (an import tariff).

Government derives its income from various taxes: sales, excise, import duties, export,
production, factors and direct taxes. Investment revenues come from household, government and
net foreign savings. Government and investment expenditure function are derived from the CES
functions.

The standard scenario incorporates three closure rules. Typically government expenditures
are held constant as a share of GDP, fiscal balance is exogenous while direct taxes adjust to
cover any changes in the revenues to keep the fiscal balance at the exogenous level. The second
closure rule determines the investment savings balance. Households save a portion of their
income with the average propensity to save influenced by demographics and economic growth.
Government savings and foreign savings are exogenous in the current specification. As a result,
investment is savings driven, so that the total amount of savings depends on household savings,
but the price of investment goods is determined by the overall volume of investment as well.
Finally, the last closure determines the external balance. In the current application we fix the
foreign savings and therefore the trade balance. Therefore changes in trade flows will results in
shifts in the real exchange rate.

As the model is recursive dynamic, the dynamics are relatively simple and straightforward.
Population growth is based on the medium variant of the UN population’s projection. Labor
force growth is equated to the growth of the working age population—defined here as the
demographic cohort aged between 15 and 64. Investment is equated to savings. Savings are a
function of demographic dependency ratios. Savings rises as dependency ratios decline. Thus
countries that have declining youth dependency rates tend to see a rise in savings. This will
eventually be offset by countries that have a rising share of elderly in their population which will
result in a fall of savings. Capital accumulation is then equated to the previous period’s
(depreciated) capital stock plus investment. Productivity growth in the baseline is ‘calibrated’ to
achieve a given trend in long-term growth in line with historical growth rates (i.e. up to 2011),
and then productivity growth remains fixed.

Finally, ENVISAGE has been developed into an Integrated Assessment Model (IAM) with
a fully closed loop between economics and climate change. Economic activity generates
greenhouse gas emissions. ENVISAGE accounts for the so-called Kyoto gases that comprise of
carbon (C or CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) and the fluoridated gases (F-gases).
Greenhouse gas emissions are added to the existing stock of atmospheric gases—that also
interact with terrestrial and oceanic stocks—leading to changes in atmospheric concentration.
Using a reduced form set of equations, changes in atmospheric concentration convert into

114
changes in radiative forcing that in turn drive changes in atmospheric temperature. ENVISAGE
closes the loop between the climate and the economy by converting the climate signal as
summarized by the global mean temperature into an economic impact.

The long term projections rely on the assumptions regarding the developments in the core
macroeconomic variables. These include variables such as population and the main components
of GDP, which in the neoclassical model consist of labor, capital and productivity. We take
United Nations’ population forecast revision from 2008 for the current simulations36. According
to UN projections the world populations will increase from 6.5 billion in 2005 to 8.3 billion in
2030, while Chinese population is expected to increase from 1.29 billion in 2005 to 1.44 billion
in 2030. Figure A1 displays UN forecast for China and seven major World Bank regions: high-
income (HIC), East Asia and Pacific (EAP), South Asia (SAS), Europe and Central Asia (ECA),
Middle East and North Africa (MNA), Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) and Latin America and the
Caribbean (LAC).
Figure A1. Population scenario, various regions through 2050, millions


 2,500

                                                                        hic
 2,000
                                                                        eap

                                                                        chn
 1,500
                                                                        sas

 1,000                                                                  eca

                                                                        mna
   500                                                                  ssa

                                                                        lac
     0
          2005     2010    2015     2020     2025     2030



Source: UN Population Division, 2008 Revision

According to UN projections, almost all growth of population in 2030 comes from
developing countries, with the population of HICs growing by only 92 million out of the 1.8
billion total population’ growth. ECA is the only region where the UN expects a drop in total
population of 6 million over this period. The average annual population growth in China is
expected to slow down from 0.64 percent in 2005 to 0.13 percent in 2030. As a result the share
of Chinese population in world population will drop from 20 percent in 2005 to 17 percent in
2030.




    36
       The UN has released a new projection in May 2010. There are relatively modest changes with respect to the older
projection with the total population in 2050 increasing to 9.31 billion versus 9.15 billion in the 2008 projections.

                                                                                                                         115
The evolution of labor force is assumed to be in line with the growth of the working age
population- i.e. population between 15 and 6437. According to UN forecast (Figure A2), high
income countries and ECA would see their labor force declining from 2015 onwards. The labor
force in South Asia is expected to increase by 50 percent, while Sub-Saharan Africa’s labor force
is expected to double over 2005-2030 period. From 2020 onwards the Chinese labor force
stabilizes and then declines at an average annual rate of 0.3 percent. This will likely pose a
challenge to the continuation of the fast economic growth.

According to UN projections the global average youth dependency ratio is expected to
decrease, from 44 to 35 youth per 100 in the working age population over the period 2005-2030
(see Figure A3). All regions see a declining trend with the highest drop recorded in South Asia
and Sub-Saharan Africa. In China the youth dependency ratio falls from 31 to 25 per 100 in the
working age population and by 2030 it reaches the levels typical of the high income countries.
Figure A2. Working age population (15-64) through 2050, millions

 1,600
                                                                      hic
 1,400
                                                                      eap
 1,200
 1,000                                                                chn

   800                                                                sas

   600                                                                eca

   400                                                                mna

   200                                                                ssa

      0                                                               lac
             2005    2010    2015    2020   2025   2030



Source: UN Population Division, 2008 Revision

Figure A3. Youth dependency ratio, Number of persons aged under-15
relative to 100 working age population


 90
                                                                      hic
 80
                                                                      eap
 70
                                                                      chn
 60
                                                                      sas
 50
 40                                                                   eca

 30                                                                   mna
 20                                                                   ssa
 10                                                                   lac
  0                                                                   wld
           2005     2010    2015    2020    2025   2030



Source: UN Population Division, 2008 Revision




      37
        This is a simplistic assumption given that the overall labor force participation rates are likely to increase as more women
enter the labor force in developing countries or due to the rise in the retirement age in high income countries.

116
While youth dependency ratios decline, the elderly dependency ratios increase in all
regions (see Figure A4). The world average elderly dependency ratio increases from 11 to 18
per 100 in the working age population. The highest elderly dependency ratio is typical for the
high income countries, where the share of the elderly in total population increases to 23 percent
in 2030 from 15 percent in 2005. However the elderly dependency ratio increases rapidly for all
regions. In China the elderly are expected to constitute 16 percent of total population in 2030
with the old-age dependency ratio increasing from 11 per 100 in the working age population in
2005 to 25 in 2030. The aging of the population is likely to affect not only the saving rates and
fiscal solvency of the pension system, but it is also likely to lead to a shift in consumer demand
toward services (notably health-related) and away from consumer goods, durables an housing.
The effects of population aging on consumer demand are not captured in the current version of
the ENVISAGE model.
Figure A4. Elderly dependency ratio, Number of persons aged
over 65 relative to 100 working age population


 40

 35                                                           hic

 30                                                           eap

 25                                                           chn

 20                                                           sas
                                                              eca
 15
                                                              mna
 10
                                                              ssa
  5
                                                              lac
  0
       2005   2010    2015    2020   2025       2030



Source: UN Population Division, 2008 Revision

While the national savings are determined by income and demographic factors, the foreign
savings are exogenous in the baseline. We assume the foreign savings level such that the
current account balances decline to a sustainable level. In the case of China the current account
surplus is consistent with the observed values up to 2010 and then declines from the projected 8
percent of GDP in 2011 to 3 percent of GDP in 2030.

In the low growth scenario the historical trend of a faster productivity growth in
manufacturing as compared to agriculture and services is extrapolated. The productivity
growth in developing countries is faster than in developed countries, as they catch up quickly to
the productivity frontier. This results in faster economic growth in developing countries, overall.
However, due to slower growth of productivity in services, their relative price increases. This
results in an increasing share of services in the economy and therefore slower overall economic
growth, as low productivity sectors (services) become relatively more important. The demand
side developments also lead to the expansion of the share of services. In high income countries
the demand for health and personal services is expected to grow with the aging of societies. In
developing countries ageing will play a similar role, but demand for services is also likely to
increase as income per capita rises. The increasing importance of services will lead to a flow of
capital to these sectors, which will further reduce overall growth rates.

                                                                                               117
The previous paragraphs discussed core dynamic drivers of the model, the resulting per
capita growth rates are depicted in Figure A5. In the baseline low growth scenario the average
annual per capita growth in China slows down dramatically towards the end of the projection
period from initial 10 percent to only 3 percent. The pattern of per capita income growth in the
East Asia and Pacific is very similar to that of China, which dominates the region. The average
per capita income growth in high income countries slows down from an average of 2 percent in
2015 to 1 percent in 2030. South Asia becomes the fastest growing developing region with an
average growth of 5 percent per annum in 2030. This implies that in constant prices (2004 USD)
China’s weight of the world economy increases from 5 percent in 2005 to 13 percent in 2030,
while the weight of developing countries almost doubles from 21 percent to 42 percent over this
period. Similar weights in constant purchasing power parity prices would amount to 19 percent
for China in 2030 (up from 9 percent in 2005) and 66 percent for developing countries (up from
44 percent in 2005). One should expect the nominal shares at market exchange rates to be even
higher as prices are expected to grow faster in developing countries relative to high-income
countries (Balassa-Samuelson effect).
Figure A5. Per capita income growth rates, percent per annum.


 12             hic   eap     chn   sas   eca   mna   ssa   lac


 10


  8


  6


  4


  2


  0
         2010          2015           2020        2025            2030



Source: World Bank Envisage model.




118
B. Brazil’s Top Exports by Destination


                               Exports to China (Average Share 1997-2011)

 Code                               Product                                 Share   Cumulative   Lall's Class.
120100   Soya beans, whether or not broken.                                  0.26     0.26            pp
         Iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted iron pyrites :--
260111   Non-agglomerated                                                   0.23       0.49          rb2
         Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals,
270900   crude.                                                             0.07       0.56          pp
         Iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted iron pyrites :--
260112   Agglomerated                                                       0.06       0.62          rb2
150710   Crude oil, whether or not degummed                                 0.05       0.67          rb1
         Oil-cake and other solid residues, whether or not ground or in
         the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of soyabean
230400   oil.                                                               0.05       0.72          pp
470329   Semi-bleached or bleached :-- Non-coniferous                       0.04       0.76          rb1
240120   Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed/stripped                         0.02       0.78          pp
         Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding
880230   2,000 kg but not exceeding 15,000 kg                               0.01       0.80          ht2
         Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding
880240   15,000 kg                                                          0.01       0.81          ht2
         Spacecraft (including satellites) and suborbital and spacecraft
880260   launch vehicles                                                    0.01       0.83          ht2
         Other bovine leather and equine leather, parchment-dressed
410431   or prepared after tanning :-- Full grains and full grain splits    0.01       0.84          lt1
         In coils, not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced) :--
720917   Of a thickness of 0.5 mm or more but not exceeding 1 mm            0.01       0.85          lt2
720293   Other :-- Ferro-niobium                                            0.01       0.86          mt2
         Other bovine leather and equine leather, tanned or retanned
         but not further prepared, whether or not split :-- Bovine
410422   leather, otherwise pre-tanned                                      0.01       0.87          lt1
370320   Other, for colour photography (polychrome)                         0.01       0.88          mt2
         Containing by weight less than 0.25 % of carbon :-- Other, of
720712   rectangular (other than square) cross-section                      0.01       0.89          mt2
         Raw sugar not containing added flavouring or colouring
170111   matter :-- Cane sugar                                              0.01       0.89          rb1
440799   Wood sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled                  0.01       0.90          rb1
740311   Refined copper :-- Cathodes and sections of cathodes               0.01       0.91          pp




                                                                                                           119
                         Exports from Brazil to EU27 (Average Share 1997-2011)

 Code                               Product                                Share   Cumulative   Lall's Class.
120100   Soya beans, whether or not broken.                                 0.09     0.09            pp
         Oil-cake and other solid residues, whether or not ground or in
         the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of soyabean
230400   oil.                                                              0.09       0.18          pp
 90111   Coffee, not roasted :-- Not decaffeinated                         0.07       0.25          pp
         Iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted iron pyrites :--
260111   Non-agglomerated                                                  0.06       0.31          rb2
470329   Chem wood pulp, soda/sulphate, non-conifer, bleached              0.03       0.34          rb1
         Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals,
270900   crude.                                                            0.03       0.37          pp
         Iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted iron pyrites :--
260112   Agglomerated                                                      0.03       0.40          rb2
200911   Orange juice :-- Frozen                                           0.03       0.42          rb1
240120   Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed/stripped                        0.02       0.44          pp
890590   Floating docks, special function vessels nes                      0.02       0.46          mt3
         Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding
880240   15,000 kg                                                         0.02       0.48          ht2
         Meat and edible meat offal; Of fowls of the species Gallus
 20714   domesticus :-- Cuts and offal, frozen                             0.01       0.49          pp
760110   Aluminium, not alloyed                                            0.01       0.51          pp
890520   Floating or submersible drilling or production platforms          0.01       0.52          mt3
         Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding
880230   2,000 kg but not exceeding 15,000 kg                              0.01       0.53          ht2
 20230   Bovine cuts boneless, frozen                                      0.01       0.55          pp
260300   Copper ores and concentrates.                                     0.01       0.56          rb2
200919   Orange juice :-- Other                                            0.01       0.57          rb1
840999   Parts for diesel and semi-diesel engines, Other                   0.01       0.58          mt3
         Other bovine leather and equine leather, tanned or retanned
         but not further prepared, whether or not split :-- Bovine
410422   leather, otherwise pre-tanned                                     0.01       0.59          lt1




120
                            Exports to MERCOSUR (Average Share 1997-2011)

Code                                Product                                 Share   Cumulative   Lall's Class.
         Other vehicles, with spark-ignition internal combustion
         reciprocating piston engine :-- Of a cylinder capacity exceeding
870323   1,500 cc but not exceeding 3,000 cc                                0.05       0.05          mt1
852520   Transmission apparatus incorporating reception apparatus           0.03       0.08          ht1
         Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals,
270900   crude.                                                             0.03       0.11          pp
         Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals,
         other than crude; preparations not elsewhere specified or
         included, containing by weight 70% or more of petroleum oils
271000   or of oils obtained from bituminous minerals, these oils b         0.02       0.13          rb2
         Other vehicles, with spark-ignition internal combustion
         reciprocating piston engine :-- Of a cylinder capacity exceeding
870322   1,000 cc but not exceeding 1,500 cc                                0.02       0.15          mt1
         Diesel powered trucks weighing 5-20 tonnes, Other, with
         compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine
         (diesel or semi-diesel) :-- g.v.w. exceeding 5 tonnes but not
870422   exceeding 20 tonnes                                                0.01       0.16          mt1
         Diesel powered trucks weighing < 5 tonnes, Other, with
         compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine
870421   (diesel or semi-diesel) :-- g.v.w. not exceeding 5 tonnes          0.01       0.17          mt1
870899   Motor vehicle parts nes                                            0.01       0.19          mt1
271600   Electrical energy. (optional heading)                              0.01       0.20          n.a
         Chassis fitted with engines, for the motor vehicles of headings
870600   Nos. 87.01 to 87.05.                                               0.01       0.21          mt1
401120   Pneumatic tyres new of rubber for buses or lorries                 0.01       0.22          rb1
870190   Wheeled tractors nes                                               0.01       0.23          mt3
870120   Road tractors for semi-trailers                                    0.01       0.24          mt1
390110   Polyethylene having a specific gravity of less than 0.94           0.01       0.25          mt2
         Iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted iron pyrites :--
260112   Agglomerated                                                       0.01       0.26          rb2
390120   Polyethylene having a specific gravity of 0.94 or more             0.01       0.27          mt2
870829   Parts and accessories of bodies nes for motor vehicles             0.01       0.28          mt1
300490   Medicaments nes, in dosage                                         0.01       0.28          ht2
         Engines of a kind used for the propulsion of vehicles of
840820   Chapter 87                                                         0.01       0.29          mt3
         Other paper and paperboard, not containing fibres obtained
         by a mechanical process or of which not more than 10 % by
         weight of the total fibre content consists of such fibres :--
480252   Weighing 40 g/m2 or more but not more                              0.01       0.30          rb1




                                                                                                           121
                                  Exports from Brazil to USA (Average Share 1997-2011)

 Code                                           Product                       Share   Cumulative   Lall's Class.
              Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals,
270900        crude.                                                          0.08       0.08          pp
              Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding
880230        2,000 kg but not exceeding 15,000 kg                            0.06       0.14          ht2
640399        Other footwear :-- Other                                        0.04       0.18          lt1
              Non-alloy pig iron containing by weight 0.5 % or less of
720110        phosphorus                                                      0.04       0.21          mt2
              Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals,
              other than crude; preparations not elsewhere specified or
              included, containing by weight 70% or more of petroleum oils
271000        or of oils obtained from bituminous minerals, these oils b      0.03       0.24          rb2
 90111        Coffee, not roasted :-- Not decaffeinated                       0.03       0.28          pp
              Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding
880240        15,000 kg                                                       0.03       0.30          ht2
470329        Chem wood pulp, soda/sulphate, non-conifer, bleached            0.03       0.33          rb1
              Iron and Steel, Semi-finished bars, i/nas <0.25%C,
720712        rectangular, nes                                                0.02       0.35          mt2
852520        Transmission apparatus incorporating reception apparatus        0.02       0.38          ht1
              Gold, semi-manufactured forms, Non-monetary :-- Other
710813        semi-manufactured forms                                         0.02       0.40          n.a
890520        Floating or submersible drilling or production platforms        0.02       0.41          mt3
840999        Parts for diesel and semi-diesel engines, Other                 0.01       0.43          mt3
841430        Compressors of a kind used in refrigerating equipment           0.01       0.44          mt3
240120        Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed/stripped                      0.01       0.45          pp
200911        Orange juice :-- Frozen                                         0.01       0.46          rb1
              Undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by volume
220710        of 80 % vol or higher                                           0.01       0.47          mt2
840991        Parts for spark-ignition engines except aircraft                0.01       0.48          mt3
870323        Automobiles, spark ignition engine of 1500-3000 cc              0.01       0.49          mt1
680293        Worked granite                                                  0.01       0.50          rb2

Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.




122
C. Brazil’s Most and Least Dynamic Products by Destination

                                                           More Dynamic Products
                                                           USA Market : 2000-2011
                                                                                     Average DRCP              Average Share               Lall's
   Code Product                                                                    Brazil        China       Brazil       China Classification
  842920 Graders and levellers                                                      7.152          n.a        0.625          n.a            mt3
  720690 Iron or non-alloy steel, primary nes, <99.94% iron                         6.671         0.285       0.200       0.181             mt2
                                                                                    6.538
  292241 Amino-acids and their esters, other than those containing more than one kind   of oxygen 2.042       0.363
                                                                                                    function; salts          :-- Lysine and rb2
                                                                                                                          0.171
                                                                                                                    thereof                 its esters; salts thereof
  854610 Electrical insulators of glass                                             5.997         3.027       0.137       0.127             mt3
  220710 Undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by volume of 80 % vol or5.372
                                                                                       higher      n.a        0.331          n.a            mt2
  282090 Manganese oxides other than manganese dioxide                              3.484         0.604       0.141       0.121             rb2
  842930 Scrapers                                                                   3.360          n.a        0.300          n.a            mt3
   80131 Cashew nuts :-- In shell                                                   3.066          n.a        0.603          n.a            pp
  240130 Tobacco refuse                                                             2.940          n.a        0.510          n.a            pp
  210220 Inactive yeasts; other single-cell micro-organisms, dead                   2.936         0.812       0.176       0.047             rb1
  530890 Yarn of other vegetable textile fibres                                     2.862         5.165       0.129       0.232             lt1
  721914 Hot rolled stainless steel coil, w >600mm, t <3mm                          2.817        -0.378       0.176       0.234             mt2
  392510 Reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers, of a capacity exceeding 3002.765
                                                                                     l            0.238       0.027       0.019             lt2
  420690 Articles of gut, goldbeater skin, bladder, tendons nes                     2.689        -0.205       0.077       0.024             lt2
   30265 Other fish, excluding livers and roes :-- Dogfish and other sharks         2.598          n.a        0.067          n.a            pp
  680293 Granite                                                                    2.473         1.215       0.320       0.174             rb2
                                                                                    2.431
  400211 Styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR); carboxylated styrene-butadiene rubber (XSBR)    :-- Latex0.020       0.059       0.001             rb1
  391220 Cellulose nitrates (including collodions)                                  2.392         0.159       0.136       0.010             mt2
                                                                                    2.389
  850212 Generating sets with compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines     (diesel 0.494           engines)0.027
                                                                                                              0.055
                                                                                                  or semi-diesel            :-- Of an outputht1
                                                                                                                                              exceeding 75 kVA but not ex
  470200 Chemical wood pulp, dissolving grades.                                     2.360          n.a        0.064          n.a            rb1

                                                Least Dynamic Products
                                                USA Market : 2000-2011
                                                             Average DRCP               Average Share               Lall's
   Code      Product                                        Brazil       China         Brazil       China Classification
  722490     Semi-finished products of alloy steel except-5.795
                                                             stainless   0.373         0.315        0.010            mt2
  260111     Iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted   iron pyrites n.a
                                                            -5.206                     0.498
                                                                            :-- Non-agglomerated      n.a            rb2
  220720                                                         strength n.a
                                                            -5.103
             Ethyl alcohol and other spirits, denatured, of any                        0.277          n.a            mt2
  630691     C amping goods nes, of cotton                  -4.765       5.125         0.228        0.432            lt1
  293810     Rutoside (rutin) and its derivatives           -4.519       5.017         0.322        0.409            ht2
  440724     Lumber, Virola, Mahogany                       -3.272         n.a         0.132          n.a            rb1
  500400                                                    -3.045
             Silk yarn (other than yarn spun from silk waste)  not put up1.116         0.103
                                                                           for retail sale.         0.297            lt1
   80122     Brazil nuts :-- Shelled                        -3.037         n.a         0.189          n.a            pp
  640691     Parts of footwear of wood                      -2.681       1.719         0.120        0.162            lt1
  170290     Sugar nes, invert sugar, caramel and artificial-2.629
                                                                honey    0.430         0.174        0.041            rb1
  160300                                                        molluscs-0.107
                                                            -2.620
             Extracts and juices of meat, fish or crustaceans,                         0.272
                                                                          or other aquatic          0.011
                                                                                             invertebrates.          rb1
  440839     Veneer, tropical woods                         -2.272       1.400         0.093        0.106            rb1
  292421     Cyclic amides (including cyclic carbamates) and-2.271       1.253 salts
                                                                their derivatives;     0.269        0.050
                                                                                          thereof :--                rb2 derivatives; salts ther
                                                                                                      Ureines and their
  250629     Quartzite :-- Other                            -2.266       0.641         0.132        0.158            pp
  200891     Palm hearts, otherwise prepared or preserved   -2.264         n.a         0.341          n.a            rb1
  852729                                                    -2.145without
             Radio-broadcast receivers not capable of operating          1.767            source of0.176
                                                                                       0.095
                                                                              an external                            mt3
                                                                                                      power, of a kind used in motor vehicles,
  760521     Wire, aluminium alloy, t > 7mm                 -2.130       0.332         0.043        0.007            pp
  470319     C hem wood pulp, soda/sulphate, non-conifer,   -2.122
                                                               unbleached  n.a         0.458          n.a            rb1
  841829     Refrigerators, household type :-- Other        -1.926       2.382         0.058        0.352            mt3
  730810     Bridges and bridge-sections                    -1.900       9.082         0.087        0.195            lt2




                                                                                                                                            123
                                                        More Dynamic Products
                                                        EU27 Market : 2000-2011
                                                                                     Average DRCP          Average Share          Lall's
   Code Product                                                                    Brazil      China      Brazil    China Classification
  200919 Orange juice :-- Other                                                     3.459       0.000     0.437     0.000           rb1
                                                                                    2.896
  170111 Raw sugar not containing added flavouring or colouring matter :-- Cane sugar           0.001     0.185     0.000           rb1
  151521 Maize (corn) oil and its fractions :-- Crude oil                           2.102         n.a     0.073       n.a           rb1
   21090 Meat and edible meat offal cured, flours, meals nes                        1.935         n.a     0.543       n.a           rb1
  711420 Gold, silversmith wares, base clad with precious metal                     1.729      -0.892     0.044     0.115           lt2
  150810 Crude oil                                                                  1.616      -1.053     0.123     0.016           rb1
  844519 Machines for preparing textile fibres :-- Other                            1.595       2.216     0.055     0.044          mt3
  260200 Manganese ores and concentrates, including ferruginous manganese ores 1.409                      0.293
                                                                                               -0.013with a
                                                                                    and concentrates                  content of 20 rb2
                                                                                                                    0.002
                                                                                                            manganese               % or more, calculated on the dry
  470329 C hem wood pulp, soda/sulphate, non-conifer, bleached                      1.398      -0.001     0.289     0.000           rb1
  250629 Quartzite :-- Other                                                        1.391      -0.251     0.391     0.057           pp
  240120 Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed/stripped                                 1.308       0.231     0.214     0.021           pp
  292690 Nitrile-function compounds, nes                                            1.295       0.416     0.038     0.053           rb2
  250490 Natural graphite, except powder or flakes                                  1.252       1.206     0.043     0.184           pp
  284329 Silver compounds:-- Other                                                  1.170         n.a     0.188       n.a           rb2
  481620 Self-copy paper                                                            1.119       0.023     0.028     0.002           lt2
                                                                                    1.097
  260111 Iron ores and concentrates, other than roasted iron pyrites :-- Non-agglomerated      -0.003     0.477     0.000           rb2
  440920 Non-conifer wood continuously shaped along any edges                       1.043       1.600     0.082     0.140           rb1
  160232 Fowls meat and meat offa                                                   1.026       0.115     0.126     0.003           rb1
  120720 Cotton seeds                                                               0.997         n.a     0.089       n.a           pp
                                                                                    0.994
  290919 Acyclic ethers and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives  0.035
                                                                                               :-- Other  0.036     0.002           rb2


                                            Least Dynamic Products
                                            EU27 Market : 2000-2011
                                                        Average DRCP            Average Share            Lall's
   Code Product                                        Brazil      China       Brazil      China Classification
                                                       -5.422not exceeding
  880220 Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight         n.a        0.049
                                                                             2,000 kg        n.a          ht2
  200911 Orange juice :-- Frozen                       -2.712       0.000       0.374       0.000         rb1
   80121 Brazil nuts :-- In shell                      -2.456        n.a        0.247        n.a          pp
  470319 C hem wood pulp, soda/sulphate, non-conifer,  -2.285
                                                           unbleachedn.a        0.092        n.a          rb1
                                                       -2.238
  160300 Extracts and juices of meat, fish or crustaceans, molluscs 0.012       0.285
                                                                    or other aquatic        0.001
                                                                                     invertebrates.       rb1
  720293 Other :-- Ferro-niobium                       -1.754       0.015       0.505       0.003         mt2
  440724 Lumber, Virola, Mahogany                      -1.742      -0.011       0.068       0.001         rb1
   20230 Bovine cuts boneless, frozen                  -1.646        n.a        0.219        n.a          pp
  292242 Amino-acids and their esters, other than those  containing 0.175
                                                       -1.518                   0.035
                                                                    more than one                         rb2
                                                                                            0.100 function;
                                                                                   kind of oxygen           salts thereof :-- Glutamic ac
                                                       -1.508
  420690 Articles of gut, goldbeater skin, bladder, tendons   nes -1.131        0.030       0.281         lt2
  293293 Piperonal                                     -1.486       0.576       0.129       0.615         rb2
   80122 Brazil nuts :-- Shelled                       -1.482      -0.001       0.085       0.002         pp
  630691 C amping goods nes, of cotton                 -1.457       2.366       0.105       0.494         lt1
  440121 Wood in chips or particles :-- Coniferous     -1.443        n.a        0.039        n.a          pp
  293810 Rutoside (rutin) and its derivatives          -1.407      -2.255       0.149       0.190         ht2
                                                       -1.361exceeding
  880230 Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight                    0.081
                                                                     n.a 2,000 kg            n.a 15,000ht2
                                                                                  but not exceeding         kg
   21020 Meat of bovine animals                        -1.329        n.a        0.042        n.a          rb1
                                                        stainless 0.073
  722490 Semi-finished products of alloy steel except-1.315                     0.031       0.004         mt2
                                                       -1.241
  470429 C hem wood pulp, sulphite, non-coniferous, bleached        0.002       0.033       0.001         rb1
                                                       -1.179
  292800 Organic derivatives of hydrazine or of hydroxylamine.      0.583       0.016       0.031         rb2

124
                                                         Most Dynamic Products
                                                      MERCOSUR+ Market: 2000-2011
                                                                                       Average DRCP      Average Share        Lall's
Code   Product                                                                          Brazil   China   Brazil   China   Classification
521022 Bleached :-- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill                  12.217            0.591                 lt1
       In coils, not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced) :-- Of a
720915 thickness of 3 mm or more                                                       11.007            0.307                 lt2
722720 Of silico-manganese steel                                                       10.659            0.618                 lt2
10210     Pure-bred breeding animals                                                   8.958             0.311                 pp
722592 Other :-- Otherwise plated or coated with zinc                                  8.765             0.788                 lt2
220430 Other grape must                                                                8.464             0.368                 rb1
860310 Powered from an external source of electricity                                  8.344             0.512                mt2
284310 Colloidal precious metals                                                         8.2             0.316                 rb2
640691 Other :-- Of wood                                                               8.069             0.557                 lt1
90700 Cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems).                                            7.6             0.677                 pp
681190 0ther articles                                                                   7.41     -1.14   0.273    0.029        rb2
       Mechanical stokers, including their mechanical grates, mechanical ash
841630 dischargers and similar appliances                                               7.17     -0.29   0.247    0.039       mt3
441090 Of other ligneous materials                                                     7.141              0.21                 rb1
       Sack kraft paper, creped or crinkled, whether or not embossed or
480820 perforated                                                                      6.946     -0.65   0.643    0.069        rb1
521129 Bleached :-- Other fabrics                                                      6.499     0.071   0.348    0.158        lt1
740819 Of refined copper :-- Other                                                     6.466     0.092    0.45    0.003        pp
       Other vehicles, with compression-ignition internal combustion piston
       engine (diesel or semi-diesel) :-- Of a cylinder capacity not exceeding
870331 1,500 cc                                                                        6.283             0.618                mt1
320630 Pigments and preparations based on cadmium compounds                            6.265             0.393                mt2
230210 Of maize (corn)                                                                 6.228             0.173                 pp
       Containing 85 % or more by weight of staple fibres of nylon or other
550912 polyamides :-- Multiple (folded) or cabled yarn                                 6.114             0.441                 lt1


                                                         Least Dynamic Products
                                                      MERCOSUR+ Market: 2000-2011
                                                                                       Average DRCP      Average Share        Lall's
Code      Product                                                                       Brazil   China   Brazil   China   Classification
81010     Strawberries                                                                 -10.646           0.402                 pp
580123 Of cotton :-- Other weft pile fabrics                                           -9.114    7.156    0.2     0.441        lt1
80719 Melons (including watermelons) :-- Other                                          -8.44            0.714                 pp
80711     Melons (including watermelons) :-- Watermelons                               -8.201            0.478                 pp
290490 Other                                                                           -7.574    2.015   0.346    0.265        rb2
722490 Other                                                                            -7.57            0.818                mt2
       Other mineral or chemical fertilisers containing the two fertilising
310551 elements nitrogen and phosphorus :-- Containing nitrates and phosphates         -7.305            0.167                mt2
520812 Unbleached :-- Plain weave, weighing more than 100 g/m2                         -7.082    1.061    0.52    0.226        lt1
       Other, with at least one outer ply of non-coniferous wood :-- With at least
441222 one ply of tropical wood specified in Subheading Note 1 to this Chapter         -6.866            0.502                 rb1
722599 Other                                                                           -6.654            0.165                 lt2
722230 Other bars and rods                                                              -6.61            0.242                 lt2
790112 Zinc, not alloyed :-- Containing by weight less than 99.99 % of zinc            -6.528            0.471                 pp
200919 Orange juice :-- Other                                                          -6.306            0.401                 rb1
       Carboxylic acids with phenol function but without other oxygen function,
       their anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and their derivatives :--
291821 Salicylic acid and its salts                                                    -6.273    1.842   0.398    0.134       mt2
110814 Starches :-- Manioc (cassava) starch                                            -6.198            0.421                 rb2
560721 Of sisal or other textile fibres of the genus Agave :-- Binder or baler twine    -6.04    0.207   0.541    0.05         lt1
       Tunas (of the genus Thunnus), skipjack or stripe-bellied bonito (Euthynnus
       (Katsuwonus) pelamis), excluding livers and roes :-- Skipjack or strip-
30343 bellied bonito                                                                   -5.975            0.271                 pp
521112 Unbleached :-- 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill                -5.948            0.618                 lt1
70990 Other                                                                            -5.941            0.513                 pp
530911 Containing 85 % or more by weight of flax :-- Unbleached or bleached            -5.933    5.183   0.283    0.251        lt1



Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.



                                                                                                                                     125
D. Export Similarity between Brazil and Other Countries
Export similarity index: Brazil (graphs by country)

                China                             United States                        European Union                            Argentina
  0.4                                   0.4                                   0.4                                    0.4
  0.3                                   0.3                                   0.3                                    0.3
  0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2                                    0.2
  0.1                                   0.1                                   0.1                                    0.1
  0.0                                   0.0                                   0.0                                    0.0
        97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11               97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11               97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11                97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11
              Paraguay                              Uruguay                               Venezuela                               Bolivia
  0.4                                   0.4                                   0.4                                    0.4
  0.3                                   0.3                                   0.3                                    0.3
  0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2                                    0.2
  0.1                                   0.1                                   0.1                                    0.1
  0.0                                   0.0                                   0.0                                    0.0
        97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11               97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11               97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11                97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11
                Chile                               Colombia                               Ecuador                                 Peru
  0.4                                   0.4                                   0.4                                    0.4
  0.3                                   0.3                                   0.3                                    0.3
  0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2                                    0.2
  0.1                                   0.1                                   0.1                                    0.1
  0.0                                   0.0                                   0.0                                    0.0
        97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11               97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11               97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11                97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11

Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.
Note: Vertical axis is the export similarity index that takes a value between 0 and 1. See Technical Appendix for a discussion and formal presentation
of the export similarity index. The index measures the extent to which both countries actively export a product or category of products in world markets.




126
E. Export Sophistication by Destination and Lall Category
Contribution to export sophistication by Lall classification
(GDP per capita in thousands of constant 2005 PPP-adjusted international dollars)

                                                             Exports of Brazil to the World

               PP                            RB1                               RB2                           LT1                           LT2
 5                             5                                 5                             5                             5
 4                             4                                 4                             4                             4
 3                             3                                 3                             3                             3
 2                             2                                 2                             2                             2
 1                             1                                 1                             1                             1
 0                             0                                 0                             0                             0
     97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09           97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09
               MT1                           MT2                               MT3                           HT1                           HT2
 5                             5                                 5                             5                             5
 4                             4                                 4                             4                             4
 3                             3                                 3                             3                             3
 2                             2                                 2                             2                             2
 1                             1                                 1                             1                             1
 0                             0                                 0                             0                             0
     97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09           97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09


                                                               Exports of Brazil to China

               PP                            RB1                               RB2                           LT1                           LT2
 5                             5                                 5                             5                             5
 4                             4                                 4                             4                             4
 3                             3                                 3                             3                             3
 2                             2                                 2                             2                             2
 1                             1                                 1                             1                             1
 0                             0                                 0                             0                             0
     97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09           97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09
               MT1                           MT2                               MT3                           HT1                           HT2
 5                             5                                 5                             5                             5
 4                             4                                 4                             4                             4
 3                             3                                 3                             3                             3
 2                             2                                 2                             2                             2
 1                             1                                 1                             1                             1
 0                             0                                 0                             0                             0
     97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09           97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09       97   00    03   06   09




                                                                                                                                                       127
                                                                  Exports of Brazil to EU27

                PP                             RB1                                  RB2                                   LT1                             LT2
  5                             5                                     5                                     5                              5
  4                             4                                     4                                     4                              4
  3                             3                                     3                                     3                              3
  2                             2                                     2                                     2                              2
  1                             1                                     1                                     1                              1
  0                             0                                     0                                     0                              0
      97   00    03   06   09       97    00    03    06    09            97   00    03     06   09             97   00    03    06   09       97   00     03   06     09
                MT1                            MT2                                  MT3                                   HT1                             HT2
  5                             5                                     5                                     5                              5
  4                             4                                     4                                     4                              4
  3                             3                                     3                                     3                              3
  2                             2                                     2                                     2                              2
  1                             1                                     1                                     1                              1
  0                             0                                     0                                     0                              0
      97   00    03   06   09       97    00    03    06    09            97   00    03     06   09             97   00    03    06   09       97   00     03   06     09


                                                                Exports of Brazil to Mercosur+

                PP                             RB1                                   RB2                                   LT1                              LT2
  5                             5                                     5                                     5                                  5
  4                             4                                     4                                     4                                  4
  3                             3                                     3                                     3                                  3
  2                             2                                     2                                     2                                  2
  1                             1                                     1                                     1                                  1
  0                             0                                     0                                     0                                  0
      97   00    03   06   09       97    00    03 06       09            97    00    03    06    09            97   00    03 06      09            97    00 03        06    09
                MT1                            MT2                                   MT3                                   HT1                              HT2
  5                             5                                     5                                     5                                  5
  4                             4                                     4                                     4                                  4
  3                             3                                     3                                     3                                  3
  2                             2                                     2                                     2                                  2
  1                             1                                     1                                     1                                  1
  0                             0                                     0                                     0                                  0
      97   00    03   06   09       97    00    03    06    09            97    00    03    06    09            97   00     03   06   09            97    00    03     06    09


                                                            Exports of Brazil to United States

                 PP                                 RB1                               RB2                                 LT1                             LT2
  5                                 5                                     5                                 5                              5
  4                                 4                                     4                                 4                              4
  3                                 3                                     3                                 3                              3
  2                                 2                                     2                                 2                              2
  1                                 1                                     1                                 1                              1
  0                                 0                                     0                                 0                              0
      97   00    03 06     09            97    00    03 06       09            97    00 03       06    09       97   00    03    06   09       97    00    03     06    09
                 MT1                                MT2                               MT3                                 HT1                             HT2
  5                                 5                                     5                                 5                              5
  4                                 4                                     4                                 4                              4
  3                                 3                                     3                                 3                              3
  2                                 2                                     2                                 2                              2
  1                                 1                                     1                                 1                              1
  0                                 0                                     0                                 0                              0
      97   00    03   06   09            97    00    03    06    09            97    00    03    06    09       97   00     03   06   09       97    00    03     06    09


Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations.




128
F. Comparison of Number of Products Traded by Classification

 1500                  Brazil: Number of products exported             1500                   Brazil: Number of products imported
                                 Primary Products                                                       Primary Products
 1200                                              to China            1200                                                  from China
                                                   to World                                                                  from World
  900                                              Maximum Number       900                                                  Maximum Number

  600                                                                   600

  300                                                                   300

    0                                                                     0
        1988 90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06     08   10          1988 90   92     94   96   98   00   02   04    06   08   10


 1500                  Brazil: Number of products exported                              Brazil: Number of products imported
                                                                       1500
                         Resource Based Manufactures                                      Resource Based Manufactures
 1200                                                                  1200

  900                                                                   900
                                                 to China
  600                                            to World               600
                                                 Maximum Number
                                                                        300                                              from China
  300
                                                                                                                         from World
                                                                                                                         Maximum Number
    0                                                                     0
        1988 90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06     08   10          1988 90   92     94   96   98   00   02   04    06   08   10




                   Brazil: Number of products exported                                         Brazil: Number of products imported
 1500                                                                  1500
                     Low Technology/Manufactures                                                 Low Technology/Manufactures
 1200                                                                  1200

  900                                             to China
                                                                        900
                                                  to World
  600                                             Maximum Number        600                                             from China
                                                                                                                        from World
  300                                                                   300                                             Maximum Number
    0                                                                     0
        1988 90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06     08   10          1988 90   92     94   96   98   00   02   04    06   08   10

                  Brazil: Number of products exported                                   Brazil: Number of products imported
 1500              Medium Technology/Manufactures                      1500              Medium Technology/Manufactures

 1200                                                                  1200
                                                  to China
  900                                             to World              900
                                                  Maximum Number
  600                                                                   600
                                                                                                                        from China
  300                                                                   300                                             from World
                                                                                                                        Maximum Number
    0                                                                     0
        1988 90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06     08   10          1988 90   92     94   96   98   00   02   04    06   08   10

                  Brazil: Number of products exported                                        Brazil: Number of products imported
 1500                                                                  1500
                    High Technology/Manufactures                                               High Technology/Manufactures
 1200                                                                  1200
                                                  to China                                                               from China
  900                                             to World                                                               from World
                                                  Maximum Number        900
                                                                                                                         Maximum Number
  600                                                                   600

  300                                                                   300

    0                                                                     0
        1988 90   92    94   96   98   00   02   04   06     08   10          1988 90   92     94   96   98   00   02   04    06   08   10

 Source: UN Comtrade; World Bank staff calculations


                                                                                                                                        129
G. Technical Notes

Revealed Comparative Advantage

The revealed comparative advantage (RCA) of country in product        and year is calculated as:




where       is the share of product in total exports of country and      is the share of product
 in total exports of the world . A comparative advantage is revealed in product if            .

Dynamic Revealed Comparative Position

The dynamic revealed comparative position (DRCP) of country in product          between years
and is calculated as:



where        is the share of imports of country   from country in total imports from the world
in product   and year .

There is direct competition if the average DRCP between 2000 and 2011 of country is greater
than zero and the DRCP of country is less than zero in country . There is partial competition
if the average DRCP is positive for both country and country . Partial pressure is strong if the
average DRCP of country is greater than the average DRCP of country . Otherwise partial
pressure is weak. Note that when comparing the share of products subject to competition across
years, the change in the series is purely compositional, since the products subject to competition
are not changing, only the product’s shares.

Export ‘Sophistication’ (EXPY and EXPY2)

Haussman, Hwang and Rodrik (2006) propose a measure of export sophistication, denoted by
EXPY, that measures the export-weighted average level of GDP per capita associated with a
country’s export bundle. It is computed in a two-stage process. The first stage is to measure the
income level associated with each product in the world, termed ‘PRODY’. The PRODY of a
particular product is the GDP per capita of the typical country that exports that good, calculated
by weighting the GDP per capita of all countries exporting the good. The weight given to each
country is based on ‘revealed comparative advantage’, defined as the share of its exports that
comes from that good relative to the ‘average’ country. Therefore, a product that typically makes
up a large percentage of a poor country’s export basket will have stronger weights towards poor
countries’ GDP per capita. This will be less the case for a product that makes up a small
percentage of a poor country’s exports but is a significant component of many rich countries’
export baskets. Accordingly, the sophistication of a product is linked to the per capita income of
the countries that export that product.




130
The second stage is to measure the income associated with a country’s export basket as a whole;
this is its EXPY. From the first stage, each product that a country exports will have a PRODY.
The EXPY is calculated by weighting these PRODY by the share that each good contributes to
total exports. If butter makes up 15 percent of a country’s exports, its PRODY will be given a
weight of 0.15. Countries whose export baskets are made up of ‘rich-country goods’ will have a
higher EXPY, while export baskets made up of ‘poor-country goods’ will have a lower EXPY.
Accordingly, the sophistication of exports is linked to per capita income of the countries that
export similar products. The calculations are:

                                         ⁄
                                ∑                and         ∑
                                     ∑   ⁄


where is GDP per capital of country and        is the share of exports of product in total
exports of country in year . The PRODY is calculated for each year and the average PRODY
across years is then used.

EXPY2 is constructed using PRODY2, which is PRODY of exports minus PRODY of imports.
A positive (negative) PRODY2 indicates that the product tends to be exported (imported) by
richer countries. A positive (negative) EXPY2 suggests a country’s export basket is associated
with richer (poorer) countries’ export basket.

Revealed Factor Intensities

The measure of revealed factor intensity (RFI) is similar to that of the export sophistication
measurement, using a two-stage process. It measures the export-weighted average level of a
factor associated with a country’s export bundle. The factors are: human capital, measured as
average years of schooling for the 15-year old and above population; physical capital, measured
as the capital stock per capita; and arable land, measured as per capita. The first stage is to
measure the factor level associated with each product in the world, termed ‘IND’. The IND of a
particular product is the factor level of the typical country that exports that good, calculated by
weighting the factor level of all countries exporting the good. The weight given to each country
is based on ‘revealed comparative advantage’. The IND is then standardized (its value minus the
mean divided by the standard deviation) across countries.

The second stage is to measure the standardized factor level associated with a country’s export
basket as a whole; this is its underlying indicator of endowment or RFI. From the first stage,
each product that a country exports will have an IND. The RFI is calculated by weighting these
IND by the share that each good contributes to total exports. The calculations are:

                                         ⁄
                                 ∑               and        ∑
                                     ∑       ⁄


where is the factor of country , and         is the share of exports of product in total exports
of country in year . The IND is calculated for the years 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2010 and the
average indicator across years is then used.



                                                                                               131
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of Market and Product Concentration

The Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI) is used to measure concentration of exports or imports
across markets or products, and for year is calculated as:

                                                ∑


where      is the share of exports or imports of product or market in total exports or imports in
year . When considering export (import) market concentration, the shares of total exports
(imports) to (from) each market are used. When considering export (import) product
concentration, the shares of each product’s exports (imports) to (from) the world are used. In
addition, export (import) product concentration can be calculated across markets, in which case
the shares of each product’s exports (imports) to (from) each market are used. When
benchmarking across countries, the root of the Herfindahl-Hirschman index is used.

Export Similarity Indexes

The export similarity index (ESI) between country and country in year is calculated as:

                                           ∑


where       is the share of country ’s exports of product        in total exports to the world.




132
