                                                      89468




                                Corporate
                              Tendencias    Governance
                                          del  Gobierno
                           of State-Owned
                           Corporativo       Enterprises
                                        de las Empresas
                                      in
                            Públicas en  Latin America
                                        América  Latina
                                       Current Trends and Country Cases




                                        World Bank            July 2014
                                 Banco   Mundial       Noviembre 2014
                         Governance Global Practice
Unidad de   Reducción      la Pobreza
                        deand
             Latin America              y Gestión
                              the Caribbean Region
                                      Económica
                     Unidad del Sector Público
Copyright © 2014


The International Bank of Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank Group
1818 H St, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA


Printed August 2014
Graphic Design: Viktoria Kirjuchina




Standard Disclaimer:
         This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does
not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning
the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
                                    Report No.: 89468-LAC




                   Corporate Governance
              of State-Owned Enterprises
                        in Latin America
                          Current Trends and Country Cases




                            World Bank           July 2014
            Governance Global Practice
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
IV
                        Acknowledgements
       This study was prepared by a World Bank team comprising Alexandre Arrob-
bio (Task Team Leader), Fanny Weiner (Task Team Leader), Federico Guala, Alejandra
Nuñez, José Garrido, Christopher Russel Rolando Ossowski, Santiago Pinto, Maria Ines
Vasquez, Alejandro Guerrero, and Ana Mie Horigoshi Reis.

          The initial steps toward the preparation of this publication stemmed from the
interaction between authorities of Paraguay’s Ministry of Finance and the World Bank
during 2009-2011. This initiative was part of a wide range of World Bank technical as-
sistance supporting a series of reforms implemented by the Paraguayan government
aimed at strengthening the institutional and corporate governance framework for the
oversight of State Owned Enterprises. As part of this engagement, the oversight unit for
SOEs from Paraguay (Unidad de Monitoreo de Empresas Públicas, UMEP) and the World
Bank organized the Technical Workshop on SOE Oversight in Latin America and the Ca-
ribbean Countries, held in December 2011 in Punta del Este, Uruguay. In March 2014, the
initial findings were presented at the Annual Meeting of the Latin American Network on
Corporate Governance of State-owned Enterprises, in Buenos Aires, Argentina, which
was co-organized by the OECD, CAF and the World Bank.

        The World Bank team is very grateful to the following representatives from the
Government of Paraguay for their collaboration, comments and suggestions: Dionisio
Borda (former Minister of Finance of Paraguay) and Manuel Caballero (former Vice-Min-
ister Economy and Integration of Paraguay), and to Rogelio Cáceres, Patricia González,
Elvio Brizuela, Yenny Alfonso, Leticia Antúnez, and Francisco Servín.

        We also want to express our sincere gratitude to all participating governments,
their respective heads of SOE Oversight Units and their teams for their collaboration:
Noel Giacomitti, and Cláudio Machado (Brazil); Mónica Singer González, Hugo Caneo,
Víctor Selman, Eduardo Charme, and Augusto Veas Rojas (Chile); Ciceron Fernando
Jimenez Rodriguez (Colombia); George Reinoso (Dominican Republic); Alma Rosa More-
no (Mexico); Diego Galindo, and Elizabeth Lau Chong (Panama); Titto Almora, Mercedes
Auqui, and Mario Gonzales (Peru); Angel Fernández Álvarez, and Natividad Bris Barrio
(Spain); Graciela Pérez Montero, Teresa Chávez and Germán Benítez (Uruguay).

       The team is grateful for the valuable guidance and advice provided by Rodrigo
A. Chaves, J. Humberto Lopez, Arturo Herrera, and Rossana Polastri, as well as the peer
reviewers Henri Fortin, Rajeev Swami, Kathrin Plangemann, Ruxandra Burdescu, Alberto
Leyton, and Marijn Verhoeven.

      This publication was supported by the Ministry of Finance of Spain through the
Spanish Trust Fund for Latin America and the Caribbean (SFLAC).




                                                                                      V    Acknowledgements
                         Main Abbreviations
                              and Acronyms
General (throughout document)

CDB	                 China Development Bank
CEO	                 Chief Executive Officer
GDP	                 Gross Domestic Product
IFRS	                International Financial Reporting Standards
MF 	                 Ministry of Finance
OECD	                Organization for Economic Co-operation
	                    and Development
SOEs	                State-Owned Enterprises


Chapter II.1 | The Case of Brazil

BNDES	               Brazilian National Development Bank
	                    (Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social)
DEST	                Department of Coordination and Control of
	                    State Enterprises (Departamento de Coordenação e 			
	                    Controle das Empresas Estatais)
ELETROBRAS	          Brazilian Power Electricity Company
	                    (Centrais Elétricas Brasileiras S.A.)
PDG	                 Comprehensive Plan of Expenditures
	                    (Plano de Dispêndios Globais)
PETROBRAS	           Brazilian Oil Company S.A. (Petróleo Brasileiro S.A.)
SEST	                Secretariat of Coordination of State-Owned Enterprises 		
	                    (Secretaria de Controle de Empresas Estatais)
SIIF	                Integrated Financial Information System
	                    (Sistema Integrado de Informação Financeira)


Chapter II.2 | The Case of Chile

CODELCO	             National Copper Corporation
	                    (Corporación Nacional de Cobre)
CORFO	               Production Development Corporation
	                    (Corporación de Fomento de la Producción)
ENAP	                National Oil Company (Empresa Nacional del Petróleo)
SAE	                 Enterprises Management System
	                    (Sistema Administrador de Empresas)
SEP	                 State-Owned Enterprise System
	                    (Sistema de Empresas Publicas)
SVS	                 Chilean Securities and Insurance Supervisor
	                    (Superintendencia de Valores y Seguros de Chile)


  VI
Chapter II.3 | The Case of Colombia

CONPES	             National Council of Economic and Social Policy
	                   (Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y Social)
DNP	                National Planning Department
	                   (Departamento Nacional de Planeación)
ECOPETROL	          Colombian Oil State Company
	                   (Empresa Colombiana de Petróleos)
MCC	                Mixed-capital Corporations
OPN	                National Budgeting Office
	                   (Oficina del Presupuesto Nacional)



Chapter II.4 | The Case of Paraguay

ANDE	               Paraguayan Power & Electricity Company
	                   (Administración Nacional de Electricidad)
ANNP	               National Administration of Ports and Waterways
	                   (Administración Nacional de Navigación y Puertos)
CNEP	               National Council of SOEs
	                   (Consejo Nacional de Empresas Públicas)
COPACO	             Paraguayan Telecom Company
	                   (Compañia Paraguaya de Comunicaciones)
CTI	                Inter-Institutional Technical Commission
	                   (Comisión Técnica Inter-institucional)
ESSAP	              Paraguayan Water & Sewage Utility
	                   (Empresa de Servicios Sanitarios del Paraguay)
INC	                National Industry of Cement
	                   (Industria Nacional del Cemento)
PETROPAR	           Paraguayan State Oil Company
	                   (Petróleos Paraguayos)
PGN	                National Budget
	                   (Presupuesto General de la Nación)
UMEP	               State-Owned Enterprises Oversight Unit
	                   (Unidad de Monitoreo de las Empresas Públicas)




                                                                        VII
Chapter II.5 | The Case of Peru

CGR	                National General Comptroller
	                   (Controladoría General de la República del Perú)
CORPAC S.A.	        Peruvian Corporation of Airports & Commercial Aviation 			
	                   (Corporación Peruana de Aeropuertos y Aviación Comercial)
FONAFE	             National Fund for Financing State Business Activity
	                   (Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento de la Actividad
	                   Empresarial del Estado)



Chapter II.6 | The Case of Spain

IGAE	               General Comptroller and Accounting Directorate’s
	                   (Intervención General de la Administración del Estado)
POA	                Annual Operational Plan
	                   (Plan Operativo Anual)
RTVE	               Spanish Radio & Television
	                   (Radiotelevisión Española)
SEPI	               State Holding for Industrial Participations
	                   (Sociedad Estatal de Participaciones Industriales)



Chapter II.7 | The Case of Uruguay

ANCAP	              State Oil Company
	                   (Administración Nacional de Combustibles,
	                   Alcoholes y Portland)
ANTEL	              National Telecom Company
	                   (Administración Nacional de Telecomunicaciones)
BROU	               Bank of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay
	                   (Banco de la República Oriental del Uruguay)
DEP	                Department of State-Owned Enterprises
	                   (Departamiento de Empresas Públicas)
IAS 	               International Accounting Standards
OPP	                Office of Planning and Budgeting
	                   (Oficina de Planeamiento y Presupuesto)
SIIF	               Integrated Financial Information System
	                   (Sistema Integrado de Información Financiera)
TCR	                National Court of Accounts
	                   (Tribunal de Cuentas)
UTE	                State Power & Electricity Utility
	                   (Administración Nacional de Usinas y Transmisiones
	                   Eléctricas)




VIII
Chapter II.8 | Leading State-Owned Enterprises: The Cases of the Panama Canal
				           and PEMEX

ACP	               Panama Canal Authority
	                  (Autoridad del Canal de Panamá)
CA	                Management Council
	                  (Consejo de Administración)
CAED	              Audit and Performance Evaluation Committee
	                  (Comité de Auditoria e Evaluación de Desempeño)
CNH	               National Commission of Hydrocarbons
	                  (Comisión Nacional de Hidrocarburos)
CRE	               Energy Regulatory Commission
	                  (Comisión Reguladora de Energía)
OIC	               Internal Control Agencies
	                  (Órgano Interno de Control)
PEMEX	             Mexican State Oil Company
	                  (Petróleos Mexicanos)
SENER	             Energy Secretariat
	                  (Secretaría de Energía)
SFP	               Secretariat of Public Administration
	                  (Secretaría de la Función Pública)




                                                                                IX
                              Table of Contents

Executive Summary			 1

Introduction					 7
		


PART I – Trends in Corporate Governance of SOEs in Latin America	   		 12
I.1	|	Legal Framework			 14
I.2	 |	 Ownership Function			 28
I.3	 |	Performance Monitoring			 38
I.4	 |	Board Procedures			 50
I.5	 |	Fiscal Risk				 60



PART II   - Country Cases	                                          		 72
II.1	|	 The case of Brazil			 74
II.2	|	 The case of Chile			 86
II.3	|	 The case of Colombia			 96
II.4	|	 The case of Paraguay			 104
II.5	|	 The case of Peru			 112
II.6	|	 The case of Spain			 124	
II.7	|	 The case of Uruguay			 134
II.8	|	 Leading SOEs: The Cases of the Panama Canal and PEMEX			 142	
	



Annexes		   						 154

Bibliographical References	                                         		 169




                                                                        XI
                        Executive Summary
         The main objective of this report is to provide a descriptive analysis of the cur-
rent practices and trends of corporate governance of State-owned Enterprises (SOEs) in
several Latin-American countries. It provides practitioners of SOE corporate governance
with a stocktaking of current practices and trends in several Latin American countries,
as well as international experiences and good practices elsewhere. This report intends
to contribute to the discussion and growing interest on SOE corporate governance and
to provide an impulse for further analytical work in this area.
         In most Latin American and Caribbean countries, the SOE sector contributes sig-
nificantly to GDP and represents an important part of consolidated public expenditures.
In several cases, the SOEs are also key and strategic actors in the country’s economy
– providing essential goods and services – and frequently hold a dominant market posi-
tion in critical sectors, such as petroleum, electricity, and transportation. They also op-
erate in competitive markets such as financial services, telecommunications, etc. SOEs
are also increasingly under pressure, by both their governments and by international
competition, to operate and achieve their goals more efficiently and effectively. Within
this context, achieving good corporate governance practices is critical to SOEs effec-
tively providing goods and services and achieving their short-, medium-, and long-term
goals, within a sustainable fiscal framework.
         This report has been prepared with the direct collaboration of government of-
ficials involved in the SOE sectors of eight countries in Latin America and the Carib-
bean, and Spain. It is mainly based on financial information and other relevant data on
the above-mentioned countries, covering the period from 2010 to 2013. As part of data
collection for the report, representatives of the SOE sectors in Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Spain and Uruguay, attended the
Technical Workshop on SOE Supervision in Latin American and Caribbean Countries,
organized by the SOE Monitoring Unit of Paraguay and the World Bank in December 2011
in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
         Part I of the report, called Trends in Corporate Governance of SOEs in Latin
America is based on three complementary and closely interrelated concepts. Chapter
I.1 presents an analysis of the legal framework in several countries of the region under
which SOEs operate. Specific corporate governance issues are then discussed; begin-
ning with the function of the state as owner of SOEs (Chapter I.2). The next two chapters
discuss how the state exercises that function in two key areas: Performance Monitor-
ing (Chapter I.3) and Board Procedures (Chapter 1.4). Finally, the chapter on Fiscal Risk
(Chapter I.5) identifies the main risks inherent in the performance of the SOE. It then
surveys the management of those risks by the state, including supervision, prepara-
tion of financial reports and specific risk mitigation measures. The presentation of the
conceptual framework of each of these topics is followed by a descriptive analysis of
current practices and trends in six Latin-American countries Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Par-
aguay, Peru and Uruguay using the information presented under Part II (Country Cases)
as well as specific inquiries the Bank team made to the representatives from the SOE
sector in the respective countries as a basis.
         Part II of the report, Country Cases, reviews SOE corporate governance in the
six above-mentioned Latin-American countries, as well as in Spain. It also features case
studies on two particularly notable SOEs: PEMEX, the Mexican petroleum company,
and the Panama Canal. As mentioned above, the country cases have been developed in
close collaboration with government officials involved in the SOE sector. Each country
case first presents a brief description of the country’s SOE portfolio and an assessment



                                                                                         1    Executive Summary
of its economic relevance. Then, key aspects of SOE corporate governance are analyzed,
using criteria based on principles and guidelines from the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD). These include the state ownership function and
accountability, as well as issues related to performance monitoring, information dis-
closure, auditing mechanisms and the role of the board in the companies. All country
cases conclude with a brief summary of current SOE corporate governance challenges
identified for the country.


                     Corporate Governance Practices and Trends in
                                            Latin American SOEs

Institutional and organizational framework

        Generally, the organization of SOE ownership function maintains its own char-
acteristics, depending on the country considered. The institutional and organizational
framework that determines SOE ownership function does not correspond to a defined
typical organization structure in each of the six countries analyzed. Nor does it appear
to depend on the number or size of SOEs, or on the strategic importance of the SOE
sector. Rather, it is rooted in a set of historical, economical, political, and institutional
aspects for each country.

        However, there are institutional arrangements in use that gradually point to-
ward greater centralization. Indeed, except for Colombia, in the other five countries
there is a “hybrid” type of organizational and institutional framework for SOE ownership
in which institutional agreements of the traditional, decentralized model are combined
with those of the centralized model. Within the sample, Peru and Chile turn out to be
cases in which SOE ownership function is clearly carried out in a centralized manner. In
the SOE ownership scheme predominant in other cases, the sectorial ministries play an
important role. There are important efforts being made toward more centralized super-
vision, especially in Brazil, and more recently in Paraguay.


Accountability and supervision mechanisms

Planning documents
        The preparation of the annual budget and its approval and scrutiny are respect-
ed processes in most cases. SOEs have achieved greater budgetary flexibility over time,
for several reasons. Nevertheless, they should generally comply with goals and financial
constraints specified by the central government. Also, in several of the countries, the
SOE budgets are part of the national budget and therefore subject to scrutiny and an-
nual approval by Congress.

       On the other hand, some countries have achieved important advances in the
development of a performance management framework for SOEs. Several factors make
achieving a solid and effective framework to manage the performance of SOEs not an
easy task. Some of those factors are structural—such as the prevalence of “dual” insti-
tutional arrangements of SOE ownership and the limited use of results-based budgeting



2
tools. Others are more specific, such as the frequent failure to internalize the conflicts
between commercial and non-commercial objectives, the low degree of institutionaliza-
tion of those objectives, or simply the complex, dynamic nature of the activities usually
performed by SOEs. Within the sample of countries, Chile, Peru, and Paraguay represent
the strongest recent experiences of the implementation of performance management
contracts between the government and the SOEs. However, the degree of development
of the contracts and the results achieved in their implementation vary among the coun-
tries.

Board and Management Proceedings
        Several countries have taken steps toward granting the SOE board and manage-
ment greater financial autonomy and decision-making power. However, the decision-
making process of the companies is still commonly associated with compliance with
sector-specific policy objectives and with financial constraints established by the cen-
tral government.

        At the same time, there has been concrete progress in the implementation of
good practices by the boards of directors and management of SOEs. Within the sample
of the six Latin American countries, there is a clear separation between the board and
the management of the SOEs; moreover, the board generally is in charge of appointing
the management of each company. Furthermore, in the cases of Chile and Peru, which
are regional frontrunners in the implementation of integrated reforms of SOE gover-
nance, regulations promote the nomination and appointment of directors and managers
based on merit and qualifications; the practice also exists in Brazil.

Financial Reports and External Audit
        Several Latin American countries have been undertaking significant advances
in the harmonization of regulatory requirements for SOE information disclosure and
application of accounting standards. Nowadays, the governments usually have relevant
and timely financial information from the SOEs and other decentralized entities through
modern information systems. Although there are disparities in accounting standards
among the countries studied, this study found a general trend toward the application
of homogeneous standards for SOEs, commonly with requirements similar to those ap-
plied in the private sector and in some cases even more advanced requirements. For
example, in Chile the standards are in accordance with the International Financial Re-
porting Standards (IFRS).

         The preparation and submission of annual financial reports by SOEs is common
in all the countries studied, and adequate institutional procedures generally guaran-
tee the reports’ compliance and transparency. In some cases, the reports are prepared
quarterly. The management of each SOE is responsible for presenting an annual finan-
cial and accounting report to the respective ministry of finance or ministry of planning,
as well as to other government control agencies (internal and external). In most cases,
the information is also available to the public through the Internet.

        In the cases of Chile and Peru, the respective central agencies usually consoli-
date the information of the companies under their supervision in an annual report. SEP
in Chile develops an annual report that consolidates the financial performance of the
SOEs under its supervision and sends it to the President and both chambers of the Con-



                                                                                        3    Executive Summary
gress. FONAFE in Peru uses an electronic data system, which enables centralizing the
delivery of the SOEs’ financial reports.

        In all of the countries analyzed, the annual financial statements of the SOEs are
audited by an external public control entity or by a specialized accounting firm from the
private sector. In most of the cases, this audit is carried out by specialized companies
and in accordance with international quality standards. Within this general practice,
each country shows specific characteristics. In the case of Paraguay for example, the
external audit process of the financial statements has been notably improved over the
past years through the establishment of the SOE Council (CEP) in 2008. In Uruguay, all
SOEs are audited by the Court of Accounts (Tribunal de Cuentas de la República), and
additionally by international audit companies. In Peru on the other hand, this process is
carried out by audit companies from the private sector, which are selected through a call
for proposals led by the Comptroller General (Contraloría General).

         The evaluation of fiscal risk and of contingent liabilities linked to SOEs and oth-
er public entities is starting to be developed. This is especially relevant when taking into
account the important relative size of the SOE sector and its strategic function in the
economy of each country. Currently, the cases of Chile, Colombia, and Peru are the most
advanced and regulated in this area. Brazil also has made progress through an annex on
fiscal risk that is attached to the country’s annual budget. Furthermore, several coun-
tries have recently advanced in the mitigation of the above mentioned risks through
the reduction of quasi-fiscal activities—for example, introducing budgetary transfers to
cover the real operating costs of the SOEs, taking into consideration explicitly their com-
mercial and non-commercial objectives—and also by strengthening several corporate
governance processes and systems, as discussed in this report.

Future Challenges
        All countries studied in this report have achieved significant progress in the
corporate governance of their SOEs, but there is still a long way to go. There is a general
recognition among the countries of the region that the implementation of good corpo-
rate practices can help the SOEs achieve their goals and objectives more effectively and
efficiently. Several reform measures have been undertaken in recent years to strengthen
those practices. However, there are several challenges ahead:


•	      Strengthen—in some cases—the legal-institutional framework that defines the 		
	       state role as owner of the SOE.
•	      Continue to implement measures to promote greater independence and
	       professionalism of the SOE board and management.
•	      Increase the standards for financial reporting to achieve the level of
	       internationally accepted practices.
•	      Continue to improve the identification, assessment, and management of the
	       fiscal risk associated with the SOE sector, and the preparation and disclosure of
	       relevant reports.
•	      Continue to develop a solid and effective performance management framework.
•	      Continue to advance in the identification, assessment, and management of the
	       fiscal risk associated with the SOE sector, and the preparation and disclosure of 	
	       relevant reports.



    4
5   Executive Summary
                                                 Introduction
        1.	Despite undergoing deep structural changes during the past few decades, the
State-owned enterprise (SOE) sector continues to play a significant and strategic role in
most Latin American countries. In many countries, SOEs still represent significant public
expenditures and management of public assets. They also contribute substantially to
the delivery of public and commercial services to citizens. As a consequence, SOEs find
themselves increasingly under pressure, from both domestic voters and global competi-
tion, to operate and achieve their goals in the most effective and efficient way. In this
context, good corporate governance practices are crucial to ensure that SOEs provide
efficient services, to guarantee that companies adhere to fiscal discipline, and to allow
enterprises to achieve their short-, medium-, and long-term strategic objectives, within
a sustainable fiscal framework.
        2.	SOEs face several challenges, and the implementation of good corporate
governance practices is considered essential to improving SOEs’ overall performance.
Some of the major challenges are commonly connected to the efficiency and effective-
ness of service delivery. Others have to do with the management of fiscal risks associ-
ated with the operation of SOEs. There is a consensus that the degree of success that a
country can achieve in coping with these challenges, and therefore improving the overall
performance of its SOEs, is linked to the country’s legal and regulatory framework gov-
erning SOEs.
        3.	In this context, this report is aimed at providing an overview of SOE corporate
governance practices and trends as observed in several countries of Latin America. By
describing and comparing SOE corporate governance practices and trends in different
countries of Latin America, this report helps identify the region’s successful practices as
well as major challenges and opportunities for improvement.


Scope and Methodology

         4.	The main objective of this report is to provide a descriptive analysis of the cur-
rent practices and trends of corporate governance of State-owned Enterprises (SOEs) in
several Latin-American countries. It provides practitioners of SOE corporate governance
with a stocktaking of current practices and trends in several Latin American countries,
as well as international experiences and good practices elsewhere. This report intends
to contribute to the discussion and growing interest on SOE corporate governance and
to provide an impulse for further analytical work in this area.
         5.	For the purposes of this report, the “SOE sector” in each country refers to com-
mercial companies, in which the Government holds at least 20 percent of the shares.
Exceptional cases, such as companies with lower levels of state ownership or non-profit
public enterprises, are identified in the report. Also, subnational SOEs, although they
may exercise a very important economic and social role in some countries, especially in
those with a federal structure, are not included.
         6.	This report has been prepared with the direct collaboration of government of-
ficials related to the SOE sector of eight countries in Latin America and the Caribbean,
and of Spain. It is mainly based on financial information and other relevant data of the
above-mentioned countries, covering the period from 2010 to 2013. As a part of data
collection for the preparation of the report, representatives of the SOE sectors in Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Spain, and



                                                                                            7    Introduction
Uruguay attended the Technical Workshop on SOE Supervision in Latin American and
Caribbean Countries, organized by the SOE Monitoring Unit of Paraguay (UMEP) and the
Bank in December 2011 in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
         7.	This report consists of two parts. The first part, Trends in Corporate Gover-
nance of SOEs in Latin America, is based on three closely interrelated conceptual top-
ics. The first chapter presents an analysis of the legal framework in several countries of
the region under which SOEs operate. Specific corporate governance issues are then
discussed, beginning with the function of the state as owner of SOEs (Chapter I.2). The
next two chapters discuss how the state exercises that function in two key areas: Perfor-
mance Monitoring (Chapter I.3) and Board Procedures (Chapter 1.4). Finally, the chapter
on Fiscal Risk (Chapter I.5) identifies the main risks inherent in the performance of the
SOE sector. It then surveys the management of those issues by the State, including
supervision, development of financial reports, and specific duties of risk mitigation. The
presentation of the conceptual framework of each of these topics is followed by a de-
scriptive analysis of current practices and trends in six Latin American countries—Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay—using the information presented under
Part II (Country Cases) as well as specific inquiries the Bank team made to the represen-
tatives from the SOE sector in the respective countries as a basis.
         8.	Part II of the report, called Country Cases, reviews SOE corporate governance
in the six above-mentioned Latin American countries as well as in the case of Spain. It
also features case studies on two particularly notable SOEs: PEMEX, the Mexican pe-
troleum company, and the Panama Canal. As mentioned above, the country cases have
been developed in close collaboration with public officials involved in the SOE sector,
and include Brazil (Chapter II.1), Chile (Chapter II.2), Colombia (Chapter II.3), Paraguay
(Chapter II.4), Peru (Chapter II.5), Spain (Chapter II.6), and Uruguay (Chapter II.7). The
cases of PEMEX and the Panama Canal are presented in Chapter II.8. The country cases
use a common structure, providing first a synthetic description of the country’s SOE
portfolio and an assessment of the sector’s economic relevance. The cases then analyze
key aspects of SOE corporate governance, using criteria based on the principles and
guidelines formulated by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD)2, including: State ownership, oversight and accountability, performance moni-
toring, information disclosure, audit mechanisms, and the role of the board of directors.
All chapters conclude with a brief consideration of current corporate governance chal-
lenges faced by the SOE sector from each country.


Main Principles of Corporate Governance

          The main pillars of SOE corporate governance, as defined in the OECD guide-
        9.	
lines, have provided the conceptual rationale for this report (See Box I.1). These guide-
lines include an effective legal and regulatory framework; ownership function and
oversight mechanisms; transparency and disclosure of information; and the role of the
boards of directors. The OECD guidelines provide a benchmark to steer governments in
improving the performance of their SOE sectors.




2	   OECD, 2005.




 8
                Box I.1: Extract of OECD Guidelines on Corporate
                         Governance of State-Owned Enterprises
                                                                      Source: OECD, 2005


                Ensuring an Effective Legal and Regulatory Framework
             I. 
             	 for State-Owned Enterprises.
     The legal and regulatory framework for state-owned enterprises should
     ensure a level-playing field in markets where state-owned enterprises and
     private sector companies compete in order to avoid market distortions. The
     framework should build on, and be fully compatible with, the OECD Principles
     of Corporate Governance.

            II. The State Acting as an Owner (ownership function).
     The state should act as an informed and active owner and establish a clear
     and consistent ownership policy, ensuring that the governance of state-
     owned enterprises is carried out in a transparent and accountable manner,
     with the necessary degree of professionalism and effectiveness.

             III. Transparency and Disclosure.
     State-owned enterprises should observe high standards of transparency in
     accordance with the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance. These include
     in particular: publication of annual aggregate report on SOEs by ownership
     entity; development of internal audit functions in SOEs monitored by board
     and audit committee or equivalent; annual independent external audits
     based on international standards; same high quality accounting and auditing
     standards for SOEs and listed companies; and disclosure of material informa-
     tion described in the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance.

           IV. The Responsibilities of the Boards of State-Owned Enterprises.
     The boards of state-owned enterprises should have the necessary authority,
     competencies and objectivity to carry out their function of strategic guidance
     and monitoring of management. They should act with integrity and be held
     accountable for their actions.




         10. The legal and regulatory framework for SOEs should ensure a level playing
field for SOEs and private sector companies. This requires the State to clearly sepa-
rate its ownership function from other functions that it performs; to actively exercise its
ownership function in the definition of SOEs’ objectives and their implementation, while
carefully limiting its participation in the daily management of SOEs; to grant powers to
the boards of directors of SOEs to manage their enterprises independently and without
political interference; to guarantee equal treatment to their shareholders, including mi-
nority shareholders; and to create mechanisms for public accountability and disclosure
of information on financial and non-financial performance of its SOEs to the public. Le-



                                                                                         9    Introduction
gal aspects of SOEs are covered in Chapter I.1.
         11. The organization of SOE oversight can be categorized by three models of
State ownership: decentralized, centralized, and dual. The State ownership function is
addressed in Chapter I.2 and also in all country cases. In situations of dual ownership
the supervision of SOEs is partly carried out by sector ministries or other government
units, and partly by the ministry of finance, though in close coordination. In the case of
centralized ownership, the oversight function is the responsibility of one agency or hold-
ing company. In the decentralized model, each sector ministry takes responsibility for
SOEs that fall into its sector. While the decentralized model prevailed up to the 1980s,
the current trend points to the centralized model.
         12. Transparency and disclosure of information includes reporting on perfor-
mance and financial status of the SOE to the ownership entity and the general public
through several mechanisms. These mechanisms are divided into ex ante, ex post, and
consolidated reporting, and they are analyzed in both Part I and Part II of the report. Ex
ante information mainly entails the setting of objectives for an SOE’s performance for
a future period, while ex post information includes financial and performance reports
prepared by the SOE. In cases where there is a consolidated report on SOEs, it typically
is presented annually, and is commonly prepared by a centralized entity or a govern-
ment audit entity. This consolidated reporting aims both at reporting to the legislature
and the general public. The transparency of the work of SOEs depends not only on the
disclosure of such documents, but also on the quality of the content, its relevance, and
the timeliness of disclosure.
         13. Annual publication of external audits of SOE financial statements is also con-
sidered a critical factor for SOEs’ good governance. Financial audits are critical to assur-
ing the entity exercising ownership, and the public, that an SOE’s financial statements
fairly represent its financial situation and performance. The performance and publica-
tion of financial audits represent an important element of accountability. Other issues
affecting the quality of external audits of SOEs include the choice of auditor ­     — since
the increasing trend is to rely on independent external audit firms; the adoption of rules
guaranteeing the independence of the auditor; the role of the supreme audit institu-
tion; and the existence of audit committees on the boards of directors of SOEs. Relevant
country practices in Latin America are provided in Part II of the report.
         14. The fulfillment of responsibilities of an SOE board of directors can be illus-
trated by referring to the hypothetic example of a three-legged stool. One leg repre-
sents the owner, the second is the board of directors, and the third is management. As
with a stool, if one leg is too short (or too weak in this analogy), or one leg is too long—
or too strong—the stool is unstable and will fall over. Accordingly, OECD Guidelines sug-
gest that a good governance model for SOEs should comprise three distinct layers, each
having a distinct role: (i) the State ownership function which is responsible for defining
the ownership policy and high-level objectives for SOEs; (ii) a board which is authorized
by the State to oversee the development of a strategy to achieve the State’s objectives,
and to monitor progress; and (iii) the executive management, which is accountable to
the board for implementing the strategy in directing the SOE’s operations. The role of
SOE boards of directors and management, including empirical evidence from several
countries in Latin America, is surveyed in Chapter I.4 and in the country cases.




10
11   Introduction
                                PART I
Trends in Corporate Governance of SOEs
                       in Latin America
                                    Legal Framework
                                                                                     I.1




I.1.1                 Legal Frameworks on Corporate Governance of SOEs
                15. The management of companies adheres to two main models of corporate
        governance. There are two models of corporate governance applicable to private com-
        panies and State-owned Enterprises listed on the stock exchange: one model based
        on rules of strict compliance and the other based on voluntarily adopted principles.
        The first model involves strictly enforced commercial laws and regulations that impose
        transparency requirements on the disclosure of companies’ financial and non-financial
        information. Under the second model, also known as “comply or explain,” companies
        voluntarily adopt a corporate governance code whose recommendations go beyond the
        provisions of commercial law. Administrative regulations require companies that adopt
        these codes to report their compliance to financial regulatory bodies.3




        3 	 Bernal et al., 2012




         14
                                            Box I.2: Corporate Governance Models
                                                   Sources: Bernal et al., 2012; Colombia Capital, 2009




         There are two corporate governance models applicable to private enterprises
         and state-owned enterprises listed on the stock exchange:

         Strict compliance model: An example of the strict compliance corporate gov-
         ernance model is the United States’ legal system, which has federal laws such
         as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
         and Consumer Protection Act of 2010; regulations issued by the Securities
         and Exchange Commission, stock exchanges, and other regulatory bodies;
         and the commercial laws of each state.

          “Comply or explain” model: An example of the “comply or explain” model is
         the adoption of the Colombian Code of Best Corporate Practices or “Country
         Code,” which establishes standards with respect to the Shareholders General
         Meeting, Board of Directors, disclosure of financial and non-financial infor-
         mation, and dispute resolution. Colombian corporations registered or whose
         securities are registered with the National Registry of Securities and Issu-
         ers shall submit the “Best Corporate Governance Practices Survey,” which is
         based on the Country Code, to the Financial Superintendence. Through this
         Survey, companies can explain their reasons for not implementing a specific
         standard or for adopting different measures from those recommended in the
         Code.



        16. The “comply or explain” model offers clear advantages for SOE management.
The flexibility of the “comply or explain” model allows SOEs to adapt the application of
corporate governance best practices according to various commercial and public policy
objectives which, under certain circumstances, may be incompatible.4 The same model
can be applied to the management of every SOE, in the sense of the voluntary adoption
of standards that exceed the minimum requirements established in the legislation and
in the oversight of its implementation by the State ownership entity. In Peru, for ex-
ample, FONAFE issued a Framework Code of Good Corporate Governance for companies
under its scope of authority, which establishes minimum standards for the develop-
ment of codes of good governance as well as an action plan for their implementation
by each company.5 As for specific SOEs, the Colombian oil company ECOPETROL issued
the “Declaration of the Nation in its capacity as Majority Shareholder” which deals with
issues such as special decisions by the shareholders meeting and participation of mi-
nority shareholders in the board of directors.6
        17. SOEs exist under various legal forms that vary depending on the moment of
their creation, their ownership entity, their role in the public administration and their
mission. Generally speaking, SOEs are entities separated from the public administration


4	 Ib.
5	 FONAFE Corporation, Code of Good Corporate Governance for Companies under the oversight of FONAFE, March 2013
6 	 ECOPETROL, Declaration of the Nation in its Capacity as Majority Shareholder, 26 of July 2007.




                                                                                                                   15   Legal Framework
and, depending on the applicable law, they have legal personality under public law or
private law. Each country defines its SOE categories differently, using various criteria, in-
cluding the State’s participation in the company’s capital, its effective control, and the
company’s mission, among others.


       Box I.3: Definitions of State-Owned Enterprise in some
                                      Latin-American countries
                                  Source: Data prepared based on applicable legislation



     There is a variety of definitions of state-owned enterprise according to sev-
     eral criteria, such as participation in the company’s capital, effective control,
     and the company’s mission, among others.

     Brazil: Brazilian law provides for two types of SOEs: public enterprises and
     public/private joint ventures. Both types of companies are created under
     private law. Public enterprises are fully-owned by the State, and they can
     take any corporate form under commercial law. In public/private joint ven-
     tures, the State owns more than half of the shares with a right to vote and,
     under applicable law, these companies must be limited liability companies.
     An example of public enterprise is the National Bank for Economic and So-
     cial Development Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social
     - BNDES). Examples of public/private joint ventures are the Bank of Brazil,
     Petrobrás, and Eletrobrás.

     Chile: The Chilean law includes the public enterprises established by law,
     without a specific typology. The law states that all SOEs established by law
     form part of the public administration, jointly with the ministries, Intenden-
     cias, Gobernaciones and the organisms and public services created to carry
     out the administrative functions. Examples of SOES established by law are
     the mining company Corporación Nacional del Cobre (CODELCO) and the
     Postal Services. Furthermore, there are corporations for which the State of
     Chile is the single or majority shareholder, and which are not created by law,
     and which need a legal habilitation previous to their establishment (i.e. Met-
     ro S.A.) These corporations are ruled by the common legislation applicable to
     the corporations listed at the stock market.

     Paraguay: In Paraguay, SOEs of two types exist: public enterprises and corpo-
     rations with the participation of the state as shareholder. Examples of public
     enterprises are the national electricity company ANDE, the national cement
     producer INC, and the oil company Petróleos Paraguayos (PETROPAR). Each
     of these companies has been created through its respective organic law,
     which defines the company as independent institution with its own legal per-
     sonality, and defines the objective of the creation. Examples of corporations
     with state shareholder participation are the telecommunication company CO-
     PACO, and the water and sanitation company ESSAP.




16
        18. SOEs created as limited liability corporations are governed by commercial
law. Generally speaking, SOEs that have adopted legal forms of private law, such as pub-
lic/private joint ventures and State industrial and commercial companies in Colombia, as
well as public/private joint ventures in Brazil, are governed by commercial law,7 particular-
ly regarding their creation procedures, the structure and powers of the board of directors,
shareholders’ rights, disclosure of financial and non-financial information requirements,
and liquidation procedures. Companies that issue financial instruments in national and
international stock exchanges are also governed by regulations issued by the relevant
securities commissions. For example, PETROBRAS is subject to the regulations issued by
the Brazilian Securities Commission8 and to the provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and
rules issued by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Private law com-
panies are also subject to public law, including budget laws, public procurement laws, and
administrative procedure statutes to challenge agency actions.
        19. SOEs that have adopted legal forms of public law are governed by admin-
istrative law. SOEs with a legal form from public law are usually subject to a general law
that governs the public administration or to a special SOE law, which sets forth their objec-
tives and regulates their creation, operation, control, and oversight. For example, in many
countries, SOEs that operate in key sectors of national economies, such as the National
Copper Corporation (Corporación Nacional del Cobre-CODELCO), PEMEX, and the Panama
Canal Authority (Autoridad del Canal de Panamá) are governed by special laws that pro-
vide for their creation, or by organic laws. Public law enterprises are also subject to laws
that impose liability on government officials as well as to budget laws, among other laws.




7 Decree No. 200 of February 25, 1967 that provides for the organization of the federal administration, establishes guidelines
for administrative reform and other provisions, Art. 5; Law 489 of 1998, which provides rules on organization and operation of
national entities; issues regulations, principles and general rules for the exercise of the powers provided for in articles 15 and
16 of article 189 of the Political Constitution; and sets forth other regulations, Art. 85.
8 Law No. 6.404 of 15 December 1976 on Stock Companies, Art. 235.




                                                                                                                              17     Legal Framework
     Box I.4: Examples of Administrative Laws Applicable to
                  State-Owned Enterprises in Latin America
                                 Source: Data prepared based on applicable legislation




     Colombia: In Colombia government-owned public utility companies are regu-
     lated under Law 142 of 1994, which establishes the legal framework for public
     utility services and other provisions.

     Ecuador: In Ecuador SOEs are regulated under the recently passed Organic
     Law of State-Owned Enterprises.

     Mexico: In Mexico the decentralized bodies and companies with majority
     ownership by the government are regulated by two codes: the Organic Law
     of Federal Public Administration (Ley Orgánica de la Administración Pública
     Federal) and the Federal Law of Parastatal Entities (Ley Federal de Entidades
     Paraestatales).

     Uruguay: In Uruguay, the creation of autonomous bodies and decentralized
     services, the appointment and removal of directors, disclosure of financial
     information requirements, and challenge to its decisions are set forth in the
     Constitution of Uruguay, Articles 185-201.

     In several countries, major SOEs that operate in key sectors are governed by
     their own laws.

     National Copper Corporation (Corporación Nacional del Cobre, CODELCO):
     Rules related to the corporate governance of CODELCO are included in Law
     no. 20.392 that modifies the Organic Statute of the National Copper Corpora-
     tion.

     Mexican Oil (Petróleos Mexicanos, PEMEX): PEMEX is regulated under the
     Mexican Oil Law (Ley de Petróleos Mexicanos).

     Panama Canal Authority (Autoridad del Canal de Panamá): The Panama Ca-
     nal Authority is governed by Law no. 19 of 11 June 1997, which structures the
     Panama Canal Authority.




18
	         20. In some cases administrative laws require the subsidiary application of com-
mercial law. In Peru, for example, protection of minority shareholders and distribution of
dividends in State-owned Enterprises are governed by the Corporations Law (Ley General
de Sociedades).9 In Chile, on the other hand, commercial law rules on conflicts of interest
preclude members of CODELCO’s Board of Directors from voting in decisions on matters in
which they have an interest.10
	         21. The application of securities law implies more robust standards of trans-
parency and information disclosure. In Latin America, important SOEs such as ECOPET-
ROL, CODELCO, and SEDAPAL list their shares in local stock markets and have minority
participation of private shareholders through initial public offers in the national market.11
The application of the legal framework on stock market financing to SOEs allows them to
compete with the private sector and establishes more robust standards of financial and
non-financial information disclosure. However, regulating SOEs under private law is not
enough to isolate them from the political pressures they often face. This requires clear
rules that define the role of the State and companies’ corporate governance.
	         22. The OECD and the CAF have issued guidelines that provide direction on
amending laws applicable to SOEs in order to improve the efficiency and transparency
of their operations. According to the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-
owned Enterprises and the CAF Guidelines for Good Corporate Governance of State-owned
Enterprises, the legal framework of SOEs should tend to achieve the following: first, the
separation between the State’s ownership function and other functions that the State per-
forms; second, the active exercise of the ownership function by the State, particularly
regarding the definition of objectives and mechanisms to implement them; third, the grant
of powers to the board of directors of SOEs to manage their enterprises independently
and without political interference; and fourth, the creation of mechanisms to facilitate ac-
countability and disclosure of information on financial and non-financial performance of
enterprises to the public.




                    Legal framework and exercise of State ownership                                                        I.1.2
                       rights of SOEs: recent trends in Latin-America
	         23. In several Latin American countries, general laws (or framework laws) are
regulating the establishment and functioning of SOEs. In Brazil, for example, the Decree
Law 200 of 1967 establishes the definition of the SOEs—public enterprise and joint ven-
tures—and States that both types should be regulated through private law. Similarly, Law
489 of 1998 in Colombia and Law 27170 which creates FONAFE in Peru established a gen-
eral legal framework for the SOEs in those countries.12 On the other hand, in such coun-
tries as Chile, Uruguay, and Paraguay, the creation of SOEs is addressed in the respective
constitutions, which implies a level of more generalization and the frequent use of specific




9 Legislative Decree No. 1031 which promotes the effectiveness of State business activity
10 Law No. 20.392 which modifies the Organic Statute of the National Copper Corporation (CODELCO).
11 Núñez et al., 2012
12 In the case of Peru, as by Decreto Legislativo No. 1031, the SOEs are regulated by the norms of the entrepreneurial
activities of State and its administrative systems, when applicable and additionally by the norms that regulate the pri-
vate sector, mainly through the General Corporation Law and the Civil Law (Ley General de Sociedades y el Código Civil).




                                                                                                                    19     Legal Framework
laws to govern different companies.13
	          24. The majority of the countries in the region have specific or sector laws (com-
mercial or administrative) which create and regulate the functioning of the SOEs, in par-
ticular the big companies operating in strategic sectors. Law 5662 of 1971 which creates
BNDES in Brazil and the case of ELECTROPERU, which falls under the general electricity
law in Peru are examples. On the other hand, in Paraguay with the absence of a legal
framework, the public enterprises are regulated through organic laws, while the corpora-
tions with State shareholder participation are regulated in accordance with specific laws
and statutes. Similarly, the most important SOEs in Chile are created by specific laws,
which also establish their legal form. In that country, there is also a group of commercial
corporations, where the State is the majority or single owner of all shares, and these are
regulated by the corporation law, which normally applies to private companies.
	          25. The effective exercise of the State’s ownership rights requires that the State
set forth limits to its participation in the daily management of SOEs. The government
must avoid interfering in the daily management of SOEs beyond the exercise of its owner-
ship rights, which requires outlining the limits of the State’s participation in the manage-
ment of its SOEs. This is important because in many cases the State’s ownership function
is vaguely defined and falls in different ministries. To that effect, the legal framework in
several Latin American countries guarantees equal conditions for State- and privately-
owned enterprises, as well as competitive conditions to access financing. The law also
defines clearly the minimum liabilities of the State as a shareholder.
	          26. The law should assure that no competitive advantages for SOEs over private
sector companies are established. The law must neither offer advantages to SOEs over
private sector companies nor establish exceptions to the application of laws on State aids
that distort economic competition.14 In Brazil, the Federal Public Administration Act pro-
vides that State-owned Enterprises and public/private joint ventures shall be subject to
the same operating conditions as private-sector companies; the only difference lies in that
the first ones are subject to the supervision of the line ministry.15 However, in some other
Latin American countries, SOEs are still being aided by subsidies and exemptions derived
from the application of tax laws.16
	          27. The law should also specify the State responsibilities as a shareholder. The
minimum responsibilities of the State as a shareholder include, at least, to be represented
in the shareholders general meeting and to vote its shares, to participate in the appoint-
ment of the board of directors and to maintain a continuing dialogue with oversight bod-
ies.17 Countries that apply commercial law to the internal management of SOEs, as Chile
does, require that the ownership entity, be it the ministry of finance, the sector ministry, or
the ownership entity, participate in and represent the state in the shareholders meeting.18
	



13 There are some other laws which affect the SOE sector in one way or another. In Uruguay, for example, starting in
1991, the parliament authorized the SOEs — upon previous authorization from the Executive—could temporarily or
permanently enter into a partnership with other SOEs or national or international private sector companies. Conse-
quently, the legal organizational schemes are many and range from the typical, based on public law, to those where the
private sector laws apply, while passing through a broad range of intermediate models. In Paraguay, Law 5058/2013
was recently approved, which created the National Council of SOEs (Consejo Nacional de Empresas Públicas (CNEP)),
an entity that centralized the supervision and control of SOEs.
14 OECD 2005
15 Decree no. 200 of 25 February 1967, which provides for the organization of the Federal Administration, establishes
guidelines for Administrative Reform, and other provisions, Art. 178.
16 Andrés et al., 2011
17 OECD, 2005
18 Enterprise System (Sistema de Empresas SEP), SEP Code, Section I, 3b.




 20
28. SOEs must maintain a high level of transparency with respect to monitoring and over-
sight. This presumes the application of accounting and audit standards and the prepara-
tion of performance reports. In Latin America, SOEs that are corporations created under
private law are better aligned with international accounting and audit standards. In Brazil,
the Law on Limited Liability Corporations and Law 11638 of 2007 set forth obligations on
accounting, preparation of financial statements, and independent audits. The latter law
provides that corporations may choose to comply with regulations on financial statements
issued by the National Securities Commission.19




                       Toward best practices of corporate governance:                                                  I.1.3
                           reforms and recent trends in Latin America
	          29. In recent years several countries have tried to reform their good corporate
governance practicies through legislative and regulatory reforms. With respect to corpo-
rate governance in general, with support of “New Public Management” scholarship and
the works of OECD and CAF, Latin America has developed Codes of Corporate Governance
with which compliance is voluntary. As for SOEs specifically, attempts have been made
to put the management of these companies on an equal standing with privately-owned
companies, in particular by subjecting them to the legal framework applicable to limited
liability companies.




19 Law No. 10.303 of October 31, 2001 which modifies and adds certain provisions to Law no 6.404 of December 15,
1976 that regulates Stock Companies; Law no 6.385 of December 7, 1976 which regulates the stock market and creates
the Securities Commission; Law no. 11.638 of December 28, 2007 which modifies and repeals certain provisions of Law
no 6.404 of December 15, 1976 and of Law no 6.385 of December 7, 1976, and applies the provisions on the preparation
and disclosure of financial statements to large corporations.




                                                                                                                21     Legal Framework
              Box I.5: Changes to the legal framework on SOEs
                         corporate governance in Latin America
                                         Sources: Report authors, based on current laws




     Chile: Chile introduced changes to the legislation applicable to the Public
     Enterprise System (SEP) and to the organic statutes of the mining company
     CODELCO, one of the most important companies of the country, as a result of
     joining the OECD. The SEP Code includes 30 principles on corporate gover-
     nance for companies under its scope, including the applicable legal frame-
     work, exercise of ownership rights, treatment of shareholders and Board of
     Directors’ liability. The Code also includes a Code of Ethics and explains ap-
     plicable rules on transparency, employment, procurement of goods and ser-
     vices, budgets, and investments.

     Peru: Peru created the National Fund for Financing State Business Activity
     (Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento de la Actividad Empresarial del Estado-
     FONAFE) to regulate and manage the State’s business activity. FONAFE issued
     a Code of Good Corporate Governance for SOEs under its scope. This Code
     comprises 32 principles that represent the best practices of corporate gover-
     nance of SOEs where the State is a majority or absolute owner. The principles
     are grouped into the following areas: objectives; legal framework; property
     rights, board and management risk policies and ethics code, and transparen-
     cy and dissemination of information. The board and the general shareholder
     assembly of each SOE approves the Code for Good Corporate Governance,
     whose compliance is reported on in an annual report, approved by its board.

     Paraguay: In Paraguay, Law 5058/2013 was approved and created the Na-
     tional SOE Council (Consejo Nacional de Empresas Públicas – CNEP), insti-
     tutionalizing the previously existing Consejo de Empresas Públicas (CEP) to
     give sustainability to the progress achieved during the process. The CNEP is
     constituted by the Minister of Finance, two sector ministers and the Attorney
     General. With this law, the SOE Monitoring Unit (Unidad de Monitoreo de Em-
     presas Públicas — UMEP), which was the executing unit for the CEP, is trans-
     formed in the General Directorate of SOEs (Dirección General de Empresas
     Públicas ­— DGEP); it is composed by a technical team and a Director, who is
     nominated by the President of the Republic.




22
	         30. During this time there has also been a significant process of expansion and
restructuring of specific SOEs in strategic sectors. In Latin America, several SOEs have vol-
untarily changed their governing statutes to promote efficiency in their management and,
in some cases, facilitate their participation in capital markets. In general, the standards
adopted have exceeded the requirements set forth in those countries’ commercial laws.




Box I.6: Changes to the Organic Statutes of State-Owned
Oil Enterprises in Latin America
                                                                 Source: Núñez et al., 2012



             In Latin America several state-owned oil enterprises have voluntarily
     changed its organic statutes to promote good corporate governance, estab-
     lishing standards that exceed the minimum requirements set forth in legisla-
     tion. For example, the Brazilian company Petróleo Brasileiro (PETROBRAS)
     changed its statutes to improve management by its Board of Directors and
     protect shareholders’ interests. The company also approved a Code of Best
     Practices of Corporate Governance and a Code of Ethics. Likewise, the Co-
     lombian company ECOPETROL changed its corporate form and voluntarily ad-
     opted corporate governance practices to facilitate the issuance of shares in
     the Colombian Stock Market.




	          31. In several Latin American countries applicable laws set forth the basic pow-
ers of the board of directors of SOEs. In Peru, for instance, Peruvian administrative law
provides that the board of directors of a SOE must establish and enforce the company’s
strategies and main policies. Its functions shall be clearly stated in the company’s stat-
utes. In Mexico, on the other hand, the Law of Parastatal Entities includes a comprehen-
sive list of powers of the board of directors of companies of which the State is the majority
owner.




                                                                                         23     Legal Framework
          Box I.7: Minimum obligations of the board of directors
                              under Peruvian and Mexican law
                                            Sources: Regulations to the Legislative Decree No. 1031




       Peru: Peruvian administrative law provides that the powers of the Board of
       Directors must be clearly defined in the company’s statutes. The Board of
       Directors must approve internal guidelines to avoid conflicts between its
       own functions and the General Manager’s functions. These positions must
       be filled by different persons. The board of directors must carry out an an-
       nual evaluation of its performance and submit a report to the Shareholders’
       Meeting; it shall also issue a report on operations that might affect minority
       shareholders and on extraordinary or strategic operations of the SOE. Other
       rights and obligations of the board of directors are established in the Corpo-
       rations Law.20

       Mexico: In Mexico, the Law of Parastatal Entities authorizes the Board of Di-
       rectors of companies with majority State participation to formulate the com-
       panies’ institutional programs and budgets, adopt the relevant measures so
       that the functions of the entity are carried out efficiently; establish quality
       control procedures for the services rendered; establish oversight systems
       and performance evaluation mechanisms; set the prices of goods and ser-
       vices they produce; approve loans; approve and authorize the publication
       of financial statements; approve guidelines for government purchases; au-
       thorize the creation of committees; agree on extraordinary payments; and
       approve the conditions of debt cancellation with third-parties21.




	         32. In some countries administrative laws also set forth general responsibilities
to SOE minority shareholders. For example, in Peru applicable regulations require State-
owned Enterprises with minority shareholder participation to establish internal policies to
ensure the fair treatment of shareholders, particularly regarding voting rights and access
to company information.22 FONAFE has also developed a specific policy to deal with mi-
nority shareholders of SOEs under its scope of authority.




20 Regulations to Legislative Decree No. 1031.
21 Federal Law of Parastatal Entities, Art. 59.
22 Regulations to Legislative Decree No. 1031, Art. 3.




 24
                        Box I.8: Public policy on protection of minority
                                                   shareholders in Peru
                  Source: FONAFE Corporation, Board Agreement no. 006-2011/006-FONAFE.




              In Peru, FONAFE recently developed a specific policy for the protec-
      tion of minority shareholders of SOEs under its scope. This policy provides
      that the rights and obligations of SOE shareholders are those set forth in the
      Corporations Law, except for the information disclosure requirements provid-
      ed therein. Specifically, SOEs must provide shareholders with the following
      information in their websites: an annual meetings’ schedule, information on
      calls for meetings, proposed agenda and related information, balance sheet,
      income statement, quarterly budget and cash flow, and annual closing pro-
      jections.




	         33. In some SOEs the legislation requires that employees are represented on
the board of directors. In Latin America, the organic laws of certain large SOEs that per-
form key activities for the national economy, such as the production of oil or copper, re-
quire the representation of their employees on the board of directors. Their appointment
requires transparent procedures and rules to solve potential conflicts of interest; these
are provided in the law. In Chile, for instance, the organic laws of some SOEs, such as
CODELCO, require the representation of employees on the board of directors; however,
such members have no voting rights in matters where there is a potential conflict of inter-
est, such as those related to the negotiation of labor contracts.23
	         34. In other countries, State-owned enterprises have adopted their own internal
standards, which exceed the protections set forth in the law. In Colombia, for example,
ECOPETROL’s statutes empower all company shareholders, including minority sharehold-
ers, to participate and vote in the Shareholders General Meeting, receive dividends, have
timely access to the company’s public information, request calls for extraordinary meet-
ings, and ask for authorizations to carry out specialized audits and to prepare proposals
related to the company’s good corporate governance. Specifically in relation to minority
shareholders, in 2007 the company issued a document called “Declaration of the Nation
in its Capacity as Majority Shareholder” (Declaración de la Nación en su calidad de ac-
cionista mayoritario de ECOPETROL) to formalize the protection of minority shareholders
with respect to dividend distribution, special decision-making, and the right of withdrawal
from meetings.24
	         35. Administrative laws usually also require the application of internal and ex-
ternal audit procedures in SOEs. For example, in Chile, the SEP Code requires SOEs to




23   Law No. 20.392 that modifies the Organic Statute of the Copper National Corporation (CODELCO), Art. 8(b).
24 ECOPETROL, Rights and Obligations of Shareholders, at http://www.ecopetrol.com.co/contenido.
aspx?catID=427&conID=41101; Núñez et al., 2012.




                                                                                                                 25   Legal Framework
establish internal audit procedures under the supervision of the Board of Directors.25 In
Peru, the rules require SOEs under FONAFE’s scope to conduct external audits, to be car-
ried out by audit companies selected through public tender.26 In other countries, some
major SOEs have changed their internal audit procedures specifically to comply with the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act. For example, in Brazil, PETROBRAS established in 2004 an “Integrat-
ed Evaluation System and Internal Oversight Methods,” which created a risk management
committee with participation from employees and executives. In Colombia, on the other
hand, ECOPETROL amended its code of good corporate governance to require adoption of
efficient internal oversight mechanisms.27




25 SEP Code, Principle 15
26 Regulations to Legislative Decree No. 1031 that promotes efficiency in the State’s business activity, Art. 27.
27 Núñez et al., 2012.




26
27   Legal Framework
                          Ownership Function
                                                                                       I.2



     	           36. Despite the wave of privatizations that took place during the 1990s, SOEs are
     still very important economic actors in the majority of Latin American countries because of
     both their size and dominant roles—frequently through monopolistic or oligopolistic en-
     terprises in strategic sectors. In the majority of the countries in the region, the SOE sector
     is usually concentrated in a few companies of great size and economic and strategic im-
     portance. Nevertheless, as analyzed in detail in this chapter, the legal and organizational
     framework defining SOEs’ ownership function maintains characteristics specific to each
     country.




I.2.1	
     	
                                                              Conceptual Framework
     	          37. The ownership function of SOEs is the form in which the State organizes
     itself to exercise ownership over State-owned companies. In some cases, the institution
     or public entity that exercises ownership rights over the SOE is also the legal owner of
     said company’s assets. In other cases, the entity that is the legal owner of the assets of
     the SOE may have delegated its ownership rights to another entity or group of entities; for
     example, a line ministry or a centralized ownership agency.
     	          38. The ownership function of SOEs could be exercised not only by the legal
     owner of the companies, but also by the agency or ministry to which the right to exercise
     that function has been delegated. In particular, it could be that in a given country the legal
     owner of the shares of the most important SOE is the ministry of finance, but the latter
     may have delegated the rights and functions typically associated with the ownership of
     the companies to line ministries or a centralized agency.




         28
	          39. The ownership function by the State over the SOE is similar to that exercised
by the shareholders of a corporation. The entities that exercise the ownership function of
SOEs will typically be in charge of appointing the members of the board, voting in annual
general meetings, and other key functions such as monitoring the performance of the
companies, approving additional capital investment, asset sales, and so on.
	          40. Because SOEs usually aim to achieve both commercial and social objectives,
the State’s role as owner of such companies is often complex, dynamic, and challenging.
For example, the State often exercises its SOE ownership function through multiple insti-
tutions—ministry of finance, line ministries, cabinet of ministers, regulating or supervis-
ing bodies, or others. In some cases this could lead to the fragmentation of responsibili-
ties and suboptimal accountability. Other complications of State control of SOEs include
frequent designation of managers (CEOs) and members of the board through processes
where political considerations take precedence; also problematic is the lack of a clear
division among the functions of the State as owner of the SOEs, regulator of the markets
in which they operate, and public policymaker. Furthermore, the consequences of such
complexities are compounded in cases where the State is a joint owner with the private
sector.
	          41. Nevertheless, it is possible to improve the accountability of SOEs, even with
greater autonomy in operational decision making. Based on evidence from reforms of the
SOE sector carried out in a large number of countries, and following the OECD Guidelines
for Corporate Governance in State-owned Enterprises, some principles that would sup-
port the State’s more effective exercise of its ownership function over the SOEs include (i)
creating clear and effective rules for the State to exercise its ownership rights; (ii) ensuring
that the State focuses on the proper exercise of its key function as owner—for example,
incorporating clear and transparent rules to appoint directors and CEOs based on profes-
sional merits and technical knowledge—and (iii) delegating to the SOE board and admin-
istration responsibilities regarding their operational functioning.


Ownership Models

	         42. The ownership function of the SOE has been changing and transforming over
time, as Governments have tried to improve the productive capacity and the effectiveness
of service delivery. Even though there is a significant level of variation depending on the
country, SOE ownership models can be roughly grouped within four approaches28:

•	   The decentralized model, in which the ownership responsibilities are usually distrib-
	    uted among several line ministries and sometimes also in other public bodies.

•	   The dual model, in which, in addition to the line ministries there is a complementary 	
	    institution—frequently the ministry of finance, or a supervising agency of which it is 	
	    in charge, or a group of ministers led by the minister of finance— which shares the 	
	    ownership rights and responsibilities of the SOEs.

•	   The council model, in which while ownership is dispersed among various ministries 	
	    and agencies, there is also an advisory or coordination body created with the purpose
	    of advising the ministers in issues related to SOE ownership.


28 It should also be noted that it is possible to observe a simultaneous application of more than one model. For ex-
ample, when the state exercises the ownership according to the dual model for a group of SOEs and for the other ones,
it applies the traditional or decentralized model.




                                                                                                                 29     Ownership Function
    •	       The centralized model, in which the ownership responsibilities lie within a centralized
    	        and independent agency, or under the authority of a single ministry.

    	          43. The empirical evidence shows that there is no model or approach which is
    applicable in all cases. Instead, it appears that the SOE ownership function tends to ad-
    just to the specific situation of each country, taking into consideration the characteristics
    of the SOE sector as well as factors associated with the political, economic, and institu-
    tional context. It also appears in a number of cases, especially in Latin America, that more
    than one model is usually in effect at the same time in the same country—some SOE are
    supervised following the premises of a centralized or dual model, and other SOEs operate
    outside of this institutional scheme, in a decentralized manner.
    	          44. In general, several variations compatible with the “decentralized” model
    have been the most frequently observed and traditional form in which the SOE ownership
    function appears, although in recent years there has been a trend toward a greater cen-
    tralization. In particular, it is possible to observe in several regions of the world, including
    some Latin American countries, the introduction of policies and reforms pointing in the
    direction of greater centralization of SOE ownership, thus giving rise to cases in which the
    traditional model (decentralized) is replaced by a “hybrid” and in some cases dual SOE
    ownership function, and where the corporate governance principles which give rise to the
    council or centralized models are considered to be cases of good practices.




I.2.2                           Recent trends and findings in Latin America
    	         45. In general, the organization of the SOE ownership function varies across
    countries. The picture of SOE ownership provided by six countries in Latin America—
    Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru, Paraguay, and Uruguay—appears similar to that of other
    regions of the world. SOE ownership in these countries resembles patterns of the four
    models described above. But SOE ownership in each does not directly correspond to any
    typical organization scheme. Nor does the ownership model in a given country seem to
    depend on the number or size of the enterprises or on the strategic importance of the SOE
    sector. Rather, the ownership function is shaped by various historical, economic, political,
    and institutional conditions specific to each country.
    	         46. Within the six countries studied, institutional arrangements are moving to-
    ward centralization of SOE ownership. In fact, five of the six country cases—Brazil, Chile,
    Peru, Uruguay, and Paraguay—exhibit an organizational and institutional hybrid type of
    SOE ownership framework, which combines aspects of the decentralized traditional mod-
    el with aspects of the centralized model. For instance, the SOE ownership function may
    be performed by a group of enterprises (similar to a holding company); by an agency or
    central body which may be created ad hoc; or simply by a ministry, typically the ministry
    of finance, or a public body of similar scope. In contrast, in the case of Colombia, the orga-
    nizational scheme is more comparable to the decentralized model: Multiple government
    units, usually various ministries and other government agencies, perform an SOE owner-
    ship function concurrently, according to their area of responsibility.
    	         47. Within the sub-group of five countries whose SOE ownership framework
    combines centralized and decentralized arrangements, clear differences still were appar-
    ent. Table I.1 shows details of the institutional framework of centralized SOE ownership
    models in each of the five countries. Differences are evident in organizational and institu-
    tional arrangements as well as in the scope and quality of the supervision and control by




        30
central agencies.
	          48. Peru and Chile are the cases in which the ownership function of the SOEs is
most clearly centralized. The National Fund for Financing State Business Activity (Fondo
Nacional de Financiamiento de la Actividad Empresarial del Estado – FONAFE) in Peru and
the State-owned Enterprise System (Sistema de Empresas Públicas – SEP) in Chile differ
from centralized agencies in other countries in a key area of ownership function: They
have the authority to appoint and remove members of the board of the SOE they super-
vise. At the same time, both FONAFE and SEP delegate the management of operations to
the corresponding boards and administrations of the SOEs.




                                                                                       31    Ownership Function
                    Table I.1: Functions and characteristics of the
               institutional framework of the centralized models
                                     in 5 Latin American countries


Country            Ministry/centralized
                                                           Basic composition                   Scope
               agency or group of companies

Brazil    Interministerial Corporate Governance       - GGPAR: formed by three        Significant. DEST
          and Federal Government Management           permanent members: Minis-       supervises 122 of
          of Participation Commission (Comissão       ter of Finance, Minister of     147 SOEs, including
          Interministerial de Governança Corpora-     Planning and Minister of        the biggest SOEs in
          tiva e de Administração de Participações    State and, if required by       the country (PETRO-
          Societárias da União – CGPAR) and           other sectorial ministers.      BRAS, ELECTROBRAS,
          Department of Coordination and Control                                      BNDES).
          of State Enterprises (Departamento de       - DEST technical depart-
          Coordenação e Controle das Empresas         ment in charge of the
          Estatais – DEST)                            supervision of the SOE. De-
                                                      pends upon the Executive
                                                      Secretary of the Ministry of
                                                      Planning.
Chile     State-Owned Enterprise System (Sistema      A 9 member Council, plus     Limited. Does not
          de Empresas Publicas – SEP)                 one executive director. All  include the biggest
                                                      of them appointed by the ex- enterprises.
                                                      ecutive branch according to
                                                      the legal framework in force
Paraguay State-owned Enterprise Council (Consejo      The CEP is a formed by          High. Practically all the
         de Empresas Públicas (CEP)) and SOE          the Minister of Finance,        SOEs of the nonfinan-
         Monitoring Unit (Unidad de Monitoreo de      two sectorial ministers         cial sector, including
         Empresas Públicas (UMEP)). Since Sep-        and the Attorney General.       the largest ones.
         tember 2013, as per Law Nº 5058/13—          The UMEP is the technical
         these institutions are named National        and executing unit, which
         Council of State-owned Enterprises           depends on the CEP
         (Consejo Nacional de Empresas Públicas)
         and General Directorate of State-owned
         Enterprises (Dirección General de Empre-
         sas Públicas), respectively.
Peru      National Fund for Financing State Busi-     Board formed by the             Significant. Includes all
          ness Activity (Fondo Nacional de Finan-     Ministry of Economy and         the SOEs in which the
          ciamiento de la Actividad Empresarial del   Finance (who chairs it), the    main shareholder is the
          Estado (FONAFE))                            president of the Ministers      State, within scope of
                                                      Council, and 3 sectorial        the central government;
                                                      ministers. It also has an ex-   except PETROPERU.
                                                      ecutive director, appointed
                                                      by the Ministry of Economy
                                                      and Finance.


Uruguay   Department of State-owned Enterprises       - OPP/DEP: has a director       Total.
          (Departamento de Empresas Públicas)         and a technical staff with 6    The supervision scope
          in the Office of Planning and Budgeting     members.                        of the OPP/DEP and
          (Oficina de Planeamiento y Presupuesto)                                     the MEF/UAM includes
          – OPP/DEP                                   - MEF/UAM: has a director       all of the SOEs related
                                                      and a technical team of 14      to the Central Govern-
          - Macroeconomic Advisory Unit (Unidad       people                          ment, including the
          de Asesoría Macroeconómica) of the Min-                                     six largest SOEs of the
          istry of Economy and Finance (MEF/UAM)                                      country (ANCAP, UTE,
                                                                                      ANTEL, BROU, OSE y
                                                                                      ANP).




32
Functions and attributions of the institutional framework, compatible with the “centralized model”

       Designates the members of the board                      Fulfills an important role in the general
          of the SOEs which supervises?                           shareholders' meeting of the SOEs?

      No. The board of the SOEs is usually          No.
      made up of several representatives of the
      related sectorial ministry, and they are
      appointed by the shareholder’s assembly
      or presidential Decree. Also, a technical
      representative of the Ministry of Planning
      is usually part of the board, and since
      2010, a representative of the union.




      Yes, and there are clear rules and require-   Indirectly, through the Board of the SOEs.
      ments for appointments.




      No.                                           No.
      The appointments are generally made           The Corporations, (Among them COPACO, ESSAP) have an an-
      by presidential decree. The SOEs which        nual shareholder meeting in which the financial statements are
      are not Corporations ruled by their own       approved and the profits transferred to the national treasury The
      Organic Acts (among them PETROPAR             sectorial ministers and the Attorney General are involved in the
      and ANDE) do not have a board, and they       process.
      are chaired by a CEO, appointed d by the      The SOEs ruled by their Organic Act do not have annual meetings.
      President of the Republic. The Corpora-       Each year a specific transfer of resources to the national treasury
      tions (Co.) have their articles of incor-     is “negotiated”, which is included in the budget. The MF and the
      poration and they are generally have a        CEO of the company are involved.
      board, appointed by decree of the PE.
      Yes. The Board of the FONAFE (particu-        Yes, together with the corresponding boards of the SOEs, with
      larly, the minister of finance and the cor-   FONAFE being responsible for exercising the ownership of the
      responding sectorial minister) designates     shares of the SOEs (companies with a corporation form) and the
      the directors of the SOEs, who should be      rights over the SOEs regulated by public law.
      ratified after by the General Sharehold-
      ers Meeting. There are clear rules and
      requirements for the designation. The
      Directors of the SOEs choose their man-
      agers (CEO) through a selection process
      carried out by headhunting companies.
      No.                                           No.
      Art. 197 of the Constitution, states that     - Art. 185 of the Constitution establishes that the industrial and
      the Directors will be appointed by the        commercial services of the State, shall be managed by Boards
      President of the Republic, in agreement       formed by 3 to 5 members.
      with the Council of Ministers, with prior
      approval of 3/5 of the members of the         - According to the provisions of public law, the SOEs are exclu-
      Senate                                        sively owned by the State and managed by boards appointed by
                                                    the PE, they do not have annual meetings. The Boards of these
                                                    SOEs meets weekly to take general operational decisions. The
                                                    pwwayments of dividends to the State is regulated by law and
                                                    communicated by the OPP at the beginning of the budget cycle.




                                                                                                                     33   Ownership Function
	           49. However, there are several significant differences between the various cas-
es. First, FONAFE is basically an agency formed by ministers, chaired by the Minister of
Economy and Finance, while SEP is a technical advisory body to the State on manage-
ment control of the SOE. Second, FONAFE, being chaired by the MF, fulfills a key role in
the consolidation and approval of the SOE annual budget, while SEP in Chile is limited to
providing the draft budget of the SOEs to the Ministry of Finance, following its technical
verification by analysis of investment projects. Finally, the SEP’s institutional plan—which
represents one of the leading examples of centralized SOE ownership function in Latin
America—is in some ways opaque, because of the SEP’s limited sphere of supervision.
The SEP supervises 23 of a total 33 companies, but does not include the main SOEs in
Chile, such as CODELCO and ENAP.29
	           50. Brazil, led by three ministries and a technical department (DEST), has at-
tempted within the last decade to make supervision of SOEs more centralized. In 2007,
the Federal Government created the Interministerial Corporate Governance and Federal
Government Management of Participation Commission (Comissão Interministerial de Gov-
ernança Corporativa e de Administração de Participações Societárias da União – CGPAR)
as an axis for the centralization of supervision functions. The permanent members of the
committee are the Minister of Planning, the Minister of Finance, and the Minister of State,
while the representatives of other sectorial ministries can participate upon the request of
the permanent members. Meanwhile, DEST—the technical coordination body of the SOEs
reporting to the Executive Secretary of the Ministry of Planning, which was established in
1979—focuses on the supervision and strategic planning of the SOE portfolio (122 SOEs
of the 147 total, including the most important by size).30
	           51. The ownership function of the SOEs in Brazil still maintains several charac-
teristics of the decentralized model, with an important role for the sectorial ministers.
On one hand, the boards of the SOEs are usually composed of several representatives of
related sectorial ministries. On the other hand, in practice DEST does not fulfill a signifi-
cant role regarding the supervision of the SOEs, nor does it supervise the external audit
process of their financial and accounting statements. The key role of “owners” fulfilled by
some ministries in Brazil should be considered in the context of the size and strategic im-
portance of some of their related enterprises. For example, PETROBRAS, Brazil’s biggest
petroleum and natural gas SOE, with a budget of almost seven percent of GDP, is linked
to the Ministry of Mines and Energy, and the National Development Bank (BNDES), which
fulfills a key role in State policy within the financial sector, is linked to the Ministry of De-
velopment, Industry, and Commerce.
	           52. Paraguay is another country in the region which has recently introduced
reforms aimed at more centralized supervision of its SOEs. The country’s SOE sector is
important because of its size (14.5 percent of GDP) and spans several sectors, focusing
on key areas such as petroleum, electricity, and telecommunications. The creation in 2008
of the National Council of SOEs (Consejo Nacional de Empresas Públicas – CEP) and of
the SOE Oversight Unit (Unidad de Monitoreo de las EP – UMEP) was one of the public
sector reform initiatives promoted by the Minister of Finance. They represent an attempt
to reduce the unwanted quasi-fiscal and social impacts of the SOE administration and the
provision of basic services delivered by SOEs.




29 Note that in September 2013, a draft law was submitted to the legislature which would legally institutionalize SEP
and increase its independence from the executive branch; furthermore, it would establish generally applicable criteria
on corporate governance for the enterprises SEP oversees.
30 The other 25 SOEs are funded through the General Treasury, and therefore controlled directly by the MF.




 34
	          53. The results of Paraguay’s initiative have been encouraging, and work con-
tinues on its implementation and consolidation. The reforms followed decades of very
deficient supervision and control levels in the traditional, decentralized ownership model.
Engaging the Ministry of Finance in the technical-political structure (CEP-UMEP) has pro-
duced several specific advances: For example, three-year management contracts between
the CEP and five of the main enterprises of the country were implemented, and the UMEP
took an active role in promoting transparent and effective annual external audits of the
SOEs’ accounting and financial statements. In September 2013, the CEP was institutional-
ized through a law creating the National Council of Public Enterprises (Consejo Nacional
de Empresas Públicas, CNEP). This strengthened the institutional framework for SOE su-
pervision and helped assure the sustainability of the reforms. The new legislation also
increased the rank of the UMEP to General Directorate of SOEs (Dirección General de Em-
presas Públicas).
	          54. Uruguay is another country where SOEs have major economic and strate-
gic significance and where their ownership mixes centralized and decentralized arrange-
ments. The centralization is evident in the role of two public entities: (i) The Public Enter-
prise Department (Departamento de Empresas Públicas – DEP), within the Planning and
Budget Office (Oficina de Planeamiento y Presupuesto – OPP), provides budgetary analy-
sis and advice and evaluates SOE investment projects. (ii) The Macroeconomic Advisory
Unit, under the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MAU/MEF), provides macroeconomic
guidelines to plan the government’s financial program—including impacts specific to
SOEs; it also monitors and analyses the quasi-fiscal impacts of SOE operations. Both OPP
and MEF participate in other functions, such as monitoring the performance of companies
that receive subsidies from the treasury. However, they do not play any role in the supervi-
sion or monitoring of external audits of SOE financial and accounting statements; nor are
they involved, according to the constitutional provisions in force, in choosing directors of
the company.



                      Examples of good practice in other countries                               I.2.3
	          55. There are examples of effective centralization of SOE ownership in coun-
tries outside Latin America. Keeping in mind that no one model is applicable in all cases,
and that the SOE ownership function tends to be adapted to each country’s situation, the
purpose here is simply to provide some reference cases of countries in which reforms to
centralize SOE management have been effective and consistent with basic principles of
corporate governance.
	          56. One good example of increased centralization of SOE ownership function
in OECD countries is the creation of State Holding for Industrial Participations (Sociedad
Estatal de Participaciones Industriales – SEPI) in Spain. SEPI, created in 1996, is a group
of enterprises (holding) which is under the Ministry of Finance and Public Administration
(Ministerio de Hacienda y Administraciones Públicas – MHAP) and has direct majority
participation in 18 SOEs which employ more than 80,000 employees. It also is a direct
minority shareholder in seven SOEs (five of them listed on stock exchanges), and par-
ticipates indirectly in ownership of more than a hundred companies. Its creation was part
of a government reform effort which included the restructuring, greater centralization of
outcome-based SOE sector supervision.




                                                                                          35     Ownership Function
                                      Box I.9: The case of SEPI in Spain




     Aspects to highlight:
     •	SEPI acts as a policy instrument of the Government, becoming a special-
        ized agent in the restructuring and supervision processes of public enter-
        prises.
     •	It functions as a corporation with financial autonomy. Its main funding
        sources come from: (i) management of its own assets; (ii) income from
        privatization processes; (iii) earnings due its participation in companies
        and (iv) loans from private financial markets, within the limits estab-
        lished by the annual General Budget Act.
     •	It is made up of a President and an Administration Council (maximum of
        15 advisers). The president is named by the Government, at the proposal
        of the MHAP while the advisors (or directors) are named by the MFPA,
        generally at the proposal of the sectorial ministries.
     •	SEPI applies an integrated planning and supervision mechanism called
        “Planning, Monitoring and Control System”(Sistema de Planificación, Se-
        guimiento y Control) to the SOEs under its control. Through this system
        SEPI applies homogeneous guidelines for the SOEs in terms of account-
        ability, fiscal and financial issues. The system is used in three stages:
        supervision of the SOEs’ budget process; regular control (monthly or
        quarterly) of budget execution; and final assessment of the performance
        and reporting of outcomes.

     Future Challenges:
     •	 Consolidating SEPI’s role as “owner” strengthening the mechanism for
         designating the directors of the SOEs it represents. In general, the func-
         tioning of the Board of the public corporations is regulated through com-
         mercial and corporate law, not having specific regulations. In practice the
         directors are named by the Boards of their respective SOEs, based on a
         proposal made by the MHAP and the sectorial ministries, and then raised
         by the Board of SEPI to the Board of the corresponding SOE.
     •	 Increasing SEPI’s sphere of supervision. There are a number of important
         SOEs in Spain that are directly owned by the Central Government, be it
         through the MHAP or the sectorial ministries. The Government’s main
         challenge in the area of corporate governance is continuing to develop
         and adopt measures that could benefit a wider group of SOEs.




36
	         57. Another case to highlight is New Zealand, which changed from a decentral-
ized model to a dual type. Unlike several cases where duality is manifested through “shar-
ing” the SOE ownership function between a “key ministry” and sectorial ministries, in New
Zealand ownership is reflected directly and explicitly through the division of the capital
stock in equal shares between the Ministry of Finance and the corresponding sectorial
ministries. The Ministry of Finance is focused on economic efficiency and the fiscal impact
of SOE performance. It takes the lead on economic issues, selling of stocks, and financial
reports, and has full responsibility for the approval of asset sales. New Zealand’s sector
ministries have a business perspective, ensuring that SOEs are successful enterprises in
the markets in which they operate. In this way, the sectorial ministries, mainly through an
advising unit (CCMAU – the Crown Company Management Advisory Unit, which is part of
the Treasury), monitor performance and have full responsibility for appointment of SOE
board members.




                                                                                       37     Ownership Function
         Performance Monitoring
                                                                                 I.3



	




58. This chapter addresses one of the key SOE ownership functions: continual monito-
ring of SOE performance. Empirical evidence from many countries shows that effective
monitoring can lead to better SOE performance, both financial and non-financial. A solid
performance monitoring framework sets clear objectives and targets linked to the SOE
strategy. That in turn helps SOE boards and management to more clearly understand gov-
ernment expectations. The monitoring framework enables the board to set and execute
the SOE strategy with an appropriate degree of autonomy. It also makes SOEs account-
able for their performance to ownership units (and government generally).
	            59. A fundamental challenge for ownership entities when establishing a per-
formance framework lies in the fact that SOEs are usually established and operated
with both commercial and non-commercial objectives. The State’s ownership entity must
ensure that each SOE is meeting the targets and objectives set for it and must take ac-
tion if it is not. Non-financial goals often carry financial costs, challenging the SOE board
and senior executives to resolve competing priorities. Inside managers have a far bet-
ter knowledge of their enterprise than external agents do. That asymmetry can allow en-
trenched managers to conceal poor performance or exceed their mandate, and can also
affect negotiation and monitoring of performance.


    38
Conceptual Framework                                                                             I.3.1
Developing a Performance Management Framework

	          60. A sound performance-monitoring framework seeks to acknowledge in-
herent tensions related to SOE performance. Such tensions arise from conflict among
commercial and non-commercial objectives, information asymmetries between SOE man-
agement and ownership entities, and so on. Performance monitoring needs to be explicit
in identifying the core financial and non-financial objectives of the SOE as well as the
government’s priorities of each SOE’s diverse strategic objectives. This helps the relevant
ownership unit or entity to develop performance targets appropriate to those priorities.
	          61. To set specific performance targets for individual SOEs, governments must
define a mandate, a strategy, and a set of individual objectives for each SOE. The man-
dates of SOEs usually define the sectors in which they operate and their main lines of
business. Mandates sometimes include public services and social obligations or commit-
ments, for instance, relating to employment issues. Thus mandates often explicitly iden-
tify the mix of commercial and policy objectives. Based on the mandate, each SOE needs
to develop its own strategy, which is then approved by its board (and explicitly or implicitly
by the ownership entity). A clear mission, vision, and strategic plan provide conceptual
clarity for both management and employees. Clear strategies provide a basis for measur-
ing performance, and they are expected to include specific objectives and goals. Objec-
tives should be clear and realistic, and then measured by key performance indicators.



Structuring Performance Agreements

	         62. Performance agreements are central to managing SOEs’ performance in
most countries. Performance agreements go by different names in different countries, of-
ten reflecting their different form or legal status. Examples include objective documents,
statements of corporate intent, memorandums of understanding, statements of expecta-
tions, shareholders’ letters, letters of agreement, and business plans. Ideally, a perfor-
mance agreement would include all the elements listed in Table I.2 below.




                                                                                          39     Performance Monitoring
  Table I.2: Main elements of SOE performance agreements
                                                     Sources: World Bank, 2014; OECD, 2010

 Concept                         Short Description

 SOE mandate                     It defines the core and noncore activities of the business
                                 that the board is accountable for delivering. The mandate
                                 provides two-way benefits: it serves as a constraint on
                                 the company, imposing a discipline against undertaking
                                 non-relevant activities that may not be in the best inter-
                                 ests of the owner; and it protects the board and manage-
                                 ment from being asked to undertake activities that are
                                 inconsistent with the core business.
 SOE strategy                    As stated above, a clear mission, vision, and strategic
                                 plan provide conceptual clarity for both management and
                                 employees. Clear strategies provide a basis for measuring
                                 performance, and they are expected to include specific
                                 objectives and goals.
 A clear description and         In particular, those related to social goals such as mini-
 explicit financial cost esti-   mum coverage, affordability for low-income consumers,
 mate of the SOE’s noncom-       etc. This helps provide the state with an overall under-
 mercial objectives.             standing of the cost of meeting social objectives.
 Financial and nonfinancial      They are the main elements allowing reviewing and moni-
 performance indicators          toring SOE performance. A commonly used “tip” to build
 and targets associated to       up effective performance indicators is to make sure that
 them.                           they are “SMART”, i.e. Specific, Measurable, Achievable,
                                 Result-oriented and Time-based. Inappropriate perfor-
                                 mance indicators may lead to unintended consequences,
                                 e.g., encourage SOE management to improving the
                                 indicator at the expense of deteriorating performance in
                                 relation to the enterprise’s objectives.
 Procedures for reporting,       When not otherwise described in law or regulation, the
 including frequency.            performance agreement should explicitly lay out the
                                 reporting requirements and deadlines for the SOE.
 A statement describing the The level of dividends for each SOE is driven by its capital
 dividend policy.           structure, its profitability, and its estimate of future capi-
                            tal expenditure. A dividend policy enables the ownership
                            entity to better control SOE expectations, since a “gener-
                            ous” balance sheet may encourage boards to extend
                            beyond their core business and preferred risk profile.


	          63. The ownership entity and the SOE are responsible for negotiating the con-
tent and scope of the performance agreement. In countries where this process is fully
developed, expected targets of relevant performance indicators are monitored, revised,
and agreed on annually. In several countries aiming to strengthen accountability, SOE per-
formance agreements are made public and are frequently submitted to the legislature. It
is crucial that the government’s expectations for the SOE—as stated by the performance


40
agreement—are formally, clearly, and publicly communicated. To properly negotiate the
agreement, the ownership entity needs to have good knowledge of the industry based on
research, experience, and dialogue with the SOE. It should also seek help from external
experts as needed.
	        64. How performance agreements are prepared and negotiated varies among
countries, but there are some widely recognized performance-monitoring frameworks.
These frameworks differ in several ways, in part because of differences in the structure
of the government’s ownership entity. For example, in New Zealand—and other coun-
tries—the framework is “bottom up,” with a negotiation between the SOE’s board and
the ownership entity at the core of the process. Instead, in South Africa—and other coun-
tries—the performance agreement is more of an “expectations document” developed by
the ownership entity for the SOE.



	                              Recent Trends and Findings in Latin America                                                     I.3.2
	          65. Developing a solid and effective performance management framework for
SOEs is an inherent challenge for most Latin American countries. First, there are struc-
tural factors, such as the prevalence of hybrid models of ownership (see Chapter I.2) and
the limited use of performance and results-oriented budgeting tools in the region. Such
conditions make it difficult to introduce the logic of standardized performance agreements
for institutions operating outside of the central government, such as SOEs. Developing a
sound performance-management framework not only requires accommodating commer-
cial and non-commercial goals that may conflict. It also needs to account for contextual
factors, such as the complexity of the SOE’s business, the market structure in which the
SOE operates, and so forth. Furthermore, where successful performance-monitoring pro-
cesses have been established, they have evolved over many years—implementing them
requires adequate capacity and a relatively high level of coordination between ownership
entities and SOEs.
	          66. Within the sample of six Latin American countries, Chile, Peru, and Paragu-
ay provide notable examples of SOE performance monitoring. In the case of Chile, both
the board and management of SOEs supervised by the ownership entity (SEP) are held
accountable—through performance agreements or similar arrangements—by continual
monitoring and by evaluating annual goals. Performance agreements include financial
and non-financial indicators and associated targets agreed between the SEP and each
SOE. In Peru, SOEs supervised by FONAFE develop a five-year institutional strategic plan
(plan estratégico institucional) that defines the enterprise’s short-, medium-, and long-
term objectives. The strategic plans include a set of performance indicators and associ-
ated targets for monitoring results. They are approved first by the SOE board and then
require approval from the sector ministry and FONAFE’s board; that is followed by ratifica-
tion through the general shareholders meeting. A similar approach using performance
contracts was launched in 2009–2010 in Paraguay between CEP-UMEP and six SOEs, in-
cluding the country’s largest ones.

31 For instance, when introducing a performance monitoring framework, ownership entities usually need to start by
gathering baseline information on each SOE. They also must assemble a team of specialists who can develop an under-
standing of and expertise in the operations of the monitored SOEs.
32 The performance monitoring instruments for the SOEs under SEP supervision are: (i) Annual Management Plans, in
the case of the port enterprises, (ii) Management Agreements in the case of companies that have government guaran-
tees for specific loan operations, and (iii) Target Agreements for the rest of the companies. Finally, note that the largest
Chilean SOEs—in the mining sector—are outside the scope of SEP supervision and therefore are not subject to these
kinds of performance-monitoring arrangements.




                                                                                                                        41     Performance Monitoring
	          67. Uruguay has also made recent progress towards SOEs performance moni-
toring. The Government of Uruguay, through the DEP, has been working recently on the
implementation of performance agreements with SOEs that finance at least part of their
operative expenses through General Treasury subsidies. These agreements specify a se-
ries of financial and non-financial performance indicators, as well as targets associated to
them, and they also contemplate a system of results-based compensations and penalties.




        Table I.3: Performance agreements between ownership
                                  entities and individual SOEs
                         Sources: Developed from information reported in country cases.


 Country

Brazil                         DEST has implemented contract agreements (pilot cases)
                               with only 4 SOEs over the last decade. There were other
                               few isolated experiences of performance agreements
                               signed between SOEs delivering utilities (water & sanita-
                               tion and electricity) and related line-ministries. DEST pilot
                               cases introduced agreed indicators related to: financial
                               performance —e.g. return on liquid assets; service deliv-
                               ery —e.g., minimum coverage; and internal management
                               —e.g. human resources, internal control, etc. These agree-
                               ments also contemplated financial penalties —partial
                               or complete elimination of bonus/dividends— in cases
                               of failure to achieve agreed targets on these indicators.
                               However, (according to DEST), compliance was weak and
                               thus the impact of these accountability tools on improving
                               performance has not been significant.
Chile                          Directors and managers from SOEs under the supervi-
                               sion of the SEP, are accountable to the latter through
                               the monitoring and evaluation of annual goals through
                               performance agreements or similar tools. The SEP evalu-
                               ates SOEs’ performance through specific instruments such
                               as annual management plans (applied to harbor enter-
                               prises and linked to monetary incentives), programming
                               contracts, and performance agreements. These perfor-
                               mance contracts include: financial indicators; service
                               delivery indicators; and internal management indicators.
                               The effective achievement of the performance indicators
                               in evaluated annually by the SEP Council, while the Board
                               can consider the possibility of sanctions in the case of
                               unjustified non-achievement.




42
    Colombia                   There are no performance agreements signed between
                               SOEs and ownership entities (related line ministries). SOE
                               boards define their “financial and performance objectives”
                               which must be aligned with national goals, as codified in
                               the National Development Plan, and these objectives have
                               to be approved also by shareholders. In practice, SOEs
                               tend to elaborate their own corporate plans, taking into
                               consideration both the strategic sector plans (e.g., the Na-
                               tional Energy Plan) and their own objectives. No informa-
                               tion regarding the elaboration of performance indicators
                               and follow-up/monitoring activities has been reported.


	         68. Finally, the Government of Brazil did not implement performance agree-
ments with SOEs at a significant scale over the last decade, and no such agreements
have been used so far in Colombia. DEST has implemented contract agreements (pilot
cases) with only four SOEs over the last decade, and has not found the impact of these
accountability tools on improving performance to be significant. In the case of Colombia,
no performance agreements have been signed so far between SOEs and their respective
ownership entities—for instance related line ministries—because of the current decen-
tralized ownership structure.




	                                                 Examples of good practices                     I.3.3
	         69. Useful guidelines and practices can be found in OECD countries where
performance monitoring has effectively made SOEs more accountable. Improving the
governance of SOEs is a complex challenge in many countries. There is evidence that ef-
fective tools of performance monitoring can strengthen the way governments exercise
their SOE ownership function. The following reviews some good practices reported by the
OECD.


Setting Objectives

	          70. In a centralized SOE ownership structure, objectives can be defined for
both the ownership entity and SOEs. For the ownership entity, it can be useful to identify
a number of indicators for the overall SOE portfolio, or at least for a significant portion of
it. Box I.10 summarizes the case of APE in France, which has a clear focus on quantitative
and financial targets.
	




33 OECD, 2010




                                                                                          43     Performance Monitoring
               Box I.10: Specific indicators to assess performance
                                       of state ownership in France
                                                                      Source: OECD, 2010




       Objective 1: Ensure the increase in State shares’ value.
       •	Indicator 1: Operational profitability of capital
       	   (operational result/assets).
       •	 Indicator 2: Financial profitability (net result/equity).
       •	 Indicator 3: Operational margin (operational results/turnover).
       •	 Indicator 4: Indebtedness sustainability (EBITDA/net debt).

       Objective 2: Ensure the success of selling transactions.
       •	 Indicator 1: Difference between receipts from sales and intrinsic or stock
           values of sold shares (based on valuations made by the Commission on
           Participations and Transfers).
       •	 Indicator 2: Level of fees and commissions paid to advisers.

       Objective 3: Contribute to the decrease in state debt.
       •	 Indicator 1: Decrease in debt and interest charges of entities in public
           administration except the state.
       •	 Indicator 2: Decrease in debt and interest charges of the state.




	         71. Setting objectives for SOEs through performance agreements or similar
tools entails negotiation between each enterprise and the corresponding State owner-
ship entity; this requires both industry knowledge and strong financial modeling skills.
According to the OECD: It also requires a certain level of operational experience to de-
termine the key levers of performance and the time frame in which it is reasonable to
expect results. The combination of this industry knowledge, financial capability, and
operational experience should be present in SOE boards, and reflected also within the
ownership entity to allow informed and balanced dialogue…. To negotiate as an informed
owner, the ownership entity should develop appropriate knowledge of the industry, based
on research and analysis as well as the history of dialogue with, and feedback from, the
SOE boards.34 It is also useful to standardize and if possible formalize the process of
developing performance agreements through legislation, regulation, or protocol—see,
for example in Box I.11, the negotiating of corporate objectives in the “business planning
cycle” and the drafting of “statements of corporate intent,” the name for SOE performance
agreements in New Zealand.


34   OECD, 2010.




 44
                Box I.11: Negotiation of corporate objectives
                                             in New Zealand
                                                              Source: OECD, 2010




 he main steps related to business planning cycle and drafting of statements
T
of corporate intent are:

•	Shareholding ministers write to each Crown company board before the
   beginning of each planning round to detail the information requirements,
   the timing (milestone dates) and any special issues the company is to ad-
   dress during the planning round.
•	Boards are then required to: assess their business environment; reas-
   sess their strategic direction; provide a detailed plan for the immediate
   year; and provide financial projections for the following 2 to 4 years.
•	Following the delivery of the boards’ outlook and business plans to the
   shareholding ministers, advisors then prepare a report on these docu-
   ments for the shareholding ministers’ consideration. Draft statements of
   corporate intent are delivered together with the business plan. The SOE
   Act, the CRI Act and other relevant company-specific legislation require
   boards to deliver their draft SCIs to shareholding ministers at least one
   month before the end of each financial year.
•	Shareholding ministers may then, through their advisors, seek further
   information.
•	Shareholding ministers then consult with boards on any issues or con-
   cerns they have with the business plans and draft statement of intent.
   This occurs either by letter or, more often, meetings between sharehold-
   ing ministers, advisors and the board (referred to as the business plan-
   ning meeting).
•	Following the business planning meeting (if held) shareholding ministers
   write to boards outlining their understanding of the main outcomes and
   issues discussed.
•	Boards then consider the outcomes from business planning meetings
   and the shareholding ministers’ written comments, and if necessary, re-
   vise their business plans and statements of intent. Boards then deliver
   to shareholding ministers finalized business plans and statement of in-
   tents.
•	Shareholding ministers table the finalized statement of corporate intent
   in the Parliament.




                                                                                45   Performance Monitoring
	       72. A key challenge in setting objectives for performance agreements is to de-
velop relevant performance indicators. Box I.12 below illustrates some rules used in
France and New Zealand for choosing indicators. The indicators can be broadly classified
as “financial” and “non-financial.” Associated targets are used in evaluating and monitor-
ing performance. Main sources on which to base appropriate targets are historical perfor-
mance, benchmarking against peers, and assessment of effective capabilities.




          Box I.12: Developing relevant performance indicators
                                                                      Source: OECD, 2010




     France:
     •	 Relevant so as to assess       -	   Consistent with the objectives.
     	   the results obtained           -	   Relating to a material aspect of
                                        	    the expected result.
                                        -	   Providing the basis for making a judgment.
     •	   Useful                        -	   Not producing effects contrary to
                                        	    those sought.

     •	   Reliable                      -	   Being provided at regular intervals.
                                        -	   Lending itself to comparisons in time,
                                        	    space and between players.
     •	   Verifiable	                   -	   Being immediately exploited by
                                        	    the agencies concerned.
                                        -	   Being immediately comprehensible or
                                        	    clearly explained.

                                        -	   Being durable and independent of
                                        	    organizational imponderables.
                                        -	   Being reliable beyond question.
                                        -	   Able to be drawn up at reasonable cost.


     New Zealand
     Performance indicators (financial and non-financial) must:
     •	 Be meaningful to the SOE’s business and the SOE Act.
     •	 Be specific and measurable without ambiguity.
     •	 Be timely and capable of being audited, where appropriate.
     •	 Be within the SOE’s responsibility or power of control.
     •	 Be consistent with and influence, as appropriate, the SOE’s purpose and
         principles of operation or business.
     •	 Respect commercial sensitivity, where appropriate.
     •	 Encourage and reflect best practice.
     •	 Where appropriate, ensure employee participation in, and ownership of,
         these indicators.




46
Monitoring and Auditing of Performance

	       73. Performance indicators and periodic results based on their associated tar-
gets should be available to main users involved to allow them to monitor SOE perfor-
mance and to verify their relevance and quality of information. Depending on the legal
and institutional framework, the main recipients of such information would be owner-
ship entities, line ministries, ministry of finance, audit institutions, and other govern-
ment agencies. Effective SOE performance monitoring by the corresponding ownership
entity usually should be an ongoing process—including the use of external information,
performance checkups, and regular meetings with SOE boards. Annual SOE performance
reviews are also an important information source. The reviews should be produced by
the ownership entity and distributed to other relevant public institutions. Note though
that the disclosure of performance data may be restricted in cases where commercially
sensitive information is involved.
	       74. Performance indicators, as established by performance agreements or simi-
lar tools, should also be subject to both internal and independent external audit. Audit-
ing by the State audit institutions or by private firms assures the State owner, stake-
holders, and the public of the quality and accuracy of the information provided by SOEs
about the achievement of targets. Without proper, independent audit of performance
information, poor quality data, weak analysis, or political pressure to look good might
lead to a distorted picture of performance. OECD guidelines also suggest relying on the
internal audit function: [D]evelop efficient internal audit procedures and establish an
internal audit function that is monitored by and reports directly to the board and to the
audit committee or the equivalent SOE organ.




                                                                                       47    Performance Monitoring
                                 Box I.13: Monitoring and Audit of SOE
                                                   performance in Italy
                                                                        Source: OECD, 2010




      onitoring
     M
     •	 The Ministry of Economy and Finance, which is the ownership entity, car-
         ries on a constant monitoring on SOEs’ performance and management.
         Each company is thus required to provide the ministry with the following
         detailed information and documents:
     	   -	    the annual budget for the incoming year;
     	   -	   half-yearly reports on performance and financial results, with de-
               tails on the differences with the budget and the previous year’s figures;
     	   -	    the estimated year's end figures.
     •	 SOEs are also required to point out the potential critical areas and give
         all relevant information, including the business plans approved by the
         board.
     •	 In addition, the shareholder can receive information on each SOE by its
         representatives appointed in both the Board of Directors and the Board
         of Auditors. (The Italian Civil Code [Art. 2449] allows the state as an
         owner to appoint one or more members of the Board of Directors and of
         the Board of Statutory Auditors with the same rights and duties of board
         members chosen by GSM.)

     Audit
     •	Internal Audit: In all SOEs, the internal audit office reports directly to the
        Board, usually every 6 months, on the following matters: evaluation of
        the efficiency of the internal audit procedures, checks effectively made
        and possible risk areas. Moreover, the Ministry of Economy and Finance,
        as the ownership entity, has actively promoted that all SOEs appoint a
        senior officer (usually the CFO) responsible for the company’s account-
        ing procedures and financial statements. This officer is appointed by and
        reports to the Board of Directors and is accountable to all stakeholders
        for the Company’s Annual Reports and financial data.
     •	External and independent Audit: All SOEs, both listed and unlisted, are
        subject to an annual audit by independent external auditors, who are
        appointed by the GSM. The external auditors of SOEs are required to be
        duly registered by the Italian Securities and Exchange Commission (Con-
        sob), to ensure that they meet the same high quality auditing standards
        of listed companies.
     •	State Audit: The activity of SOEs is supervised and audited by the Na-
        tional Audit Office (Corte dei Conti). An appointed official of NAO attends
        SOEs’ Board Meetings and an annual report by NAO on the performance
        of each SOE is sent to the Parliament.




48
49   Performance Monitoring
                                   Board Procedures
                                                                                    I.4


I.4.1                                                       Conceptual Framework
    	        75. A board of directors is the governing body of a corporate institution such as
    a State-owned enterprise. It is a collective decision-making team whose effectiveness is
    a function of its composite skills and experience and how relevant those skills and that
    experience are to the strategic and operational issues confronting the SOE. The board
    is typically responsible for the strategic oversight of the enterprise, the approval of its
    business plan, the appointment and oversight of senior management, and the reporting
    of performance to shareholders.
    	        76. Key elements of good board practices within an effective governance frame-
    work include:
    •	   A robust selection and appointment process designed to appoint directors who 		
    	    have the most appropriate skill set, knowledge, and experience to help the SOE 		
    	    achieve its legal and commercial mandate
    •	   A clearly stated primary objective for the SOE that would guide the board’s decision
    	    making and the management of the company
    •	  A requirement to actively participate in developing a forward-looking plan or
         performance agreement—often also termed “business plan” or “statement of cor-
         porate intent” and based upon a mix of financial and non-financial performance
         indicators—that sets out how the board will oversee the SOE to achieve the primary
         objective and the SOE’s statutory and commercial mandate
    •	   Periodic (and public) ex post reporting against the objectives and targets set out in 	
    	    the forward-looking plan
    •	   A clear separation between the government-as-owner and the board—ensuring that
    	    government ministers and officials are not appointed as SOE directors
    •	   Independent audits of the SOE’s annual financial reports that are prepared in ac		
    	    cordance with appropriate accounting standards
    •	   A clear separation between the government-as-owner and the board—ensuring that
    	    government ministers and officials are not appointed as SOE directors
    •	   Management that is separate from the board, but is held accountable by the board 	
    	    for the performance of the SOE against the objectives and targets as they appear 	
    	    in the forward-looking plan
    •	   A formal process to evaluate the performance of the board, separate from the evalu-
    	    ation of the SOE’s performance against pre-defined objectives and targets




        50
	       77. Legislative framework. The OECD study of board practices notes: [T]he role
of the board should be clearly defined and founded in legislation, preferably according
to general company law and ... the State should inform the board of its objectives and
priorities through proper channels to ensure the board maximum authority and inde-
pendence.35
	       78. SOE directors should have a clear understanding of their role. This role is
usually defined in the legislation establishing the SOE, whether it be an overarching
law or entity-specific legislation. The objectives of the director’s role should be clear
and unambiguous and be capable of measurement. Directors’ performance should be
assessed against the attainment of the SOE objective. In many SOE laws, this is termed
as the “primary” or “principal” objective. In the first SOE act developed in the mid-1980s
in New Zealand the objective was described as “being successful,” which was defined
as “being as profitable as comparable businesses not owned by the State.”36 In more
recent SOE legislation, the objective sometimes has been equated with the SOE achiev-
ing a return sufficient to meet its risk-adjusted cost of capital.


Selection process and duties of directors
	
	        79. Only candidates who have demonstrated the most relevant skills, knowl-
edge, and experience to help the SOE achieve its primary objective should be appointed
directors. In some countries the SOE director selection and appointment processes are
codified as part of the SOE act and regulations, or through a cabinet directive. In the
case of SOEs listed on stock exchanges, there is a formal process to appoint the direc-
tors, usually through election at the annual general shareholders meeting. However,
this does not guarantee that those directors nominated and appointed by the govern-
ment as shareholder are selected on merit. The quality of board decisions is very much
a function of the quality and independence of the individual directors.
	        80. The roles, responsibilities, and duties of directors—and how they will be
held accountable—should be clearly defined. If the SOE is not registered as a company,
and subject to the duties set out in the relevant company legislation, then it may be
necessary to have comparable duties codified in either the SOEs’ rules or establishing
legislation. Whether the State manages its SOEs through a centralized or decentralized
ownership model, there is merit in ensuring that the duties and responsibilities of SOE
directors are set at a consistently high standard across the full SOE portfolio. The State
should use its ownership role in its SOE portfolio to demonstrate best practices in set-
ting director duties and responsibilities, and in corporate governance generally.
	        81. It is also important that there is a clear separation between the board and
management. Having management sit as directors adds little or no value to the orga-
nization’s governance—management is still required to submit reports and recomen-
tions for the board’s consideration even if managers sit on the board, but their presence
can complicate the board’s function. It is more difficult to hold a chief executive account-
able who is also a director. Also the practice of having an executive chair, as has been the
case in many corporations in the United States, may create an environment where the
chair is all-powerful and the board is unable to exercise the required level of oversight.
35 OECD, 2013.
36 New Zealand State-Owned Enterprise Act, 1986




                                                                                         51    Board Procedures
	
	       82. Ministers and other public sector servants should not sit on the boards of
commercially-focused SOEs. In the case of non-commercial SOEs, where the enterprise
is undertaking State functions and is fully or heavily funded directly from the State
budget, it may be justifiable to have the sector minister or public servants sitting on
the board. However, in the case of commercially-focused SOEs, ministers and public
servants carry irreconcilable conflicts of interest between their roles as ministers and
public servants and their role as SOE directors. Further, having political appointees on
boards, rather than those who are best qualified, erodes the independence and au-
tonomy of the SOE boards. 37
	       83. Assuring the independence of SOE board members has several require-
ments. For example, as reported by the IFC,38 an “independent director” is a person
who, among other things, has no personal service contracts with the SOE or with related
parties, including its major shareholders and senior management members; has not
been employed by the SOE or its related parties in the past five years; is not affiliated
with a significant customer or supplier of the SOE; and is not affiliated with a company
serving as adviser or consultant of the SOE.
	       84. New directors should receive effective induction training. It may take two to
three years for a newly appointed director to be able to fully contribute to board dis-
cussions. It is in all stakeholders’ best interests if a director can fully contribute in the
shortest time period and this can be achieved if a newly appointed director is provided
with induction training. The OECD guidelines on boards of directors of SOEs39 observe:
Induction programs should match the needs of each board. They should serve as a way
to improve the effectiveness of board members. Ideally, induction training should be
undertaken both by the agency appointing the director and by the SOE on whose board
the director is about to serve.


Accountability and transparency

	       85. The foundation of any effective SOE governance model is the accountabil-
ity framework, supported by an appropriate level of transparency. SOE boards are the
stewards of public funds and should be subject to an accountability framework at least
comparable to that which applies to private sector directors. Furthermore, recognizing
that SOEs are responsible for public funds, their transparency requirements should be
higher than those usually adopted in the private sector.
	       86. The board should ensure that the SOE has adequate internal controls and
effective internal and external audit. SOE boards should be accountable for the over-
sight and publishing of a set of audited annual accounts of the immediately preceding
financial year, preferably within 3 months of that financial year ending. The existence
of an audit committee, comprised of board members selected to focus on auditing re-
quirements, is considered a good practice. The audit committee is usually in charge of
the oversight of the SOE financial reporting, and (in some cases) of the evaluation of
corporate risks. Board-revised financial reports should then be subject to independent
external audit.
37 World Bank, 2006.
38 International Finance Corporation (IFC), 2012.
39 OECD, 2013.




 52
	        87. Board accountability requires the use of forward-looking business plans—or
performance agreements—covering a meaningful term such as three to five years. It is
impossible to fulfill the minimum requirements of an SOE director if there is uncertainty
about the enterprises' current financial position or what the board and management
are planning—financially and operationally. In some cases, the SOE legislation requires
the board to develop an overall guidance for the forward-looking business plan—often
called “statement of corporate intent” or “statement of corporate objectives”— which
must be made available to the public at no cost. In order to enhance SOE accountabil-
ity, forward-looking SOE documents should contain a mix of relevant financial and non-
financial performance indicators and associated targets. Model SOE legislation requires
the SOE to publish summaries of their annual reports and actual performance measures
against targets.
	        88. In some cases, partial listing can be used to launch SOEs into a more robust
and transparent governance framework. The State may allow a partial listing of shares
in its SOEs on international stock exchanges and its own domestic share market—large
SOEs in Brazil are a good example. This practice has a number of direct benefits, such as
increasing the ability to raise capital. But it also can strengthen the governance frame-
work under which these SOEs operate; for instance, by increasing the accountability
and transparency of the SOE board and management. Partially listed SOEs must abide
by the rules set by the exchange on which their shares are listed. They also are subject
to a high level of scrutiny by brokers and other market observers.




	                     Recent Trends and Findings in Latin America                           I.4.2
	        89. SOE board and management practices in Latin American vary from country
to country. Table I.4 summarizes current practices in six Latin American countries. It is
based on information gathered by the World Bank and provided by government repre-
sentatives from the SOE sector for each country.
	        90. However, there are some practices common to all or several of the countries
studied. First, in almost all analyzed countries, the board of the SOEs has the authority
to designate the management team, and also participates in the approval of the compa-
ny’s financial reports prior to their dissemination. Laws and other norms that establish
functions and minimum characteristics of SOE boards of directors are common. Also,
three of the six selected countries—Brazil, Chile, and Peru—appoint directors based on
merit and qualifications. Finally, two practices that seem to be relatively uncommon are
(i) involving labor unions in the SOE boards and (ii) the use of sanctions—in monetary or
other form—when SOE performance falls short of pre-established indicators and goals.
	        91. Table I.4 compars of specific SOE management practices among different
countries. For example, in Paraguay only a few companies have a board of directors, so
SOEs are usually led by CEOs appointed by the President of the Republic, even though
the CEP can recommend nominations. Also, the CEP can recommend that the President
remove the CEO of an SOE that underperforms. On the other hand, in Peru under the
lead of FONAFE, the role of the “Executive President” has recently been eliminated in
most SOEs. This has helped enforce the separation of roles between the board and the
management of SOEs. In contrast, in Uruguay board intervention in operational issues
remains frequent. Finally, as mentioned earlier, the performance measurement of SOEs
in that Uruguay, and hence the use of sanctions against boards for poor performance,



                                                                                      53    Board Procedures
are still in an early stage and are limited to some companies that receive subsidies from
the national treasury.




      Table I.4: Board and management practices in SOEs in 6
                                  Latin American countries.
Source: Report authors, in coordination with government staff from the SOE sector of the
                                                                    respective countries




                                                         Colombia



                                                                     Paraguay




                                                                                        Uruguay
                                      Brazil



                                                Chile




                                                                                Peru
             Concept



  The boards appoints the man-                                      SOME
                                      YES       YES     YES                     YES     YES
  agement team                                                      CASES

  The ownership entity (ministry,
  centralized agency, etc.) or
  other institution (presidency,      NO        NO      NO           YES        NO      NO
  ministerial cabinet, etc.) ap-
  points the management team

  Clear separation of roles
  between the board and the           YES       YES     YES          NO         YES     NO
  management

  Selection of the directors based
  on merit and qualifications         YES       YES     NO           NO         YES     NO


  The board formally participates
  in the approval of financial                                      SOME
                                      YES       YES     YES                     YES     YES
  reports of the SOE previous to                                    CASES
  their dissemination

  There are norms/laws which
  establish the minimum func-         YES       YES     YES          NO         YES     YES
  tions of the board

  There is legislation that
                                               SOME
  foresees the representation of      YES               NO           NO         NO      NO
                                               CASES
  unions at the board

  The board is subject to poten-
                                                                                       SOME
  tial sanction in the case of low    NO        YES     NO           NO         NO
                                                                                       CASES
  performance of the SOE



 54
 	                                              Examples of good practices                    I.4.3
	       92. Examples reported by the OECD and by the World Bank illustrate some best
current SOE management practices.40 OECD governments have increasingly addressed
the role of boards to improve SOE governance and performance, and also to strengthen
the State’s ownership function. At the same time, the World Bank has been increasingly
paying attention to SOE corporate governance issues, including board procedures, and
has reviewed practices from several countries around the world. The following reviews
some of what the OECD and the Bank have learned.


Board member selection and appointment

	       93. Some OECD countries now base selection and appointment of SOE directors
on skills. Overall, a relatively small number of countries have imposed minimum formal
qualifications for individuals to be eligible for SOE board nomination. In the United King-
dom, board member selection and appointment is regulated jointly at several stages
by the SOE board and the Shareholder Executive (the government coordination entity).
New Zealand, through its centralized SOE monitoring unit,41 has adopted a comprehen-
sive approach to board appointments, from soliciting, vetting, and recommending can-
didates through conducting induction training after an appointment has been made.
Also ministers, when making appointments to SOE boards, must certify that they have
followed the mandated process. In Canada, when a board vacancy arises, the minister
responsible for nominating a candidate—and the minister’s staff, with support from the
department—are guided by the profile developed by the board of directors to screen
potential director candidates.42




40 OECD, 2013; World Bank, 2014.
41 Crown Ownership Monitoring Unit (COMU).
42 OECD, 2013.




                                                                                        55    Board Procedures
 Box I.14: SOE Board members selection and appointment
                                process in New Zealand
            Source: World Bank, 2014, adapted from CCMAU, “Appointment Process,” at
                 http://www.treasury.govt.nz/commercial/board-appointments/process/




     In New Zealand the appointment process may vary for specific boards, but
     the following steps detail the general process that the Crown Company Man-
     agement Advisory Unit (CCMAU) follows for all appointments.

     Skills profiling: In conjunction with ministers and the chair of each company
     board where a vacancy arises, CCMAU analyzes the board’s makeup to deter-
     mine the general skills and experience required and those that would be ideal
     in any new appointees. A position specification is then prepared.

     Candidate identification: CCMAU’s primary tool for identifying candidates is
     its appointments database. Candidates may also apply directly for specific
     positions or register in the system to be considered for future opportunities.
     Ministers generally consult Government colleagues for suitable candidates.
     Nominations from other agencies are also requested.

     Short-listing: Ministers consider all applicants for each role and short-list
     possible preferred candidates who appear to match the skill needs for each
     board.

     Due diligence and identification of conflicts of interest: Short-listed can-
     didates may undertake a due diligence process before final decisions are
     made. This allows them to assess whether they will accept the role if offered
     and allows CCMAU and the board chair to form a view about each candidate’s
     suitability, including possible conflicts of interest (such as family connec-
     tions, personal or professional links with the SOE or its management, or a
     directorship or ownership in another company that undertakes work for the
     SOE). Where a conflict is identified, a decision is made as to whether that con-
     flict renders the appointment unmanageable or whether the appointment can
     proceed with appropriate conflict-of-interest management regimes in place.

     Appointment: After a preferred candidate has confirmed his or her availability
     to serve on a board, the shareholding or responsible ministers advise the
     cabinet appointment and honors committee and the cabinet accordingly. The
     appointment is then confirmed by a notice of appointment to the success-
     ful candidate. For most candidates, the shareholding or responsible minister
     makes the appointment and the entity and successful candidate are advised
     accordingly.




56
Definition of board’s key responsibilities

	        94. The definition of the role and key responsibilities of SOE boards can often
be found in laws, decrees, corporate governance codes, and so forth. However, it is not
always clear in practice what the board is required to do to perform its functions effec-
tively. As noted earlier, it is helpful for the SOE legislative framework to provide a clear
definition of the SOE “primary” or “principal” objective—whether by an overarching law
or by SOE-specific legislation. The objective should be precise, unambiguous, and ca-
pable of measurement, and directors’ performance should be assessed against how the
objective is achieved over time.
	        95. In South Africa and India, SOE boards have been explicitly delegated certain
powers in relation to their respective ownership entity. In South Africa, board respon-
sibilities are based on the national private sector corporate governance code followed
by listed companies, with additional guidance provided for SOEs and their relevant min-
istries. In India, the span of authority delegated to the board is linked to the SOE’s
size and performance, with the boards of better-performing SOEs given more power.
Also, a number of OECD countries recently have implemented policies that empower
SOE boards and clarify their responsibilities, often in line with OECD guidelines and
corporate practices of private sector companies.43




43 World Bank, 2014.




                                                                                        57     Board Procedures
                         Box I.15: Empowering SOE boards in India
                                                and South Africa
                                                               Source: World Bank, 2014




     In South Africa SOE boards have been given explicit responsibility through
     the 2002 Protocol on Corporate Governance in the Public Sector. The protocol
     is to be used in conjunction with South Africa’s corporate governance code,
     the King Code, which applies to a range of enterprises, including listed com-
     panies. The protocol confirms that SOE boards are assigned clear respon-
     sibilities. According to the protocol, “the board of the SOE has absolute re-
     sponsibility for the performance of the SOE.” The protocol also clarifies when
     the Government shares power with the board. For example, it notes that the
     board should consult with the “shareholder” (relevant minister) on the choice
     of CEO and that the shareholder should approve the pay of executive board
     members. And it specifies that the objectives of the shareholder compact—a
     performance agreement between the shareholder and SOE—are to be the
     benchmark for measuring the performance of the company, the board, the
     chair, or the CEO.

     In India board responsibilities are outlined by the corporate governance code
     that applies to all central public sector enterprises (CPSEs), which is similar
     to the requirements for listed companies. In addition, a formal system of del-
     egation based on company performance determines which decisions are the
     exclusive purview of the board and which must be shared with the relevant
     ministry. Under this system each SOE is classified on the basis of its size,
     profitability, and governance. Maharatnas and Navratnas, some of the largest
     companies in India, have the most freedom. Miniratnas (smaller enterprises)
     have somewhat less. And some additional powers are delegated to all profit-
     making SOEs. A threshold is set for such actions as capital expenditures and
     joint ventures, subsidiaries, and mergers and acquisitions. Actions below the
     threshold require no approval by the ministry; those above the threshold do
     require its approval.




58
59   Board Procedures
                                                                           Fiscal Risk
                                                                                                                         44




                                                                                                            I.5




I.5.1       Potential Fiscal Risks Posed by State-Owned Enterprises
                 96. Various factors can generate SOE-related fiscal risks. Uncompensated qua-
        si-fiscal activities, political interference in SOE operations, excessive SOE borrowing,
        weak SOE reporting and insufficient Government oversight are considered as some of
        the main potential sources of SOE-related fiscal risks. Experience shows that such risks
        can be substantial. Significant SOE losses and debts have resulted in costly government
        financial support, with associated unforeseen bailouts and increases in government
        debt.




        44 This chapter draws heavily on previous studies of fiscal risks (IMF, 2005; Cebotari, 2008; Cebotari and others,
        2009; Petrie, 2013) and of SOEs (Allen and Vani, 2013)




         60
                                    Table I.5: SOEs as sources of fiscal risks

 Potential Sources of SOE-
                                                               Selected Examples
 Related Fiscal Risk

 Uncompensated quasi-fiscal                   andated SOE pricing below market or cost recov-
                                           • M
 activities and contingent li-               ery that generates losses not compensated by the
 abilities                                   budget.
                                             Requirements to undertake activities unrelated
                                           • 
                                             to business objectives, including substituting for
                                             government expenditure.
                                           • Soft budget constraints.
                                           • Political interference in SOE operations.


 Macroeconomic and other                      ariations in growth, inflation, exchange rates and
                                           • V
 broad sources                               interest rates, with a bearing on SOE operations and
                                             the value of assets and liabilities.
                                           • Volatility and uncertainty of commodity prices.
                                           • Natural disasters.


 Sectoral and specific sources             •   Variations in demand for SOE output.
                                           •   SOE provision of essential services.
                                           •   “Too big to fail”.
                                           •   Changes in SOE production costs.
                                           •   SOE debt and contingent liabilities.
                                           •   Volatility in weather conditions.


 Weaknesses related to SOE                    nadequate managerial, control, accounting, audit
                                           • I
 corporate governance, govern-               and reporting SOE systems.
 ment oversight, reporting and               Lax government monitoring and oversight of SOEs,
                                           • 
 risk management                             narrow fiscal reporting, shortcomings in the disclo-
                                             sure and management of fiscal risks.




        97. Sound management of SOE-related fiscal risks is essential. It involves key
elements of SOE corporate governance; strong government oversight, fiscal reporting,
and disclosure of fiscal risks; and risk-mitigation strategies. Several World Bank stud-
ies of SOE performance highlight the need for sound corporate governance practices
to help address avoidable fiscal risks.44 The IMF has suggested criteria for fiscal trans-
parency and for assessing the fiscal risks posed by SOEs. It also has made recommen-
dations for the oversight, disclosure, and management of fiscal risks, including those
posed by SOEs.46 Similarly, the OECD’s guidelines on SOE corporate governance also
emphasize the need for transparency and disclosure of information.47


45   World Bank, 1995 and 2006; Polackova and Schick, 2002; Tordo, 2011.
46   IMF, 2005, 2007 and 2012; Cebotari and others, 2009; and Kopits and Craig, 1998.
47   OECD, 2005.




                                                                                                    61   Fiscal Risk
Quasi-fiscal activities

         98. Quasi-fiscal activities (QFAs) are activities carried out by nongovernment
public entities on behalf of the government to achieve policy goals.48 Governments use
QFAs to achieve various social, economic, and political objectives. In the case of SOEs,
examples of QFAs include: the mandated supplying of goods and services at subsidized
or below-market prices, the required delivery of free services or universal service, ac-
tivities imposed by the government that are unrelated to the enterprise's business, or
activities driven by political interference in SOE operations. Fiscal risks may arise when
the financial consequences of these QFAs are not properly compensated.
         99. Some QFAs can be justified. QFAs properly and transparently compensated
from the budget may be an efficient way of carrying out certain government policies
to achieve legitimate objectives, particularly when fiscal alternatives are operationally
unavailable or more costly.
         100. SOEs may be mandated to charge prices below costs or relevant interna-
tional benchmark prices. Examples include SOEs in sectors such as electricity, water
and sanitation, transportation, and telecommunications that are required to set tariffs
below cost-recovery levels. These subsidies are often provided without adequate trans-
fers from the budget to cover the ensuing losses. In some cases, however, subsidized
prices may not require transfers from the budget to preserve the SOE’s viability. For
example, in many oil-exporting countries, national oil companies (NOCs) are mandated
to supply petroleum products to domestic consumers at prices that are less than op-
portunity cost, but above the NOC’s costs. Even in such cases, however, open-ended
subsidies raise fiscal risks for the public sector as a whole.
         101. SOEs may be required to undertake activities unrelated to their business
objectives. For example, fiscal rules that target the government’s deficit and debt may
provide incentives to shift activities to SOEs without compensation. This may also occur
in the absence of formal fiscal rules. That is the case, for example, when there is a delib-
erate intention to reduce the government’s reported deficit and debt.49 If SOE operations
are not covered by fiscal reporting, there is an incentive to induce SOEs to undertake
uncompensated spending—this can make fiscal results at the government level look
better, but at the cost of generating contingent liabilities.
         102. Political interference in SOE operations can generate inefficiencies and fis-
cal risks. For example, explicit or implicit directed employment policies may lead to SOE
overstaffing. The excess personnel generate added operating costs. Overstaffing also
presents financial and social risks in the event SOEs are restructured or privatized in the
future. Requirements to buy goods and services from domestic suppliers entail price
and availability risks.
         103. QFAs can also arise from “soft budget constraints.” Subsidies can be given
by the government through SOEs in the form of low collection rates and tolerance of
arrears. SOEs may sometimes not have enough power (from legal procedures or politi-
cal support), willingness, or capability to ensure the full and timely collection of fees.
Payment arrears and nonpayment operate as an implicit subsidy because they result in
a nontransparent transfer of resources to some users and revenue losses for the SOEs.
Difficulty in suspending services to customers with overdue bills, in the case of public
utilities, is a related and commonly observed problem.


48   IMF, 2007; Tommasi , 2013.
49   Irwin, 2012.




 62
        104. Uncompensated QFAs are one of the main sources of contingent liabilities.50
If QFAs are compensated by budget transfers, the fiscal balance of the general govern-
ment includes the costs associated with the pursuit of policy objectives through the
SOEs. However, in many countries, SOEs carry out QFAs without adequate and trans-
parent compensation from the budget. When budget transfers are insufficient to cover
operating losses and adequate investment, SOEs may be forced to borrow, often with
government guarantees, or to run arrears. This in turn leads to the build-up of govern-
ment contingent liabilities, which could affect fiscal debt sustainability. Contingent li-
abilities may be explicit, as in the case of government guarantees, or implicit, if there are
expectations that distressed SOEs will eventually be rescued by the government. These
problems can become particularly acute when SOE reporting and government oversight
are inadequate.
        105. Uncompensated QFAs can be financed by "borrowing from the future" in
the form of postponement of necessary SOE expenditures. SOEs that are unable to se-
cure adequate revenues or are in financial distress may resort to cutting down neces-
sary expenditures on operations, maintenance, and capital investment. This practice
often entails deteriorating service coverage and quality and other associated risks, such
as reduced operational safety and lost output. Negative impacts may extend to the me-
dium and long term: Depleting the SOE capital stock and generating fiscal risks will
require future spending to improve or restore service viability.


                                                Box I.16: SOE-Related Fiscal Risk:
                                                               Country Examples


      In El Salvador, tariffs charged by the water and sanitation public utility
      (ANDA) have been about 50 percent below cost. The enterprise’s budget has
      been insufficient to pay for inputs. As a result, ANDA has run recurrent arrears
      to the state-owned power generator (CEL) for power supply, and has not been
      able to cover fully its debt service, resulting in contingent liabilities for the
      government, which have materialized from time to time.51

      In Ghana, QFAs in the form of subsidized energy prices not compensated from
      the budget led to substantial losses at the state oil refinery and the electricity
      sector. Delays in adjusting petroleum prices and electricity tariffs in the early
      2000s inflicted large accumulated losses, on the order of 7 percent of GDP in
      the case of the refinery alone.52

      In Dubai, United Arab Emirates, several government-related enterprises ran
      up liabilities equivalent to 79 percent of GDP. As the global financial crisis
      unfolded, these liabilities proved unsustainable and led to a financial rescue
      by Abu Dhabi in 2010.53



50   Footnote 50: IMF, 2005; and Cebotari and others, 2009.
51   IMF, 2011.
52   IMF, 2012.




                                                                                           63   Fiscal Risk
Macroeconomic and other broad factors

        106. Sudden and unexpected changes in exchange rates and interest rates can
affect SOE finances and government budgets. SOEs that rely on revenues in domes-
tic currency may borrow in foreign currency. This leads to currency mismatches be-
tween revenues and debt service, which raises fiscal risks should the domestic cur-
rency depreciate. While it is perhaps less widely realized, NOCs and other State-owned,
resource-exporting companies also face fiscal risks stemming from domestic currency
appreciations. This is because their foreign balance—exports and any return on foreign
assets minus imports and foreign debt service—is almost invariably positive. Then, if
the domestic currency appreciates in real terms, the domestic purchasing power of the
net foreign resources accruing to the company diminishes. SOEs’ investment and debt
management may also be vulnerable to increases in interest rates, both domestic and
international.


          Box I.17: A framework for analyzing SOE fiscal risks:
                                                              54
                                      Application to Jamaica
                                                                 Source: Longmore, et al


     Analysis of SOE fiscal risk can be undertaken using forecasting techniques.
     First, a baseline outlook for financial performance of each relevant SOE is
     constructed. Then, two scenarios (optimistic and pessimistic) are developed
     to demonstrate the impact of favorable or unfavorable shocks on the opera-
     tions of the selected entities. The next step is a stress test analysis to show
     how macroeconomic risks could affect the overall SOE sector. Changes in,
     say, oil prices and exchange rates could affect some SOEs favorably and oth-
     ers unfavorable—stress testing answers the question of the aggregate effect
     of such factors on the aggregate financial outcomes and fiscal impact of the
     SOE sector.

     This fiscal risk analysis was applied to eight entities in Jamaica. The focus
     was on those public bodies (PBs—the national definition of SOEs and similar
     off-budget entities) that posed most significant fiscal risk. The selected eight
     PBs together account for 2 percent of GDP (measured as total earnings before
     interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization). Of the eight PBs, three re-
     corded losses in FY2011/12 and transfers from central government to support
     these entities amounted to J$15.1 billion (1 percent of GDP) in FY2013/14. Un-
     der baseline assumptions, operational performance and fiscal risk of the key
     eight PBs deteriorates in FY2013/14, to then improve over the medium term.

     Scenario analysis was done for each PB, including public transport company
     JUTC (Chart 1). In the pessimistic scenario with higher fuel prices, a depre-
     ciated exchange rate, higher interest rates, and government-set bus fares
     unchanged, JUTC would have substantial borrowing requirements in the me-
     dium term, about J$3.5 billion or 0.2 percent of GDP in FY2015/16.




64
                                                              JUTC Scenario Analysis


                           Operational revenue / net debt                                                               Net financing need
              1.000

                                                                                                      1.000
                   800
                                                                                                      3.000

                   600                                                                                2.000
      In percent




                                                                                                      1.000




                                                                                     In JS millions
                   400                                                                                    0
                                                                                                      -1.000
                   200
                                                                                                      -2.000

                    0                                                                                 -3.000
                         2012 / 13   2013 / 14    2014 / 15    2015 / 16                              -4.000
                                                                                                               2012 / 13 2013 / 14 2014 / 15 2015 / 16

                                     Baseline scenario                 Optimistic scenario                                Pessimistic scenario




        Stress testing shows vulnerability to macroeconomic shocks for SOE finan-
        cial performance and their fiscal impact. SOE performance is most suscep-
        tible to exchange rate risk. A depreciation of 20 percent in FY2013/14 would
        increase net debt by 1.7 percent of GDP for the eight PBs by FY2015/16 and
        increase their financing need by 0.6 percent of GDP over the medium term.
        The combined effect of a modest combined exchange rate, oil price and inter-
        est rate shock would add 2 percent of GDP to the financing need of the 8 key
        PBs over the medium term. This may seem modest, but given present tight
        fiscal conditions in Jamaica, such risks would be difficult to manage.




                 107. The volatility and uncertainty of international commodity prices
        can generate fiscal risks for SOEs and overall government finances. Power
        generators that rely on fossil fuels face significant input price risks, which
        are compounded if tariffs are not allowed to respond adequately to changes
        in costs. Resource-exporting SOEs face significant revenue risks. The distri-
        bution of those risks between the SOE and the government depends on the
        fiscal regime applied to the resource sector. For example, the export receipts
        of PEMEX, Mexico's NOC, fell significantly in 2009 when the average interna-
        tional price of oil tumbled—receipts declined from 5.3 percent of GDP in 2008
        to 4.0 percent in 2009,55 and this decline then passed on to the government in
        the form of lower tax payments.




54    his box draws on a fiscal risk assessment tool developed by Verhoeven et al. (2008) and the application to
     T
     Jamaica by Longmore, Reveira Cazorla and Verhoeven (2014).
55    xport revenue expressed in domestic currency in PEMEX's statements (PEMEX, 2009) as a ratio to nominal GDP
     E
     as reported in the IMF’s World Economic Outlook.



                                                                                                                                                         65   Fiscal Risk
I.5.2                                               Managing SOE Fiscal Risks
            108. Sound management of SOE fiscal risks depends on key elements of SOE
    corporate governance, adequate government oversight, the disclosure of potential
    risks, and effective risk mitigation strategies. Appropriate and timely SOE financial
    planning, budgeting, and reporting provide information to the government about devel-
    opments in the SOE sector, existing and potential financial stress areas that need atten-
    tion, and future prospects. Government oversight should allow for the identification of
    SOE-related risks and their disclosure and scrutiny. It should also provide the basis for
    risk mitigation measures, if needed.


    SOE Financial Planning, Budgeting, and Reporting

            109. SOEs should clearly define both their commercial and non-commercial ob-
    jectives, and include the costs of QFAs in their budgets and ex post financial reports.
    There is a growing emphasis on the provision of nonfinancial information by SOEs,
    which often combine commercial and public policy (non-commercial) objectives.56 In
    particular, any QFAs mandated or motivated by government policy objectives should be
    reported. Tordo (2011) notes that transparency with respect to the SOE’s responsibilities
    and various objectives, and the relative importance of those objectives, may reduce
    perceptions of risk. As a good practice, SOE budgets should spell out QFAs and specify
    clearly how they are to be financed. Then, SOE financial statements and annual reports
    should include the actual costs of QFAs and related transfers from the budget.

           110. Setting explicit financial objectives is important to SOE transparency, ac-
    countability, and risk management.57 The targets and outcomes can be compared to
    industry and regional standards. They can be stress tested to identify downside risks
    and to assess the financial robustness of the SOE.

           111. Effective government oversight and risk management require timely and
    comprehensive SOE reporting to the government. Reporting and monitoring are vital to
    help manage fiscal risks, including the ability to identify looming problems or the pros-
    pect of future liabilities early on and to adopt corrective actions. SOEs should submit
    relevant data to the government periodically. The government should be prepared to
    consolidate and analyze this information, and thereby to detect possible fiscal risks that
    might arise from SOE operations.

            112. The six Latin American countries studied demonstrate SOE use of adequate
    accounting standards, financial reports, and external audit. In particular, the majority
    of the countries are using accounting standards similar to the ones used in the private
    sector and are increasingly adjusting them with the International Financial Reporting
    Standard (IFRS). In all analyzed countries, SOEs prepare and disclose their respective




    56 World Bank, 2006.
    57 Allen and Vani, 2013.




        66
financial reports at least once a year. Furthermore, in some cases, these reports are
presented in a consolidated form for the SOE sector: for example, the Memoria Anual
Consolidada (Annual Consolidated Memorandum) which is published by SEP in Chile, or
the Informe Anual (Annual Report) prepared by FONAFE in Peru. Finally, the accounting
and financial statements of the SOEs are annually audited by a public external control
organ or a professional audit firm—in some cases by both, as is the case for some SOEs
in Brazil, Peru, Paraguay, and Uruguay. Despite of these achievements, further progress
is still needed in some cases to increase the quality of audits to international standards,
in particular with respect to the selection process of private sector audit firms and the
role of Supreme Audit Institutions.

        113. Evaluation of fiscal risk and contingent liability linked to SOEs and other
public entities is becoming more common. Chile, Colombia, and Peru are most ad-
vanced and regulated in this area. In Chile, the Budget Directorate (Dirección de Presu-
puesto DIPRES) publishes an annual report on the government’s contingent liabilities.58
In Colombia, the medium-term fiscal framework, which is an annex of the budget law,
contains estimates of contingent liabilities related to natural disasters, public/private
joint ventures, lawsuits against the State, and debt guarantees issued by public entities
(including SOEs). In Peru, since 2012 the Fiscal Responsibility and Transparency Law
mandates the estimation of contingent liabilities by the Ministry of Finance.59 Similarly,
the budget law in Brazil includes an annex on fiscal risk, which analyzes debt guaran-
tees and judicial processes related to the SOE sector, among others.


Government’s Oversight, Reporting and Disclosure

        114. The government should continuously monitor SOE operations accurately
and comprehensively. Oversight involves a number of functions, including review of SOE
strategic plans, financial forecasts, and financial performance; identification of SOEs
that pose high risks (such as vulnerable and money-losing enterprises); and manage-
ment of a comprehensive database on SOEs. Detailed and transparent information on
SOE operations should be provided to the legislature and the public. Reporting helps
establish accountability and proper evaluation of fiscal risks.

         115. Fiscal coverage and fiscal indicators should be extended beyond the gen-
eral government to encompass all SOEs. Lack of coverage of SOE operations in the fiscal
accounts and fiscal statistics can lead to problems, including obscuring their macro-
economic impact and the fiscal risks they may generate. Fiscal transparency and risk
management demand reporting of all activities of a fiscal nature—that is, of the con-
solidated nonfinancial public sector—and related fiscal risks. SOE operations should
be included in any wide-ranging analysis of public finances given their potential impact
on fiscal policy and contingent liabilities. Broad fiscal coverage has a number of advan-
tages:
•	   It permits a more accurate analysis of the fiscal stance.
•	   It reduces incentives for shifting activities to the SOEs.

58 At the end of 2012, the total amount of contingent liabilities of the Government in Chile (assuming complete risk
materialization) represented 3.7 percent of GDP, of which about a third (1.1 percent of GDP) was from debt guarantees
for SOEs.
59 Government guarantees for issued debt of SOEs reached 0.6 percent of GDP in 2012.



                                                                                                                 67     Fiscal Risk
•	It      reduces the likelihood of unrecorded and contingent liabilities
	        appearing unexpectedly.
•	       It enhances awareness of fiscal risks.
•	       It promotes governance and can improve market confidence.

         116. Disclosure of fiscal risks aids risk management and can help make the al-
location of public resources more efficient. Cebotari and others (2009) emphasize that
publicly disclosing information about fiscal risks subjects risk analysis to additional
scrutiny; promotes earlier and smoother policy responses; strengthens accountability;
and improves the quality of decisions and the assessment of the cost-effectiveness of
taking on certain risks. Several countries have enacted legislation on the disclosure
of fiscal risks or contingent liabilities. The trend in government practices has included
growing awareness of the importance of the fiscal-risk issue, increasingly sophisticated
and demanding international accounting and statistical standards, the introduction of
fiscal responsibility and transparency legislation in some countries, and international
transparency initiatives. Countries typically have broadened the scope of estimated and
disclosed fiscal risks gradually.
         117. Ideally, disclosure of SOE fiscal risks should be an integral part of the gov-
ernment’s broad disclosure of fiscal risks. Fiscal risks and contingent liabilities posed by
SOEs are potentially important components of overall fiscal risk faced by a government.
A holistic approach to risk analysis is needed, since a specific fiscal risk may actually act
as insurance against other potential risks.
         118. SOE fiscal risks can be included in a single, comprehensive fiscal risk state-
ment produced annually and presented with the budget. Some countries do this now.
Depending on country circumstances and the relative significance of various risks, the
fiscal risk statement can include the analysis of general economic risks as well as spe-
cific risks, including public debt, contingent liabilities, SOEs, subnational governments
and public/private partnerships (PPPs).


Risk Mitigation Strategies

         119. Risk mitigation strategies aim to identify and reduce potential fiscal risks
before they are taken on or materialize; or to minimize the cost once a risk has mate-
rialized.60 For identified fiscal risks, the priorities of risk mitigation policies should be
based on the likelihood that a particular risk will materialize and on the resulting fiscal
impact if it does. But costs also come into play: It is important to assess whether the
expected benefits from mitigating risks outweigh the costs of doing so.61 In this context,
relevant risk mitigation policies for SOEs depend on the specific risks faced and posed
by the SOE sector, and the eventual benefits and costs of risk mitigation measures.
         120. Proper budget compensation of the costs of QFAs is essential to reducing
fiscal risks. When the government fully compensates SOEs for QFAs, the costs and risks
generated by the pursuit of government policy objectives are incorporated explicitly in




60 Petrie, 2013.
61 Hardy, 2010.




    68
the budget balance and the government’s debt. Besides significantly reducing SOE risks,
full budget compensation of QFAs can foster a more efficient allocation of resources and
greater appreciation of risks. It forces QFAs to compete fairly for scarce public resources
in the budget process, and it forces the government to explicitly internalize fiscal risks.
        121. The granting of guarantees of SOE debts, which can be a significant source
of fiscal risk, should be strictly controlled.62 Government debt guarantees issued to
SOEs and other relevant decentralized entities should in all cases be analyzed and ap-
proved by the ministry of finance. Requiring legislative approval emphasizes that guar-
antees pose risks that can burden future budgets.
        122. Biases in favor of granting excessive debt guarantees may be remedied by
setting quantitative limits and requiring legislative approval for changing them. There
may be biases toward granting excessive and wasteful guarantees: The guarantees may
not be subject to the same degree of inspection as spending appropriated in the budget,
and, unlike cash spending, they may not have to compete for fiscal space in the budget
process. Setting limits on the granting of guarantees would foster competition for ap-
proval and focus priorities.
        123. Exogenous risks can sometimes be mitigated through the use of market
instruments. For example, currency, interest rate, price, and weather-related risks can
be hedged—transferring risk to financial markets better able to bear them, at a cost.
However, the use of market instruments to reduce risk requires considerable technical
capacity and strong governance, and should not be attempted if those elements are not
in place.
        124. In some cases diversification can reduce risks. For instance, the diversifica-
tion of energy sources of State-owned power utilities that rely largely or exclusively on
one energy source can mitigate cost volatility and associated fiscal risks.64
        125. Strengthening SOE investment procedures reduces long-term risks. The
quality of SOE investment is a determining factor for the sustainability of the enterprise
and depends on the strength of the investment mechanisms in place. Weaknesses in
project appraisal, selection, implementation, and evaluation can be significant sources
of fiscal risk since they can impair the enterprise’s sustainability. These deficiencies
should be addressed as needed.




63 IMF, 2005a; Cebotari, 2008.
64 Yépez-García and Dana, 2012.




                                                                                        69    Fiscal Risk
           Table I.6: Financial reports and external audit in six
                                       Latin American countries
           Source: Report authors, based on Part II and through consultation with staff
                                       from the SOE sector of the respective countries.



                                                       Reports on
                                                                          Independent
                   Accounting         Financial        fiscal risk
  Country                                                                   external
                   Standards           Reports       and contingent
                                                                             auditor
                                                       liabilities


                 Application of                                          Yes (Comptrol-
                                   Yes; annually    Annex on fiscal
                 own standards                                           ler General and
Brazil                             and publically   risk in the Bud-
                 and IFRS com-                                           external audit
                                   accessible       get Law.
                 plimentary                                              companies).

                 Similar stan-                      Report on
                                   Yes; quarterly
                 dards to those                     contingent           Yes (interna-
                                   and annually
Chile            used by the                        liabilities pub-     tional audit
                                   and publically
                 private sector;                    lished annually      companies).
                                   accessible.
                 mainly IFRS                        by DIPRES.

                                                    Estimates of
                                                    contingent
                 In process of
                                   Yes; annually    liabilities in the   Yes (private
                 harmonizing
Colombia                           and publically   medium-term          audit compa-
                 own standard
                                   accessible       fiscal frame-        nies).
                 with IFRS
                                                    work under the
                                                    budget law

                 Own accounting
                 and auditing
                 standard, based                                         Yes (Comptrol-
                                  Yes, annually
                 on international                                        ler General and
Paraguay                          and publically    No.
                 standards.                                              private audit
                                  accessible.
                 Introduction                                            companies)
                 of IFRS in
                 process.




70
                                              Estimation of      Yes (private
          Similar ac-       Yes, annually     contingent         audit compa-
          counting rules    and publically    liabilities is a   nies selected
          to those of the   accessible. An-   requirement        through a call
Peru
          private sector,   nual consoli-     of the Fiscal      for proposals,
          including IFRS    dated Report      Responsibility     coordinated by
          2003              (FONAFE)          and Transpar-      the Comptroller
                                              ency Law.          General).

                                              The financial
                                              statements of
          Similar ac-
                                              the SOEs con-      Yes (Supreme
          counting rules
                            Yes, annually     tain footnotes     Audit Institu-
          to those of the
Uruguay                     and publically    and remark         tion and inter-
          private sector,
                            accessible.       on fiscal risk.    national audit
          including IFRS
                                              There is no        companies).
          2003.
                                              general system-
                                              atization




                                                                                   71   Fiscal Risk
    PART II
Country Cases




 73   Legal Framework
                                                 The Case of Brazil
                                                                                                             II.1




II.1.1                                                     State-Owned Enterprises Portfolio
                 1. Despite a recent history of privatizations, federal State-Owned Enterprises
         (SOEs) in Brazil remain important actors.9 A number of key statistics confirms their
         relevance in Brazil’s economy. For instance, they employ around 500,000 people (0.7
         percentage of total employment); the aggregate budget for SOEs is approximately 30
         percent of GDP;10 and total investment by SOEs amounts to roughly 2.3 percent of GDP.
         At the same time, they pay dividends and contribute to government finances by paying
         taxes and fees that amount to almost 3 percent of the GDP or 9 percent of total govern-
         ment revenue.11
                 2. The universe of SOEs in Brazil includes 147 linked to the Federal Government.
         Of this set of companies, 38 are wholly owned by the government, and 25 are directly
         controlled by the state due to their being fully financed by the state budget. The rest of
         the companies finance their activities with their own resources or through the market,
         and are indirectly controlled by the state.
                 3. SOEs in Brazil operate in both competitive and non-competitive markets.
         Their activities are concentrated in the oil and natural gas, finance, electricity, and ser-
         vice sectors. A few large SOEs play a leading role in their respective sectors: Brazilian Oil
         Company S.A. (Petróleo Brasileiro S.A. - PETROBRAS) is the largest company in oil and
         natural gas with a budget that represents almost 7 percent of Brazil’s GDP - Banco do
         Brasil, Caixa Econômica, and the Brazilian National Development Bank (Banco Nacional
         de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social - BNDES) are the most important actors in the
         finance sector with an aggregate budget equal to approximately 4.3 percent of GDP. The
         budget of the postal service company, Empresa Brasileira de Correios e Telégrafos , is


         9 	 This work focuses on SOEs linked to the Federal Government
         10 	It is important to note that the combined budget of the ten largest SOEs in Brazil (PETROBRAS, BR, Banco do Brasil,
         Caixa Econômica, BNDES, Empresa Brasileira de Correios e Telégrafos, ELETROBRAS, Banco do Nordeste do Brasil,
         Empresa Brasileira de Infra-Estrutura Aeroportuária – INFRAERO, and Casa da Moneda do Brasil) added up to almost 13
         percent of GDP and contributed 86 percent of SOE employment in 2010.
         11 	The figures are for 2010 and were calculated using official data obtained from the Ministry of Planning and the Min-
         istry of Finance.




          74
0.33 percent of GDP; and the Brazilian Energy Company (Centrais Elétricas Brasileiras
S.A. - ELETROBRAS) leads the electricity sector a budget of 0.3 percent of GDP. In terms
of distribution of firms across sectors, the table below shows that 43 percent of Brazil-
ian SOEs operate in the oil and natural gas sector, and 37 percent in the electricity,
finance, and service sectors.
        4. SOEs have an important presence in the Brazilian stock exchange. Eight com-
panies are listed on the BM&F BOVESPA exchange, accounting for approximately 25
percent of its total market capitalization; PETROBRAS alone represents 17 percent of
market capitalization.12


                        Figure II.1: Distribution of SOEs across Sectors
                                                                                     Source: Ministry of Planning
                                                                            Others
                                                                               10
        Electricity
        19


    Infrastructure
                                                                                            Oil and Natural Gas
    9
                                                                                                             63
                                                    Total 147
     Services
     16
        Transport
        3
             Finance
             19        Research                                           Industry
                       4                                                         4



	
                           Ownership Function: Institutional Framework                                            II.1.2
                                                      and Organization
         5. Brazil’s government follows a hybrid model for SOE oversight. While the Minis-
try of Finance (MF) takes the lead on rate-setting, the Ministry of Planning focuses on bud-
geting and is also responsible for strategic planning, investment programs, and SOE orga-
nization and performance oversight, through the Department of Coordination and Control
of State Enterprises (Departamento de Coordenação e Controle das Empresas Estatais
- DEST), its coordinating agency for SOE oversight. The DEST reports to the Executive Sec-
retariat of the Ministry of Planning and is responsible for overseeing 122 SOEs.13 Among
its duties, the agency coordinates SOE budget preparation and monitors its execution (in-
cluding the fiscal goals and investments), compiles SOE economic and financial data, and


12 	The Governance of Mixed-Ownership Enterprises in Latin America: Discussion Paper, OECD 2012




                                                                                                             75     The Case of Brazil
         promotes good practices of corporate governance. Several sector ministries (listed in An-
         nex A) also play a significant role, both in sector planning and technical aspects, such as
         defining benchmarks and targets for performance in that sector, and for service delivery.
         Finally, regulatory agencies are responsible for sector regulation, consumer protection,
         and guarding against anti-competitive behavior by SOEs.
                  6. The oversight of most SOEs in Brazil has been technically strengthened and bal-
         anced by the role of DEST, and institutionally consolidated through the SOE Governance
         Committee. On one hand, and playing a particular role, DEST is a technical department
         within the Ministry of Planning in charge of the direct oversight of SOEs. On the other, the
         SOE Governance Committee is a political body composed of three permanent members
         (Minister of Finance, the Minister of Planning, and the Executive Office of the President)
         and upon special request, other representatives from sector ministers The SOE gover-
         nance committee is charged with coordinating the main institutional actors involved in
         SOE oversight, and plays a leading role in strategic decisions regarding the SOE portfolio,
         such as in the case of merger & acquisitions or privatizations. DEST is responsible for
         providing the Governance Committee with support on technical issues.
                  7. The Ministry of Planning assumes the leading role in defining the general
         framework for SOE staffing policies. The Minister of Planning is empowered (by means
         of Decree 3.735) to approve or reject staffing plans and ceilings; labor collective agree-
         ments; profit-sharing programs for employees; incentivized resignation programs; and
         other personnel policies. Some personnel policies are outside the immediate purview of
         the Minister of Planning; for example, Law 3.255 establishes limits to SOE staff benefits.


II.1.3                                         Accountability and Oversight Mechanisms
         Statements of Objectives & Planning Documents
                  8. Management/performance contracts. In the last decade DEST has piloted per-
         formance contracts with four SOEs.14 These companies’ contracts included clearly defined
         results, which had been agreed upon between DEST (or in certain cases the company’s
         board of directors) and the SOE: financial targets (e.g. return on liquid assets), service de-
         livery targets, and some indicators on internal management (e.g. human resources, inter-
         nal control, technical aspects, etc). The performance contracts impose financial penalties
         (partial or complete elimination of bonus/dividends) for failure to achieve these targets.
         However, according to DEST, the impact of these accountability tools on improving perfor-
         mance has not been significant so far. It should be pointed out, that DEST signed annual
         programs with about 20 SOEs, which link the salary payment with the achievement of the
         pre-defined goals.15
                  9. SOEs budgets and investment plans. Those are approved by the executive and
         by the legislative, respectively, as stipulated in the Constitution and Budget Guidelines
         Law. The Budget Guidelines Law (Lei de Diretrizes Orçamentárias) assigns responsibil-


         13 	Conceptually, the fiscal budget in Brazil differentiates between two types of SOEs: (a) those companies that finance their
         activities with their own resources or market earnings; and (b) those that depend on the fiscal budget to pay for their current
         expenditures. Only the first group of companies is under DEST oversight are being discussed in this chapter (Annex A shows a
         complete list of state companies under DEST).
         14 	The State Electric Energy Company (Companhia Estatal de Energia Elétrica - CEEE) and the Water Company of the Federal
         District of Brazil (Companhia de Saneamento Ambiental do Distrito Federal - CAESB) signed performance contracts with the
         authorities that formulate their respective sectoral policies. These authorities are also in charge of monitoring and enforcing
         the contracts. The Sanitation Company of Rio Grande also signed a performance agreement, but in this case a committee was
         specially created to oversee the contract.




          76
ity for approving SOEs’ current expenditure budget to the Presidency. However, SOEs
investment plans are to be approved by national Congress, within the framework of the
government’s general investment plan for the year. In the particular case of fully state-
owned enterprises, the Fiscal Responsibility Law (LC-101) imposes expenditure limits
and constraints. DEST is in charge of preparing the Comprehensive Plan of Expenditures
(Programa de Dispêndios Globais - PDG) for SOEs using the integrated information sys-
tem, SIEST.
        10. Budget formulation and approval. SOEs in Brazil prepare and submit their
budgets annually, jointly with the rest of government entities. Results-based budgeting
is common for SOEs distributing dividends/bonuses to employees, while the rest usu-
ally practice simple program budgeting. The proposed budget of each SOE is cleared by
the shareholders’ assembly, and then submitted for approval to the Ministry of Finance,
or the corresponding line ministry, which works toward a consensus decision with the
advice of the Ministry of Planning. Once these steps are cleared, SOEs’ budgets are
submitted to the legislature for approval. SOEs’ approved budgets are published jointly
with the national budget, which is made available to the public.


Reporting: Monitoring of Performance & Ex post Disclosure
        11. Budget Execution Reports. DEST oversees the budget execution and finan-
cial operations of SOEs using the SIEST information system. SOE expenditures are
monitored monthly and reconciled with the budget accounts on a cash basis. Every two
months, DEST publishes online reports covering budget execution for each SOE based
on their respective investment plans16.
        12. Other SOE key reports. On a regular basis, the CEOs of SOEs prepare reports
containing financial information, as well as complementary information on performance
and other technical details on the company’s status. These reports are submitted to the
board and retained for internal audit. The board of each SOE is responsible for submit-
ting to several government control entities (internal and external) an annual financial
report containing aggregate information. Additionally, the SOE boards disclose their
annual reports and financial statements, both internally, to the relevant control bodies
in the executive and legislative, and externally, via online publication.17 Also, as per
the budget guidelines law of the federal government (Lei de Diretrizes Orçamentárias),
SOEs receiving transfers from the treasury are required to prepare an annex containing
an estimation of fiscal risk.


Auditing of SOEs
        13. SOEs are required to undergo external audits. The Accounting Court (Tribu-
nal de Contas da União - TCU) and the Office of the Comptroller General (Controladoria
Geral da União - CGU) are both entitled to perform external audits on SOEs. In addi-
tion, the respective SOE’s board of directors selects external firms to audit the company.
This external audit, performed annually, covers financial and accounting aspects of SOE
management. The results of these audits are published online and submitted to the



15 	These programs are referred to as the Program for Participation on Profit and Results (Programa de Participação nos Lucros
e Resultados - PLR).
16 	All this information is made publicly available at http://www.planejamento.gov.br/secretaria.asp?cat=20&sec=4
17 	Please refer to http://www.planejamento.gov.br/secretaria.asp?cat=20&sec=4.




                                                                                                                         77      The Case of Brazil
executive’s and the legislature’s control bodies.18
        14. However, independent external auditors are frequently selected through a
public procurement process that does not necessarily consider the relevance of tech-
nical qualification. Brazil’s Public Tender Law19 sets forth different specifications for
public tenders, which may include technical qualification and cost, or cost only. Some
independent auditors have been selected using the “lowest bid” modality. For tenders
in which technical competence is considered, proficiency is still not always the most
heavily weighted factor in the final decision; instead, cost is considered the leading fac-
tor under consideration, which has the potential to jeopardize audit quality standards.


SOEs Boards of Directors and Management

        15. Boards of directors oversee all SOEs linked to the federal government, either
directly or through a holding company. Each of these boards is composed of several
members, including a specialized technical representative from the Ministry of Plan-
ning, several representatives from the respective sector ministry, also with a strong
technical background; since 2010, a representative of the SOE’s staff has also been part
of the board. Each board is then further structured, with a president, a vice-president,
and a variable number of directors. Usually, area experts also participate regularly in
board meetings as advisors. In some specific cases, the board also relies on a technical
advisory body, independent from the SOE staff.
        16. Although board members are selected on a discretionary basis, they have a
fixed term mandate, unrelated to the government’s mandate. The supervisory ministries
select their respective board members according to technical criteria, but without a sys-
tematic competitive basis the final decision. Appointments must be further vetted and
approved by the Casa Civil (Executive Office of the President) to ensure technical sound-
ness in the selection. The duration of their mandate is fixed, and generally unrelated to
the government’s mandate.
	       17. There is a clear division of roles between the board and the SOE direc-
tor. Whereas the director’s area of responsibility is focused on the SOE’s business
management, the board is in charge of the following oversight responsibilities:
•	      Providing general guidelines for the SOE’s business activities;
• 	 Assessing the performance of the SOE’s director;
•	   Organizing the shareholders’ general assembly;
• 	 Evaluating the firm’s annual management report;
• 	 Deciding on public offerings or stock warrants;
• 	 Authorizing the lease or sale of fixed assets; and
• 	 Selecting and dismissing independent auditing firms.
        18. Board meetings are frequent and mainly treat technical issues. Executive
board meetings take place on a weekly basis, with content usually related to routine de-
cisions and procedures. The meetings of the Fiscal Council and the Management Council
take place on a monthly basis. At these meetings, the agenda for discussion adopt a
more strategic dimension.
        19. However, selection mechanisms for SOE directors remain discretionary. SOE
directors are appointed to fixed-term contracts by the National Treasury General Attor-

18 	Audited reports are publicly available at the companies’ website. For example, in the case of PETROBRAS, the
independent auditors’ report can be found at http://www.petrobras.com.br/rs2010/en/
19 Law No. 8666/93.




 78
ney‘s Office (Procuradoria Geral da Fazenda Nacional – PGFN), under the Ministry of
Finance, by the suggestion of sector ministries. The Casa Civil reviews the candidates’
background, but in only a few cases are there clear regulations indicating a minimum ex-
perience. Informally, political affiliation has played a role in some selection processes.
	

                   BNDES: A Key Player in the Brazilian Economy                             II.1.4
        20. Since its creation in the 1950s, the Brazilian Development Bank (Banco Na-
cional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social - BNDES) has provided most long-term
financing for investments in all segments of the Brazilian economy. The actual relevance
of BNDES can be illustrated through several different indicators. In 2011, BNDES had
2,500 employees and provided approximately half of the total credit in Brazil (total cred-
it and BNDES credit as a proportion of GDP were, respectively, 46 percent and 21 percent
in 2011). Total disbursements by BNDES totaled US$82.3 billion and reached a market
value of approximately US$60.5 billion in 2011.


      Figure II.2: BNDES Disbursements and Equity Portfolio
                                           (in US$ billion)
                                                                             Source: BNDES
19,8
22,5



             24,1
             28,2



                          34,0
                          49,7
                          12,2


                                        49,8
                                        25,3
                                        13,4


                                                     71,6
                                                     59,1
                                                     25,1


                                                                   96,3
                                                                   75,6
                                                                   48,1

                                                                                 82,3
                                                                                 60,5
                                                                                 50,8
6,9




             8,4




2005         2006         2007          2008          2009         2010          2011
Disbursements
Market Value
Cost Value

        21. BNDES was established on June 20, 1952, under Law 1628, as a government
agency, with the aim of developing and carrying out national economic development
policies. Subsequently, according to Law 5662, of June 21, 1971, BNDES was converted
into a state-owned company under private law, which both reduced political interfer-
ence, and gave the bank greater flexibility to raise and invest funds.
        22. The size of BNDES’ loan portfolio and equity is comparable to those from
other well-known financial institutions. In order to assess its size and relevance, the



                                                                                       79    The Case of Brazil
following table shows several indicators that compare BNDES to other international de-
velopment banks. In terms of total assets and loan disbursements, BNDES ranks second
after China’s Development Bank (CDB). Relative to the size of their respective econo-
mies, however, loan disbursements by BNDES amount to 5 percent of GDP, while loans
by the CDB are 2 percent. Additionally, BNDES’s return on average equity (ROE) is the
highest among international development banks considered in this sample.




                Table II.1: BNDES Compared to Multilateral Banks
                                                (in US$ million)

                            BNDES          IDB         IBRD          CAF          CDB
                            Dec 31        Dec 31       Jun 30       Dec 31       Dec 31
                            2009          2009        2009(*)       2009         2009


 Total Assets             222,050      84,006       275,420       15,887       665,168

 Shareholders‘ Equity     15,867       20,674       40,037        5,287        55,471

 Net Income               3,868        794          3,114         235          4,673

 Loan Disbursements       78,910       11,424       18,564        4,584        92,998

 Total Loans              162,917      58,049       105,698       11,687       543,196

 Capitalization           7.10%        24.60%       14.50%        31.90%       8.30%

 ROA                      2.30%        1.00%        2.40%         2.40%        0.80%

 ROE                      29.00%       4.00%        8.00%         4.70%        8.80%

 Founded                  1952         1959         1945          1968         1994

Note: IDB = Inter-American Development Bank, IBRD = The International Bank for Reconstruc-
tion and Development (World Bank), CAF = Corporación Andina de Fomento,
CDB = China Development Bank, Capitalization = Shareholders’ Equity / Total Assets,
ROA = Return On average Assets, ROE = Return On average Equity.
(*) Unlike other institutions, 12-month fiscal year ends June 30th



        23. The presence of BNDES is significant throughout the Brazilian economy.
BNDES provides support by financing projects including investments, equipment ac-
quisition and exports of goods and services. In addition, BNDES strengthens the capital
structure of private companies and devotes non-reimbursable financing to projects that
contribute to social, cultural and technological development.




80
                      Figure II.3: BNDES Disbursements by Sector
  7%       8%        5%       5%       7%       12%      12%      14%
                              9%       7%                                  16%
  12%      14%       17%                                                            21%
                                                8%       6%       5%
                                                                           6%
                                                                                    7%
                                       33%
                              36%
  35%      30%                                           39%      35%      31%
                     38%                        40%
                                                                                    40%




  46%      48%                50%      53%                        46%      47%
                     40%                                 43%
                                                40%
                                                                                    32%




2002     2003     2004     2005 2006          2007     2008 2009         2010      2011

Industry
Infrastructure
Farming
Trade and Services


Corporate Governance
         24. BNDES’s policies are set by the Minister of State for Development, Industry,
and Foreign Trade. However, the company still reports to DEST, within the Ministry of
Planning, on its financial and economic performance. As mentioned above, DEST is in
charge of preparing the Comprehensive Plan of Expenditures (PDG) for all SOEs under
its oversight, including BNDES.
         25. BNDES’ corporate governance practices are based on the principles of trans-
parency, fair treatment of all stakeholders, and accountability. The implementation of
these practices is meant not only to optimize BNDES’ performance, but also to protect
its sole shareholder, the central government, and other stakeholders, such as employ-
ees, creditors, workers, and Brazilian society in general. Within the organization, the
corporate governance practices are scrutinized at different stages by: (i) the Advisory
Board, (ii) the Audit Committee, iii) the Fiscal Council and the Management Council, and
(iv) the Ombudsperson’s Office.

Advisory Board
        26. The Advisory Board is the highest guidance body. It has eleven members,
including the Chairman of the Board; four selected by the Ministers of State for Plan-
ning, Budget and Management; Labor and Employment, Finance, and Foreign Affairs,
respectively, and the other by the Minister of State for Development, Industry and For-
eign Trade. The President of the BNDES is the Vice-President of the Board. Members of
the Advisory Board are appointed by the President of the Republic to a three year term,
effective from the date the appointment is published and renewable for one additional.
Prospective candidates should have outstanding knowledge and experience in the area,
moral integrity and unblemished reputation. The Advisory Board meets every quarter,
and for extraordinary sessions, called by the President at his/her discretion, or at the
request of at least two of its members. The board only takes decisions in the presence
of at least six of its members. The Advisory Board’s duties include:




                                                                                      81    The Case of Brazil
•   	 Provide opinions and analysis, when requested by the Minister of Development, 	
	     Industry and Foreign Trade, on issues pertaining to the economic and social
	     development of the country and directly related to BNDES’ efforts;
•   	 Advise BNDES’ President on general guidelines for the Bank’s efforts and to
	     promote disclosure of objectives, programs and results of BNDES’ operations to 	
	     the 	 main nstitutions in the economic and social sector;
•   	 Examine and approve proposals of BNDES’ President, to ensure that general
	     policies and long-term programs of the bank remain consonant with the economic 	
	     and financial policy of the central government.

Auditing Committee
         27. BNDES’ Audit Committee acts as an auxiliary agency to the Advisory Board,
to whom it must report. This relationship is stipulated by statutory provision and is in
keeping with the guidelines of the Code of Best Corporate Governance Practices of the
Brazilian Institute of Corporate Governance (Instituto Brasileiro de Governança Corpo-
rativa - IBGC). The Committee can consist of up to six members (at the time of writing,
there are three) appointed by the Advisory Board. Members are appointed for an indefi-
nite term, which may end at any time by resolution of the Advisory Board. The duties of
the Auditing Committee include:
• 	 Nomination of an independent auditor to be contracted by the administration;
• 	 Reviewing BNDES’ financial statements every six months prior to publication;
• 	 Assessing the effectiveness of internal and independent audits;
• 	 Recommending changes to correct or improve policies, practices, and procedures 	
	    which fall within the ambit of the Board of Directors;
• 	 Preparing a report of its own activities and assessing the effectiveness of
  	 internal control systems.

Fiscal Council
        28. Brazilian legislation establishes a fiscal council to oversee limited liability
companies and corporations. The fiscal council is essentially a supervisory and inspec-
tion body which reports directly to the shareholders. In the case of BNDES, the Brazil’s
Corporations Act Law defines the responsibilities of the Fiscal Council and of the Man-
agement Council, and appointment rules governing the appointment of their members.
The fiscal council of BNDES is formed by three members and three alternates; all serve
a two-year term, renewable for an equal period. Two members and their alternates are
appointed by the Minister of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, and one member
and his/her alternate are appointed by the Minister of Finance, as representatives of
the National Treasury; lines of responsibility are considered to run to the President of
the Republic, in the sense that he or she appoints these ministers. The Fiscal Council’s
duties include:
• 	 Examining and providing opinions on the balance sheets, other financial
	   statements, and the half-yearly accounts of the BNDES’ directors;
• 	 Performing other duties established in the Stock Corporation Act. For instance,
	   administrative agencies are required to provide the current members of the Fiscal 	
	   Council with a copy of the minutes of their meetings, by means of formal
	   communication, within ten days. Within fifteen days of their completion, copies of 	
	   balance sheets and other periodically prepared financial statements, as well as
	   reports on budget implementation, must also be supplied to the Fiscal Council.




    82
Ombudsperson’s Office
         29. The Ombudsperson’s office is charged with mediating issues between citi-
zens and the institution. It provides clarification on items of contention, and seeks to
strengthen ties between the BNDES, its clients, and the general public. To that end, it
encourages decentralized, voluntary initiatives to effectively improve the services pro-
vided, in the process playing a role as an instrument of social inclusion. This office con-
tributes to enhancing the democratic process by acting independently and impartially to
confidentially convey demands and concerns from the public and clients to the BNDES.
The Ombudsperson is appointed by the BNDES’ President and remains in office indefi-
nitely, ending his/her term at any time at the discretion of the President.


	                                                              Reform Initiatives             II.1.5
        30. After the 1980s debt crisis, the Brazilian Government began to shed an ex-
tensive SOE portfolio, which played a major role in the economy, with the initiation of a
large-scale privatization plan. Before 1990, a limited privatization scheme was launched,
and the central government privatized 38 enterprises. Between 1990 and 1992, 15 more
SOEs were privatized, yielding about US$3.5 billion in total proceeds. Another 18 SOEs
were sold afterwards, yielding over US$5 billion. By 1994, 25 state-owned enterprises
had been sold, mostly in exchange for debt certificates and little hard cash.
        31. This second wave of SOE privatizations under the Cardoso administration,
beginning in 1994, focused on SOEs responsible for the major part of Brazil’s economic
infrastructure, including, enterprises in the energy, transportation, and communications
sectors. However, Brazil’s largest state-owned enterprises, PETROBRAS, remained out-
side the program because of constitutional restrictions.
        32. The government has taken some steps toward strengthening and central-
izing SOEs oversight in the past few decades. Departing from a fully-decentralized over-
sight in which sector ministries played a key role, the central government initiated the
centralization of oversight functions by creating in 1978 the Secretariat of Coordination
of State-Owned Enterprises (Secretaria de Controle de Empresas Estatais - SEST), under
the Ministry of Planning. Regulatory agencies were also created after 1994 to reinforce
the technical oversight and legal framework of strategic sectors.
        33. Following privatization reforms throughout the 90s, the government opted
for further centralization of the oversight function. In 2007, the central government cre-
ated the Inter- Ministerial Commission of Corporate Governance and Administration of
State participation (Comissão Interministerial de Governança Corporativa e de Adminis-
tração de Participações Societárias da União - CGPAR) as a centerpiece of the central-
ization of oversight functions. The committee’s permanent members are the Minister of
Planning, the Minister of Finance, and the Executive Office of the President, while other
sector ministries may participate by request of permanent members. DEST exercises the
role of Executive Secretariat for the Committee, which focuses on the strategic oversight
and planning of the SOE portfolio, and on improving management of SOEs, with an em-
phasis on public financial management of these firms.
        34. The main three actors driving this gradual oversight reform process have
been the Ministry of Planning, DEST (within the Ministry of Planning), and the Minis-
try of Finance. While the privatization process caused political turmoil and was mainly
undertaken in response to distressed public finances, reform of SOE oversight was a
gradual process initiated by the creation of SEST, and by the progressive consolidation



                                                                                        83     The Case of Brazil
of the institutional oversight structure. The resulting oversight structure, far from being
completely centralized, distributes responsibilities between the oversight coordination
agency (DEST), the SOE Governance Committee, regulatory agencies, and several sector
ministries.
        35. In 2010, the legal framework was modified to introduce mandatory participa-
tion of a staff representative in every SOE Board.


                                                   Table II.2: Legal Framework

                                                        LEGAL PROTECTION
                                                                                LOWER
                                        CONSTITUTION      LAW      DECREE
                                                                                NORM

 Division of Responsibilities
 between Ministries in
                                               X            X         X
 the ownership function of
 the SOEs Portfolio

 Creation of SOEs Monitoring Unit                                     X

 SOEs Board/CEO’s appointment
                                                        Not established
 & dismissal rules

 Reporting Requirements from
                                                           X          X
 SOEs, if any

 Auditing Requirements from SOEs,
                                                           X          X
 if any

 Assessment Mechanisms of SOEs
                                                                      X            X
 Performance




Challenges Ahead
         36. The main challenges in the area of corporate governance in Brazil concern
the relationship between the state as the main shareholder and other shareholders.
Specifically, the rules regulating this relationship have been subject to several modifica-
tions, and the current legal framework is still questioned. Keeping in mind the signifi-
cant share of Brazilian SOEs that participate in capital markets, it is commonly argued,
on the one hand, that government control of publicly-traded corporations can have un-
intended consequences, due primarily to the conflict of interest that may arise when the
state is simultaneously a shareholder and a regulator. It is also generally assumed that
corporate law could influence the behavior of the state as shareholder.
         37. There are other specific areas of corporate governance that present concrete
challenges to SOEs. In particular, it is important to continue implementing measures
that ensures an appropriate functioning of the board of directors. Some of the issues
that would require attentions are those related to the definition of roles and responsi-
bilities between boards; independence of external directors; and, in some cases, remu-
neration of board members.


84
85   The Case of Brazil
                                                  The Case of Chile
                                                                                                             II.2




II.2.1                                                      State-Owned Enterprises Portfolio
                  38. Even though the State-Owned Enterprise (SOE) sector is relatively small in
         Chile, some state-owned companies play an important role in strategic sectors of the
         Chilean economy.21 Overall SOEs employ around 49,000 people (0.7 percent of overall
         employment); their aggregate expenditures account for approximately 9.4 percent of
         GDP; revenues generated by all SOEs amount to 12.8 percent of GDP;22 and total invest-
         ment 1.2 percent. At the same time, they contribute to government finances through
         taxes, fees, royalties, and dividends in an amount that reaches almost 2.5 percent of the
         GDP or 6 percent of total government revenue.23
                  39. The universe of SOEs in Chile comprises 33 SOEs linked to the central gov-
         ernment. Twenty-seven of the 33 are entirely state-owned, and the rest has some private
         participation. They operate in both competitive and non-competitive markets, and their
         activities are spread across different sectors. However, SOEs are particularly important
         in the mining and financial sectors, where SOE revenues represent 11 and 1.1 percent
         of Chile’s GDP, respectively.24 They also actively participate in transportation, harbor
         infrastructure, communications, defense, water and sanitation, and services, but the
         revenues generated by SOEs in each one of these sectors represent less than 0.2 per-
         cent of GDP.




         21 	This work only focuses on SOEs linked to the central government.
         22 	It is important to note that CODELCO, the National Copper Corporation, and ENAP, the National Oil Company, com-
         bined contribute to almost 90 percent of total expenditures and total revenues generated by all SOEs in 2010. In addi-
         tion, CODELCO is responsible for nearly 95 percent of all fiscal transfers from the SOEs to the State.
         23 	These figures are for 2010 and were calculated using official data obtained from the Budget Office
         24 	Banco del Estado de Chile is the only SOE in the financial sector.




          86
                       Number of SOEs


                                Figure II.4: Number of SOEs by sector


                                                      Financial

                                                             1                  Mining

                                                                                     4
     Service
                                                                           Transportation
     8
                                                                                         2


                                           Total 33

Water and Sanitation

2
                                                                      Harbor Operators

                                                                                   10
         Communications

         6



                       Table II.3 SOE revenue (as % of GDP) by sector


                                          Sector             Revenue (as % of GDP)

                              Mining                       11.0

                              Transportation               0.2

                              Harbor Operators             0.1

                              Communications               0.2

                              Water and Sanitation         Less than 0.1

                              Service                      0.2

                              Financial                    1.1

                              Total                        12.8




                                                                                         87   The Case of Chile
II.2.2                          Ownership Function: Institutional Framework
                                                           and Organization
              40. Chile currently has a hybrid structure ownership function. Ownership repre-
     sentation and responsibilities regarding the control and supervision of the majority of
     SOEs (23 out of 33 SOEs) reside in the State-Owned Enterprises System (Sistema de Em-
     presas Públicas - SEP). The SEP is a technical advisory body, with authority to centrally
     oversee management of state-owned enterprises.25 However, the largest Chilean SOEs
     are not under SEP control and supervision, but operate in a decentralized and autono-
     mous way. They are linked to the government through the sector ministries of their line
     of competency. In particular, the National Copper Corporation (Corporación Nacional de
     Cobre - CODELCO), the national oil company (Empresa Nacional del Petróleo - ENAP),
     the Chilean State Bank, the companies active in the communications sector, and all
     defense-related state companies are subject to separate institutional arrangements.
     Many of these companies have a regulatory framework specifically developed for their
     operations and approved by special laws.
              41. The SEP is overseen by a 9-member governing council26, and managed by
     an Executive Director who reports to the Council. Under the Executive Director’s su-
     pervision, three offices execute the SEP’s functions: the Corporate Management Office,
     the Legal Office, and the Administrative Office. In addition, a Comptroller’s Office also
     reports to the Executive Director. In total, the SEP’s staff is composed of twenty-six of-
     ficials.
              42. The SEP’s main functions include nominating and appointing SOEs’ direc-
     tors, approving strategic plans, establishing annual goals and controlling the manage-
     ment of the SOEs under its supervision. The Ministry of Finance approves SOEs’ annual
     budgets and investment projects, authorizes borrowing, and approves fiscal contribu-
     tions. The SEP verifies that SOE budgets are reasonable and that their management,
     strategic initiatives and investment projects are aligned with the strategic planning. The
     management control function of the SEP is to evaluate the outputs it receives from the
     SOEs and to provide them with the necessary inputs with the aim of improving their
     functioning.
              43. The SEP informs the Ministry of Finance of the investment projects and bud-
     gets of the SOEs. The Ministry of Finance in turn determines the approval or rejection of
     proposed projects and budgets. The SEP is also required to present an annual report on
     SOEs performance to Congress and the President of the Republic.




     25 	Legally, SEP is a committee of CORFO (Chile’s Production Development Corporation) but is commonly referred to as
     a holding of SOEs. Annex B shows the full list of companies under SEP oversight.
     26 	From the members of the Council, 3 are appointed by the President of the Republic; two are appointed by the Min-
     istry of Finance; one is appointed by the Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism and three are appointed by
     the Vice-president of CORFO – out of these three, one is proposed by the Ministry of Mining and one by the Ministry of
     Transportation and Telecommunications.




         88
                                             Figure II.5: SEP’s organizational chart


                                                         SEP
                                                        Council




                                                          SEP
                                                       President




                                                       Executive
                                                         Office



                                                                                                 Comptroller
                                                                                                   Office




       Administrative                                    Legal                            Corporate Management
          Office                                         Office                                    Office




        44. Enterprises that take on loans with the guarantee of the state have to sign
a contract with the SEP in which the objectives and expected results of the operation
and investment program are laid out. The annual compliance rate of these contracts is
specifically reported to the President of the Republic and the National Congress.




                                   Accountability and Oversight Mechanisms                                                   II.2.3
 Statements of Objectives & Planning Documents
       45. Management/Performance Agreements. SOEs’ directors and managers are
accountable to the SEP, which establishes annual goals through performance agree-
ments. The SEP evaluates SOEs’ performance through specific instruments: annual
management plans for harbor companies; programming contracts; and performance
agreements. The performance contracts include: financial indicators; performance in-
dicators to measure service delivery; and internal management indicators (human re-
sources, internal control, and technical issues). In general, SOE leadership and manage-
ment are subject to penalties for not reaching the established goals.27



27 	For example, in the case of harbor companies, board members do not receive a bonus in their stipends if they fail to meet
targets specified in their management plans.




                                                                                                                        89      The Case of Chile
         46. Budget formulation and approval. The Budget Office of the Ministry of Fi-
nance is in charge of assigning public resources to SOEs. Annually, in October, SOEs
have to submit a budget proposal to the Budget Office (Dirección de Presupuestos),
which finalizes the budgets in December based on a report developed by the SEP. Ex-
ecuted budgets and on-going budget execution are reported on the Budget Office web-
site. 28


Reporting: Monitoring of Performance & Ex post Disclosure
         47. Budget execution reports. SOEs are required to provide monthly reports to
the SEP indicating any deviations from the original budget. These reports are subse-
quently submitted to the Budget Office.
         48. Chile has made significant progress in the harmonization of standards
across SOEs in the areas of information disclosure, accounting provisions, and audit-
ing. The Transparency Act, enacted in April 2009, requires all SOEs to disclose the same
information and comply with the same accounting standards as private enterprises,
mostly International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). SEP has established a list of
criteria, systematized in the SEP Code, that intends to formalize and unify practices of
corporate governance29 across all SOEs. The policies to be harmonized include policies
on internal management, internal audit, risk management, and board, CEO, and person-
nel supervision.
         49. Each SOE has the obligation to elaborate quarterly Management Reports.
The reports have to be issued within a month following the end of the quarter, and are
submitted to the SEP Council for review.
         50. Each SOE submits an Annual Report. They are not standardized, resulting in
different formats and differences in the content of the report between SOEs. The length
of these reports varies,30 and their content can be divided into two topic areas. In the
first, the company reviews the values and missions of the SOE, the statutes and the in-
ternal organization. The second usually covers areas of transparency and accountability,
and it includes management reviews, external audit reports, and financial statements.
         51. Since its creation in 2001, SEP has centralized all information from SOEs
under its control, using this information to compile a consolidated Annual Report (Me-
moria Anual). This report is submitted to the President of the Republic and to the presi-
dents of both chambers of Congress. The Annual Report contains a brief overview of the
SEP (administration, history, Council officials, mission, etc.) focusing on the projects,
investments, and results of the SOEs under its control. The rest of the report reviews the
performance of each SOE in turn. In that respect, it is not a self-evaluation of the SEP,
but rather an evaluation of the results and achievements of the each SOE in a given year.
The reports are made available online at the corresponding SOEs’s websites, and at the
SEP website.31 Since some of the largest SOEs are not under SEP oversight, however, the
report does not fully represent the entire situation of the SOE sector in Chile.



28 	More information at http://www.dipres.gob.cl/572/channel.html
29 	These practices focus on three objectives: Board of Directors, Integrated Risk Management and Organizational
Culture. For each of them, SEP has developed guidelines called “Guías de Gobierno Corporativo Empresas- SEP” that
establishes the standards which the enterprises should comply with. They define the relation with topics such as exter-
nal audit, code of conducts, complaint mechanisms, fraud prevention and replacement of key staff.
30 	E.g., ranging from 14 pages (Coquimbo) to over 100 pages (Antofagasta and Metro S.A).
31 	The reports can be found at http://www.sepchile.cl/en/documentacion/memorias




 90
Auditing of SOEs
        52. In Chile all SOEs are required to have internal auditors. The SEP Code stipu-
lates the establishment of internal audit procedures monitored by the board. Internal
auditors focus on risk management following the guidelines of the Government General
Internal Audit Council using the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations methodology.
The results are examined by the board and SEP. Non-SEP SOEs also have internal audit
functions.
        53. All SOEs are subject to an annual external audit by independent auditing
firms. In the case of those SOEs that are limited liability companies, audits and audit
firms are assigned at the shareholder meeting. For the remaining companies, the com-
panies assigned to perform audits are selected by the board and approved by the SEP.
An audit company cannot remain the auditor of a particular SOE for more than four
years. These audits focus on financial statements, and the results are later included
in the Annual Report. In 2011, for example, the harbor company Empresa Portuaria de
Iquique was audited by KPMG and ENAMI (Empresa Nacional de Minería) by PWC. Listed
SOEs are also subject to the oversight of the Chilean Securities and Insurance Supervi-
sor (Superintendencia de Valores y Seguros de Chile - SVS).
        54. In addition, SOEs are audited by the Office of the Comptroller General, the
agency that supervises compliance with administrative regulations. These audits are
publicly available on the Office of the Comptroller General website.32


SOE Boards of Directors and Management
        55. All SOEs are headed by a board of directors. The board’s responsibilities and
duties are similar to those found in the private sector: appointment and dismissal of the
CEO, appointment of the internal comptroller, proposal or appointment of an external
auditor, definition of the SOE’s strategic plan, determination of the compensation sys-
tems for CEOs, and supervision of SOE management.
        56. In the case of entirely publicly-owned companies, the SEP Council is in
charge of appointing the SOE’s board of directors (see Box 3.1 below for details). These
appointments are subject to the approval of the General Comptroller’s Office. In SOEs
organized as corporations, board’s members are also nominated and selected by the
SEP Council in the respective SOE’s general shareholders’ meeting and then ratified.
Ministers, politicians and high-level civil servants may serve on some SOE boards. The
duration of the appointments is between one and three years, and this period does not
follow the government’s mandate. It is not common to appoint alternate directors. In
those SOEs that are not under SEP supervision, the appointment of board members fol-
lows their own legal or corporate regulations.
        57. In general, SOE boards meet once a month. In some case, meetings take
place twice a month, as in the case of harbor companies. It is common among SOEs to
establish different committees in charge of supervising specific areas (audit, purchas-
ing, remunerations, and risk management), and these committees convene monthly.
The SEP Code provides for annual board evaluations, which are complemented by a
self-evaluation.
        58. There is a clear definition and division of the roles played by the SOE Board
and the CEO. The CEO cannot chair the board of the same company, and its area of re-
sponsibility focuses on the SOE business management. Selection mechanisms for CEOs
are the responsibility of the respective SOE’s board.
32 	Audited can be searched at http://www.contraloria.cl/appinf/basesdocumentales/bifaPortalCGR.nsf




                                                                                                      91   The Case of Chile
           Box II.1: SOEs: Rules and standards for the nomination of
                                                     Board Directors


                       The President of the Republic of Chile, with the co-signature of the
               Ministers of Finance, Public Works and Reconstruction, issued decree Nº 113,
               2001, in September 2001. This act authorized the SEP to advise the President
               of the Republic and cabinet ministers on the designation and removal of SOE
               Board Directors. There are four main criteria regarding the nomination of Di-
               rectors:

               (a) 	Candidates should be able to comply with high ethical standards; they 	
               	    should be sufficient with respect to integrity, character, common sense, 	
               	    competence and capacities to learn from the organization;

               (b)	 Candidates should have experience and knowledge in the respective 		
               	    area;

               (c)	 Candidates must be capable of carrying out cooperative 			
               	    team work in which there is mutual gain (complementarity); and

               (d)	 Candidates should look after the best interest of the company with
               	    independence of who designated them.


                       A nominating committee proposes to the SEP Council a list of pro-
               spective candidates for the positions at the SOE’s board. This committee is
               composed of the President and Vice-president of the SEP Council, four ad-
               ditional council members, and another individual is designated by the SEP
               Council. The Executive Director of SEP serves as the Secretary of the Com-
               mittee. In line with good practice, an independent recruitment firm or “head
               hunter” selects the five candidates who will be evaluated by the nominating
               committee to choose the SOE Board Director.




II.2.4	                                                                 Reform Initiatives
              59. Until 1997, Chilean public enterprises were managed by the Production De-
      velopment Corporation (Corporación de Fomento de la Producción - CORFO). Created in
      1939 to foster industrial development and economic growth, CORFO promoted a wide
      variety of industries in the Chilean economy, most notably oil (Empresa Nacional del
      Petróleo), sugar (Industria Azucarera Nacional) and steel (Compañía de Acero del Pací-
      fico). CORFO was and still is the main shareholder in many SOEs and as such, controls



          92
the ownership of SOEs. The number of these enterprises rose from 46 in 1970 to over
500 in 1973. Then, Chile initiated an important privatization process, including large
companies such as energy and telecommunications. CORFO’s main goal in the 1990s
was to restructure and write off SOEs high deficits. Since then, CORFO has focused on
fostering technological research and development (R&D), promoting the development
of private enterprise and the modernization of management practices, and facilitating
business access to loans.
        60. The first step in reforming the SOE ownership function in Chile was the cre-
ation of the Enterprises Management System (Sistema Administrador de Empresas -
SAE) in 1997. The creation of this new entity served to separate the ownership function
from industrial development policy, with the latter continuing to be exercised by CORFO.
CORFO’s governing council33 delegated to SAE the administration of rights and shares of
SOEs. In addition, the SAE was empowered to appoint and remove its own representa-
tives in the shareholder’s meetings of SOEs placed under its control. In parallel to this
reorganization process, another privatization reform was enacted, which involved two
steps: first, the transformation of many enterprises into joint corporations; and sec-
ond, the introduction of private capital in public enterprises in the water sector, such as
EMOS S.A. (today Aguas Andinas S.A.), ESVAL S.A., ESSBIO S.A., and ESSAL S.A.
        61. The next move toward SOE reform was the creation of the Sistema de Empre-
sas (SEP), seeking to attain a more clear ownership function. As a result of a consen-
sual review process that concluded¬ with recommendations34 to strengthen the state’s
ownership function, the SAE was replaced in 2001 by a new entity, the System of Public
Enterprises (Sistema de Empresas – SEP). Soon after its creation, SEP was granted an
important role in nominating and removing SOE directors of all SOEs under state control
(except for CODELCO, Banco Estado, Televisión Nacional, ENAMI, and defense enter-
prises).


         Table II.4: Evolution of the Governmental Organization
                                           Supervising the SOEs

          UNTIL 1997                                   1997 - 2001                                 SINCE 2001

  Corporación de Fomento                 Sistema Administrador de Empre-                      Sistema de Empresas
     de la Producción                                   sas                                           (SEP)
         (CORFO)                                       (SAE)                                      Replaces SAE
   Controls SOEs in Chile                Exercises the ownership function                     exercising the owner-
     SOEs, with some                    SOEs at behest of main shareholder                   ship function at behest
        exceptions                                   (CORFO)                                   of main shareholder
                                                                                                    (CORFO)




33 	The governing council of CORFO is composed of 7 individuals: the Minister of Economy, Development and Tourism; the
Executive Vice-president; the Minister of Foreign Affairs; the Minister of Social Development; the Minister of Finance; the Min-
ister of Agriculture and a member appointed by the President of the Republic. For further details, see http://www.corfo.cl/
acerca_de_corfo/estructura_corporativa/consejo_directivo
34 	Institucionalidad y Criterios de Gestión para las Empresas Públicas (2001).




                                                                                                                           93      The Case of Chile
         62. Chile has been focused for several years on incorporating good corporate
governance practices in the management of SOEs. As a result of this decision, the per-
formance of SOEs has substantially improved. Some of the most relevant measures are
listed below: 	
•	   SOEs have been granted greater autonomy. Measures have been taken to shield 	
	    enterprises from government “instructions” and to ensure that SOEs do not receive 	
	    preferential treatment. At the same time, SOEs have also been allowed greater 	
	    operational autonomy. The SEP’s management practices strive not to “duplicate 	
	    the work” of SOE boards.
•	   There have been noticeable improvements in transparency and information
	    disclosure. Financial statements and other reporting of SOEs are generally made 	
	    publicly available on trimestral basis. Consolidated annual reports are compiled by 	
	    the SEP, and subsequently sent to the executive power and/or parliament,
	    and publicly disclosed. The Transparency Act (April 2009) requires all SOEs to 		
	    disclose the same information as corporations are required to provide to the SVS.
•	   Significant steps have been taken to strengthen the quality of financial and non-	
	    financial disclosure, including the adoption of International Reporting Standards.
•	   The SEP Code establishes an ethics standard that individual SOEs are required to 	
	    implement, if necessary adapted to their specific situation and regulations.
•	   Chile is well advanced in assuring equal treatment of shareholders in SOEs with 	
	    minority non-state participation. Minority shareholders are guaranteed, by law,
	    nondiscrimination, access to information and access to vote in shareholder
	    meetings. The state is not legally entitled to obtain information in preference over
	    other shareholders in SOEs.


Challenges Ahead
        63. The main challenge faced by the reforms implemented in Chile concerns the
legal status granted so far to the new institutional arrangement in SOEs management.
Certain new functions have been extended to the SEP by specific laws and decrees.
Recently, new legislation has been drafted to strengthen the current institutional frame-
work. The draft law currently under consideration would grant the SEP legal status as an
autonomous public agency.




94
95   The Case of Chile
                                The Case of Colombia
                                                                                                             II.3


         	



II.3.1                                                    State-Owned Enterprises Portfolio
                  64. As in many other Latin American countries, national State-Owned Enterprises
         (SOEs) in Colombia remain important actors despite a recent history of intense priva-
         tization.35 The aggregate budget of SOEs linked to the central government in Colombia
         represents approximately 8 percent of GDP and 24.5 percent of the government budget;
         36
            total investment by SOEs amounts to roughly 5 percent of GDP; and SOEs contribute
         to the national government finances via dividends equal to almost 1.3 percent of GDP
         or 4 percent of total government revenue.37 Three SOEs (Ecopetrol, ISAGEN and ISA) are
         listed on the national stock exchange; they constitute 15 percent of the National Stock
         Market and 50 percent of the total value of SOEs.38
                  65. The universe of SOEs in Colombia is made up of 37 SOEs linked to the cen-
         tral government.39 This number includes state industrial and commercial companies,
         and mixed-capital corporations (MCC), as recognized by the current legal framework.
         SOEs in Colombia operate in both competitive and non-competitive markets. Their ac-
         tivities are widespread across sectors, but they play a significant role in the oil, finan-
         cial, and electricity sectors. The Colombian Oil State Company (Empresa Colombiana de
         Petróleos – ECOPETROL), a mixed-capital corporation with majority state participation,40
         is dominant in the oil sector with a budget that amounts to almost 7 percent of Colom-
         bia’s GDP (or 20 percent of the government’s budget). In the financial sector, SOEs’ ag-
         gregate budget is 0.87 percent of GDP (3.18 percent of the government’s budget), and
         0.44 percent of GDP (1.53 percent of the government’s budget) in the electricity sector.


         35 	This work only focuses on SOEs linked to the central government. Counting SOEs that involve the participation of
         sub-national governments, however, there are a total of 105 SOEs in Colombia, representing 16.7 percent of GDP and
         0.7 percent of employment (OECD).
         36 	It should be noted that expenditures by ECOPETROL, the state-owned oil company, represent almost 7 percent of
         GPD and 20 percent of the government budget.
         37 	The figures are for 2010 and were calculated using official data obtained from the National Planning Department and
         the Ministry of Finance.
         38 	The Governance of Mixed-Ownership Enterprises in Latin America: Discussion Paper, OECD 2013b. Corporate Gov-
         ernance Working Paper No. 12, Colombian SOEs: A review against the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of
         State-Owned Enterprises, written by Hector Lehuede
         39 	Annex C provides a complete list of SOEs linked to the central government




             96
        66. There are 15 SOEs in the financial sector, six of which provide agricultural
financial services. Another seven SOEs operate in the energy sector, providing public
home utilities. Rounding  out the
                     Number       list,
                                 of     four SOEs focus their activities in telecommunica-
                                     SOEs
tions, three in transportation, and the rest in areas such as veterinary products (VECOL
S.A.), tourism (Sociedad Hotelera), and crafts (Artesanías de Colombia).


                                Figure II.6: Number of SOEs by sector
                                                                               Source: DNP, MF


                                                                 Oil and Natural Gas
                  Others
                                                                                  1
                   6


                                                                                           Financial
     Transportation
                                                                                                15
     3
                                          Total 37


Telecommunications

4
              Postal Services

              1
                                                                            Electricity

                                                                                       7



	                                Table II.5: SOE expenditure by sector

                                                      Expenditures
                  Sector
                                    % of Gov. Budget                    % of GDP

    Oil and Natural Gas                   19.70                            6.81

    Financial                             3.18                             0.87

    Electricity                           1.53                             0.44

    Postal Services                       0.04                             0.01

    Telecommunications                    0.02                       Less than 0.01

    Transportation                   Less than 0.01                  Less than 0.01

    Others                                0.02                       Less than 0.01

    Total                                 8.13                            24.50



                                                                                                97     The Case of Colombia
II.3.2                          Ownership Function: Institutional Framework
                                                           and Organization
              67. The SOE ownership function in Colombia is decentralized and exercised by
     several government units simultaneously or sequentially. In general, sector ministries
     or similar agencies are in charge of executing ownership rights. However, for some com-
     panies ownership rests entirely with the MF. Complementing these institutional arrange-
     ments, other relevant public sector entities may play key roles, intervening at different
     stages of the budgeting and oversight processes. For example, the National Planning
     Department (Departamento Nacional de Planeación - DNP) takes significant responsi-
     bility for, oversight of SOEs and control of royalties, and the National Council of Eco-
     nomic and Social Policy (Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y Social - CONPES) is
     responsible for financial programming of some enterprises.
              68. In most cases, the sector ministry exercises ownership rights with another
     ministry or agency. These SOEs follow sector-specific policies and articulate their plans
     according to the sector planning process. For instance, companies in the telecommuni-
     cation sector implement the sector policies dictated by the Ministry of IT and Commu-
     nications or the National Television Commission. In a few other cases the Ministry of Fi-
     nance exercises SOEs ownership rights along with the sector ministry. In this latter case,
     while the MF monitors financial indicators, the sector ministry focuses on performance
     indicators. For example, strategic and operational decisions taken by ECOPETROL are
     subject to the approval of the Ministry of Mining and Energy. However, the MF exercises
     the ownership function as the main shareholder of the company.41
              69. Colombia’s National Planning Department (DNP) is one of the main govern-
     ment entities in charge of supervising SOEs. DNP is a highly technical executive admin-
     istrative agency that reports directly to the Presidency, and whose main objectives are
     the preparation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the activities performed
     by the entire public sector. DNP evaluates all public investment projects developed by
     the SOEs which are financed through the national government’s budget, and monitors
     their results. SOEs are required to send their financial statements to DNP annually, but
     DNP may also request specific information at any time. DNP keeps centralized records of
     the information submitted by SOEs on potential financial surpluses and, in some cases,
     on their investment budget. It also receives financial information from other government
     agencies, and coordinates the formulation of the National Development Plan for the entire
     public sector. In 2010, DNP elaborated a methodology to monitor SOE performance.42 The
     main objective of such methodology is to “create an integrated information system to
     monitor the management of SOEs in order to adopt policy strategies towards the opti-
     mization of SOEs performance.” This methodology includes three dimensions: financial,
     internal organization, and performance.
              70. The National Council of Economic and Social Policy (CONPES) is in charge of
     determining the amount of money from financial surpluses and profits of industrial and
     commercial enterprises and MCCs to be assigned to the national treasury43. At least 20

     41 	The last column of the table in Annex C shows the main sector ministry in charge of supervising the corresponding
     SOE.
     42 DNP acknowledged in the 2003 National Development Plan the importance of clearly defining the concept of au-
     tonomy in the organizational policies applicable to SOEs. The DNP emphasized the need to clarify responsibilities and
     roles of sector ministries, MF, and DNP regarding SOE management (Departamento Nacional de Planeación, Colombia,
     2003). It also highlighted the importance of implementing good corporate governance practices to improve the per-
     formance of SOEs.
     43 	This is applied to SOEs once their budget has been approved.




         98
percent of these surpluses remain in the respective SOEs that generated them. CONPES
informs SOE boards about the distribution of the surpluses generated by their company.
         71. The Water and Sanitation, Energy, and Communications regulatory com-
missions also exercise oversight functions on SOEs. The regulatory commissions are
administrative units within their respective sector ministries (Ministry of Economic De-
velopment, Ministry of Mining and Energy, or Ministry of Communications) with techni-
cal, financial, and administrative autonomy. The responsibilities of these commissions
include setting tariffs and fees, ensuring compliance with contracts and acts, and col-
lecting and analyzing all relevant information provided by public utility companies.
         72. Various superintendencies oversee the performance of SOEs. The Public Util-
ity Superintendence (Superintendencia de Servicios Públicos Domiciliarios), an agency
that is part of the DNP hierarchy, oversees compliance with Law Nº 142/1994 (Public
Domiciliary Utilities Law); rules, and performance indicators established by regulatory
commissions (water and sewage, energy, and telecommunication); and contracts be-
tween users and public utilities, technical requirements established by sector ministries
regarding procedures, equipment and public works. Commercial SOEs are controlled by
the Superintendence of Mercantile Companies (Superintendencia de Sociedades), and
the Financial Superintendence (Superintendencia Financiera) supervises those SOEs
that provide financial services and those that trade in the stock market.44
         73. The Office of the Comptroller General, in accordance with the Colombian
Constitution, oversees the execution of the budget of all SOEs. This supervising func-
tion extends to all entities that receive or execute public funds.


	                                Accountability and Oversight Mechanisms                                                II.3.3
Statements of Objectives & Planning Documents
         74. Management/Performance contracts. Financial and performance objectives
in service delivery are defined by the SOE Boards. These objectives must be aligned
with national goals, as codified in the National Development Plan, and have to be ap-
proved by shareholders. However, often the objectives derived from national plans are
too broad to concretely inform the management of SOEs. For this reason, each SOE
tends to elaborate its own corporate plans, taking into consideration the strategic sec-
tor plans (e.g., the National Energy Plan) and their own objectives.
         75. Budget formulation and approval. The National Budgeting Office (Oficina del
Presupuesto Nacional - OPN) of the MF monitors the budgets of industrial and commer-
cial SOEs, and MCCs operating in non-financial activities. The OPN gathers all relevant
information about the budget planning processes of these SOEs through a financial in-
formation system which operates independently from the integrated financial informa-
tion system (SIIF) that includes all other resources of the national government’s bud-
get. It also establishes rules and procedures for the disclosure of information. Annual
budgets of non-financial SOEs with a majority of shares held by the central government



44 In a country report issued by the Financial Superintendent (2007), this institution argued that the Corporate Gover-
nance Code (Código País) “(…) will be used as a standard for issuers to provide the market with relevant and adequate
information regarding their corporate governance. This information would become an important tool for the decision-
making process leading to investments.” Among the SOEs that have adopted this Corporate Governance Code are
ECOPETROL, Banco Agrario S.A., FINAGRO (Colombian Credit Fund for Agriculture & Livestock) and Fondo Nacional de
Garantías.




                                                                                                                   99     The Case of Colombia
are supervised by the Superior Council of Fiscal Policy45 (Consejo Superior de Política
Fiscal); the corresponding sector ministries also participate in the process. The Colom-
bian legal framework provides for the approval and modification of the SOEs’ budgets.
This applies to industrial and commercial SOEs, as well as the division of CONFIS that
functions as a mixed-capital corporation, CONFIS, an institution attached to the Ministry
of Finance and Public Credit and in charge of fiscal policy and the coordination of the
budget system.


Reporting: Monitoring of Performance & Ex post Disclosure
        76. Budget execution reports. The MF and the DNP supervise budget execution
by SOEs with a majority of shares held by the national government. Monthly reports on
budget execution are elaborated and published in the MF website.46 These reports are
based on the information collected by the ONP through a financial information system.
        77. The DNP is in charge of collecting and disseminating information about the
execution of the companies’ investment plans, and the progress of the National Devel-
opment Plan. The DNP also reports regularly to the President regarding the execution
of public investments and the implementation of the development plan, and advises on
the preparation of an annual report on these issues to Congress.47
        78. Additional information disclosure and reporting requirements for SOEs. In
general, there are no specific rules for citizens to access financial information of SOEs.
However, SOEs are required to prepare and disclose the following information:
•	  Financial Reports. Financial statements are presented to the Investment and 		
	   Public Finance Office of the DNP and are made available at the SOEs’
	   websites.48
•	  General Directors’ or Corporate Governance reports. The Chairman, on behalf 		
	   of the board of directors, provides a report on the performance of the SOE to 		
	   the general shareholder meeting.
•	  Performance (Results in Service Delivery) reports. Annual and quarterly
	   management reports are produced. The CEO is responsible for officially
	   submitting quarterly management reports.
•	  Other specific reports required from SOEs. Financial reports are submitted to 		
	   the Financial Superintendence or Public Utilities Superintendence, depending 		
	   on the type of SOE.
•	  Disclosure of ex post reporting. Financial and management reports are publicly 		
	   available and usually posted on the company’s website.
        79. Additionally, superintendences collect and publish information about SOE
performance. The Public Utility Superintendence, for instance, publishes management
performance and quality indicators for the year under review. The indicators made avail-
able include information on claims, customer satisfaction, and sanctions placed on com-
panies that do not comply with specified standards.49

45 SCFP is formed by the MF, the Director of the Administrative Department of the DNP, the Economic Advisor for the
Presidency, the Vice Ministries of Finance, and the National Directors of the OPN, Office of Public Debt, Office of Taxes
and Customs, and the Treasury.
46 This information is published at the MF website: http://www.pte.gov.co/
47 	The information can be found at http://www.dnp.gov.co/Default.aspx
48 To cite a couple of examples, in the case of ECOPETROL, this information can be consulted at http://www.ecopet-
rol.com.co/english/contenido.aspx?catID=305&conID=41397, and in the case of the electricity company DISPAC, at
http://dispac.com.co/nuestra-empresa/informes-empresariales/
49 	Refer to http://www.superservicios.gov.co/home/web/guest/inicio




 100
Auditing of SOEs
       80. SOEs are subject to internal and external audits. The table below describes
the audit arrangements that serve to exercise control on SOEs.


                                                        Table II.6: Types of Audit

 Type                Who is Responsible        Audit Scope                            Frequency

 Internal   Inside   Auditor                   Oversees financial statements          Permanent
            SOE      (fiscal supervisor)       and accounting processes.
                     Audit committee           Oversees internal control
                     (formed by members        management.
                     of the board of direc-
                     tors)                                                Types of Audit
                     Internal control office   Ensures processes,
                                               implementation of improvement
                                               plans, and the compliance of
                                               ISO norms.


            Gov.     General Comptroller       Responsible for financial, legal       Annual
                     Office                    and management control, auditing
                                               and evaluation of internal control
                                               processes, and verifying the results
                                               of these processes.
                     Private auditing firms May be engaged to conduct an              Annual
 External
                                            audit upon request of shareholders
                                            with more than 5% of shares.



SOEs Boards of Directors and Management
        81. Boards of directors and CEOs. At the national level, the sector ministers and
the directors of administrative departments coordinate and guide the activities of the
industrial and commercial SOEs and MCCs in their respective sectors. Typically a board,
with the director, president, or CEO of the company, is in charge of the direction and
management of these SOEs.
        82. There are no specific rules guiding the appointment of board members, di-
rectors, or presidents of SOEs. Law Nº 489/1998 only establishes generic guidelines.
The President of the Republic or the respective Board of Directors selects CEOs or presi-
dents of SOEs and can remove the appointees at any time. The designation of board
members is established in the law or norm that creates the corresponding SOE. Mem-
bers of the board must follow the sector policy guidelines and uphold the interests of
the SOE. Members who come from the private sector are not considered public officials,
although they execute a public service. In general, in appointing these positions SOEs
must draw guidance from both Law Nº 489/1998 and their own governing statutes.
        83. In practice, the selection criteria have not followed a standard procedure. In
some cases, the CEO is required to have a specific background consistent with the type



                                                                                               101   The Case of Colombia
of business developed by the SOE or the ministry that exercises the ownership rights.
For example, the CEO of the Sociedad Hotelera Tequendama must be an official of the
military since the Ministry of Defense is the major shareholder in this SOE.
         84. The DNP stated in its 2003 National Development Plan that the appointment,
term duration, and promotion of directors and managers are to be decided by merit-
based criteria or performance, but in practice this is not always the case. In some cases,
directors and managers are appointed, retained, and promoted based on their political
allegiance, which can generate uncertainty within the organization. This may also cre-
ate perverse incentives for appointees, as in such cases, directors and managers tend
to devote a significant amount of resources to goals determined by political expediency,
sometimes at the expense of sound long-term policies for the companies they guide.
         85. The following characteristics define the functioning of SOE boards in Colombia:
•	   Frequency of meetings: Ordinary shareholder meetings are held annually, while 		
	    the 	 boards of the companies meet monthly or bi-monthly (depending on the
	    company).
•	   Record-keeping of meeting minutes: In accordance with the Commercial Code a
	    secretary is designated to keep minutes, which must be approved by the respective 	
	    meeting participants.
•	   Rules or code of ethics informing the board’s behavior and composition: Many 		
	    SOEs have code of ethics approved for the entire enterprise, but these do not apply
	    specifically to the board.
•	   Rules for board members’ appointment and dismissal: Regulations regarding the 	
	    composition of the board are stated in the law that creating the SOE in question.
•	   Length/duration of appointment: One year.
•	   Board responsibilities: Interaction with the CEO (supervision, dismissal) and with 	
	    the Ministry / SOE Management Unit.
•	   Mechanism of Board’s performance appraisal: Self assessments are presented by 	
	    the Chairman of the Board in the shareholders meeting.
         86. Salaries of managers, members of the board and other employees are not in
all cases based on performance. There is a fixed salary scale which limits the incorpora-
tion of salary incentives or bonus for good performance. One attempt at reform in this
area was the creation of an additional “technical bonus,” which was applied to those
SOEs operating under public law. In practice, however, this bonus was incorporated into
the regular salary for employees at these SOEs, negating its original purpose. In the
case of companies operating under private law, bonus payments based on results are
more firmly established.
         87. SOEs that operate in the financial sector must comply with additional rules
and guidelines. In 2005, Congress passed the Securities Market Law (Ley del Mercado
de Valores-964). The law established mandatory corporate governance practices for is-
suing institutions.50 Among other things, it established a minimum mandatory percent-
age (25 percent) of directors on the board that must be independent, and established
the requirement for an audit committee, to be formed by independent board members.
Additionally, in 2006, a working group led by the Financial Superintendent elaborated
a code to promote good governance practices. The code enumerates recommendations
for the functioning of the board of directors, setting best-practice standards for the
number of directors, their desired qualifications and degree of independence, responsi-
bilities of the board, and frequency of board meetings.


50 Issuing institutions are companies with registered securities in the National Registry of Securities and Issuers.




 102
	                                                             Reform Initiatives           II.3.4
        88. As in many other countries, in Colombia improving corporate governance is
seen as an opportunity for SOEs to advance their access to international markets, and
their ability to compete openly in those markets. Companies see transparency, probity,
good enterprise practices, and effective control as key to achieving their mandated ob-
jectives in an effective and efficient manner.
        89. Two types of reforms in the area of corporate governance of SOEs should be
highlighted. First, the creation and proliferation of MCCs and the subsequent incorpo-
ration of private shareholders to SOEs have contributed to improving the performance
and transparency of the companies. Moreover, some SOEs have introduced a code of
ethics for their firm. It should be noted, however, that no general guidelines have been
provided for the creation of such codes.


Challenges Ahead
        90. The efficient management of SOEs in Colombia is still a significant challenge
for the public sector administration. The government has focused on reinforcing good
practices of corporate governance in several areas. Some of the issues that present
specific challenges are the lack of a centralized ownership structure; the existence of
reporting standards based on local norms instead of international requirements (Inter-
national Financial Reporting Standards - IFRS); and, for some SOEs, insufficient separa-
tion between commercial and political objectives.




                                                                                     103    The Case of Colombia
                                    The Case of Paraguay
                                                                                                             II.4



II.4.1                                                    State-Owned Enterprises Portfolio
                  91. Despite a recent history of privatizations, State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs)
         in Paraguay remain important actors.51 A number of key items of information confirm
         their relevance in economy. For instance, they employ around 17,000 people in total; the
         aggregate budget for all SOEs is equal to 14.5 percent of GDP, and accounts for 32 per-
         cent of the national budget (Presupuesto General de la Nación - PGN). Moreover, total
         investment by SOEs amounts to roughly 1.3 percent of GDP (3.3 percent of the national
         budget).52
                  92. The universe of SOEs in Paraguay includes 13 SOEs linked to the central
         government. Five of the companies are directly controlled by the state; the operation of
         these enterprises is regulated by Cartas Orgánicas and four are mixed corporations with
         majority state participation.53 Of the remaining four, which are not included in this chap-
         ter, three are public financial entities and one is the postal company. SOEs in Paraguay
         operate in both competitive and non-competitive markets. The participation of SOEs
         is widespread across sectors, but concentrated in oil, electricity, and telecommunica-
         tions. Typically the important SOEs play a strategic role in their respective sectors. For
         instance, in the oil sector, the state-owned company Petróleos Paraguayos (PETROPAR),
         has a budget that amounts to almost 6.2 percent of Paraguay’s GDP (13.8 percent of the
         PGN); in the electricity sector, the Paraguayan Power & Electricity Company (Adminis-
         tración Nacional de Electricidad - ANDE) has a budget that reaches 5.1 percent of the
         GDP (12.8 percent of the PGN); and in the telecommunication sector, the Paraguayan
         Telecom Company´s (Compañia Paraguaya de Comunicaciones - COPACO) budget is 1.4
         percent of the GDP (3.6 percent of the PGN). Other relevant sectors include transporta-
         tion, water and sanitation, and beverages production.



         51 	This work only focuses on SOEs linked to the central government.
         52 The figures are for 2010 and were calculated using official data obtained from the Ministry of Finance.
         53 	A complete list of SOEs is provided in table 11. The companies considered here are those listed in the National
         General Budget of Paraguay as state companies and corporations with government participation. Not included are
         public financial entities such as Banco Nacional de Fomento, Fondo Ganadero, Crédito Agrícola de Habilitación and the
         Agencia Financiera de Desarrollo”. The postal company, Correo Paraguayo, operates as a decentralized entity within
         the structure of the Ministry of Public Works and Communications.




          104
                        Table II.7: List of National SOEs in Paraguay
                                                                                Source: MF



                                                                        SOE Budget

         Sector                            SOE                        As %     As % of
                                                                     of Gov.    GDP
                                                                     Budget


 Oil                     Petróleos Paraguayos (PETROPAR)            13.8%      6.3%
                         Administración Nacional de Electricidad
 Electricity                                                        11.4%      5.2%
                         (ANDE)

                         Compañía Paraguaya de Comunicaciones
 Telecommunications                                                 3.6%       1.5%
                         S.A. (COPACO)

 Construction            Industria Nacional del Cemento (INC)       1.7%       0.7%

                         Empresa de Servicios Sanitarios del
 Water and Sanitation                                               0.8%       0.4%
                         Paraguay S.A. (ESSAP)




                    Ownership Function: Institutional Framework                              II.4.2
                                               and Organization
        93. Paraguay’s government has recently taken a series of measures aimed at
establishing a centralized model for the ownership function of SOEs. These measures
have been addressed to gradually leaving behind the traditional decentralized model,
where sectoral ministries supervise SOEs and implement a more centralized model,
whereby a single entity acts as the SOE shareholder on behalf of the state. Most of
these initiatives have been promoted by the Ministry of Finance (MF), as an attempt to
reduce fiscal and social undesired effects related to poor management and sub-optimal
service delivery of SOEs.
        94. The introduction of a Governing Council of SOEs CNEP (Consejo Nacional
de Empresas Públicas) in 2008 constituted the basis of the current organization of the
SOEs ownership function in Paraguay. The CNEP is formed by representatives of the
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Public Works and Communications, Ministry of Industry,
and the Office of the State Attorney General. The Minister of Finance holds the presiden-
cy of the CNEP. Its main objective is to administer, coordinate, and execute the plans,
programs and modernization strategies of SOEs delivering public services, while also
providing supervision and oversight of these companies.
        95. To better exercise its management and oversight functions, the CNEP has
created the Monitoring Unit for SOEs (Unidad de Monitoreo de las Empresas Públicas




                                                                                      105     The Case of Paraguay
     - UMEP) as its internal decision-making and implementing body.54 UMEP is situated
     within the organizational structure of the State Sub-Secretariat of Economics and In-
     tegration (SEE), one of the main sub-secretariats of the MF which has recently been
     granted the status of a Directorate. The unit is staffed by a director and department
     heads (Jefatura de Departamento) who oversee departments of management control,
     research and planning, and regulation. It also has a multidisciplinary professional team,
     organized into working groups to supervise each of the SOEs.
             96. The CNEP is currently working on its multi-annual strategic plan within the
     policy guidelines formulated by the National Government. The UMEP professional team
     has been progressively assuming a leading role in the elaboration of this plan, which is
     intended to provide greater predictability to sector policies, and lays out specific actions
     that the national government intends to take in policy implementation over the next few
     years. The plan is designed on the basis of the following five strategic objectives: (i)
     strengthening the institutional framework for SOE supervision; (ii) further developing
     the CNEP’s capacity to monitor and supervise SOEs; (iii) regularizing payment arrears
     for public utilities by the government’s central administration; (iv) strengthening the
     regulatory framework for the provision of public services, and (v) implementing rules for
     corporate governance of SOEs.
             97. At the same time, the CNEP intends to develop inter-institutional relation-
     ships that may also impact favorably on SOE oversight. In this case, it has an agreement
     on inter-institutional cooperation with the State Audit Office (Contraloría General de la
     República - CGR). Currently, UMEP is also in discussions with the National Directorate
     for Public Procurement (Dirección Nacional de Contrataciones Públicas (DNCP)) on sign-
     ing a similar agreement on inter-institutional cooperation.
             98. The creation of the CNEP and UMEP has contributed to significant improve-
     ment in SOE oversight from an institutional standpoint. The CNEP contributes inter-
     institutional agility in decision-making with professional and technical monitoring by
     UMEP. The CNEP meets regularly, to discuss priority topics concerning SOEs with an
     agenda prepared by UMEP; and based on discussions following the agenda, executive
     decisions are taken. The progress and impact of these decisions are regularly monitored
     and followed-up by specialists.




II.4.3                               Accountability and Oversight Mechanisms
     Statements of Objectives & Planning Documents
            99. Management/performance contracts. Between 2009 and 2010, the UMEP
     defined a standardized model for SOE management contracts. These contracts have a
     time span of 3 years and are based on standardized indicators that measure qualita-
     tive and quantitative goals. These goals, and the indicators used to measure progress
     toward them, are agreed upon between the SOEs and UMEP, and based on the SOEs’
     medium-term strategic objectives. These include indicators and goals in the financial,




     54 	Decree no 955 from November 26, 2008, defining the role and mandate of the UMEP.




         106
commercial, and economic areas, as well as technical and public services. The provi-
sions of each management contract also include monthly and quarterly reporting re-
quirements, as well as external audit reports. In addition, the UMEP is currently estab-
lishing an automated system to access SOEs’ data in order to enhance the effectiveness
of this monitoring process.
        100. Five of the main Paraguayan SOEs (ANDE, COPACO, ESSAP, INC, and PET-
ROPAR)55 signed their respective management contracts in 2010. In 2011, a sixth SOE,
the National Administration of Navigation and Ports (Administración Nacional de Naveg-
ación y Puertos - ANNP)) signed its management contract. These contracts contemplate
the systematic compliance of a series of performance indicators on both quantitative
and qualitative dimensions by the SOE and the UMEP. As a result, the CNEP now uses
a standardized monitoring mechanism, with the results displayed on an online “dash-
board,” which allows access to a database of performance indicators, and to the results
of the periodic systematic evaluations of SOEs.
        101. Budget formulation and approval. SOEs in Paraguay submit their budgets
annually, jointly with the rest of government entities. Diverging from current practice in
most countries, Paraguayan SOEs’ budgets are consolidated and approved as part of
the overall budget PGN, which also incorporates the budget of the central administra-
tion and of other decentralized (non-commercial) entities. The national budget with all
of its components is annually consolidated by the MF’s General Directorate of Budget
and submitted to Congress for approval.
        102. For SOEs constituted as corporations, the National Budget Law states that
starting in 2011 corporations with shares held by the state must submit their budgets
to the Ministry of Finance once they have been approved by their respective ordinary
shareholder meetings.


Reporting: Monitoring of Performance & Ex post Disclosure
        103. Budget execution reports. The Directorate General of Public Accountancy
(Dirección General de Contabilidad Pública) is the body responsible compiling an annual
report of the financial statements prepared by SOEs and the rest of governmental enti-
ties and agencies. These consolidated financial statements include complete informa-
tion on revenue, expenditure and financial assets and liabilities, in accordance with the
provisions of the financial administration law, and are submitted each year to the CGR,
and subsequent submitted to Congress for review.
        104. Other key reports for SOEs. Since 2010, UMEP has collected and processed
quarterly information on various indicators established in the performance contracts.
Although this information is not yet available to the public, the results of the evaluations
carried out by CNEP in its session on SOE management are occasionally published. On
the other hand, UMEP’s multi-annual strategic plan, which is currently under execution,
is available on the website of the Ministry of Finance.56 Finally, despite the relatively
large size of SOEs, and their strategic role in the Paraguayan economy, no evaluation of
their aggregate fiscal risk has been carried out.




55 These companies jointly represent around 80 percent of 2010 SOEs’ consolidated total expenditures.




                                                                                                        107   The Case of Paraguay
Auditing of SOEs
        105. Following a period of low compliance, external audits were successfully
implemented in 2009 for most SOEs, and have continued regularly since. For the au-
dit of the 2009 financial statements, the UMEP required SOEs to improve their proce-
dures for external auditing, and expand the scope of external audits, to accord with
international good practices. By May 2010, three large-scale SOEs (ANDE, COPACO, and
ESSAP) signed contracts for the preparation of external audits with independent au-
dit firms, following the procedures established by the National Public Procurement Law
(No.2051/03). As part of the effort to improve the transparency of SOEs, the results of
those external audits were made publicly available on MF’s official website.57
        106. The main oversight body for economic and financial activities of the state in
Paraguay is the Comptroller General (CGR). The CGR is empowered to perform financial,
administrative, operational, and management audits on SOEs. The CGR bases its selec-
tion of SOEs to be audited by the CGR depends on an audit risk assessment done by
this institution. For instance, the 2009 annual financial statements of the Paraguayan
telecom enterprise (COPACO S.A.) were audited by CGR in 2010.
        107. UMEP receives and reviews the external audit reports. In addition, UMEP
makes all the necessary arrangements for their publication at the MF’s website,58 and
monitors SOE compliance with the recommendations of the external audit.


SOE Boards of Directors and Management
        108. Boards of directors and CEOs. SOEs constituted as corporations have start-
ed to form boards of directors that are generally composed of a president, two board
members, and one trustee. The responsibilities of the board generally include: to ex-
ecute, comply with, and enforce the company’s bylaws, national laws, and resolutions
of shareholder meetings; to prepare and submit aggregate reports to meeting; to per-
form financial operations; sign contracts; and propose to the meeting the distribution of
dividends and creation of cash reserves. Those SOEs entirely owned by the government
only have a CEO, who jointly with the line minister is in charge of the decision making
process.
        109. There are currently no specific rules or guidelines in place to govern the
appointment of SOE authorities and the functioning of the board. The President of the
Republic has the ability to appoint and remove SOE directors through a presidential
decree. Board members and CEOs are accountable to the President of the Republic
through the CNEP. There are no specific criteria in place to guide the selection of candi-
dates. Appointments to the board do not have a specific duration, but in general, they
tend to coincide with presidential terms. There is no specific requirement for frequency
of board meetings, but boards generally meet once a week.




	

56 	http://www.economia.gov.py/umep/_admin/uploads/umep_plan_estrategico.pdf
57 http://www.economia.gov.py/umep/empresas.php
58 Published at http://www.hacienda.gov.py/web-sseei/index.php?c=322




    108
                                                              Reform Initiatives            II.4.4
        110. From the 1950s to the present, the largest companies of Paraguay have
been under state ownership. Some of these companies were privatized in a public ad-
ministration modernization process that was initiated in 1991 and that developed in
several different stages. However, the number and economic and strategic relevance of
companies under state control remains very important.
        111. The government of Fernando Lugo, which took office in 2008, introduced
significant reforms in the supervision framework for SOEs in Paraguay. Establishing ef-
fective state oversight of SOEs and improving their performance was a major part of
the plan introduced by the government. The reforms focused on the establishment of
an effective State oversight of SOEs through the creation of the Consejo Nacional de
Empresas Públicas (CNEP). However, it also included specific actions to improve busi-
ness management and even, increase private sector participation in SOEs. The govern-
ment sought to fashion a new institutional framework in order to: (i) create an adequate
structure for supervision of SOEs and the exercise of the ownership function; (ii) ensure
transparent reporting of financial management by SOEs; and (iii) promote an effective
regulatory framework for public utility services.
        112. Since the last quarter of 2008, the organization of the ownership function
within the state administration has made important progress. After the creation of the
CNEP and the regularization of the mandate of UMEP, progress has been observed in at
least three areas: in terms of institutional development; in the measurement and moni-
toring of SOE performance; and in the level of transparency in financial management of
SOEs.
        113. Instruments supporting the transparency of SOE finances and operations,
and enabling more effective oversight, are being progressively implemented. In particu-
lar, procedures for the annual publication and dissemination of SOEs’ audited financial
statements are already in place, as well as the elaboration of new rules that require the
contracting of independent audit firms, in line with international best practices. Also,
by mid-2010 elaboration and definition of medium-term financial and performance tar-
gets were advanced for at least five SOEs, representing almost 80 percent of total SOE-
consolidated expenditures.
        114. The government has also initiated actions to regularize public utilities
payment arrears from the central administration. By the end of 2009, three main Para-
guayan SOEs, responsible for the delivery of utilities and basic goods (ESSAP, ANDE,
and COPACO) claimed accumulated payment arrears to the central administration in the
consolidated amount of US$ 110 million.59 As a response, the CNEP formally designated
representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the Comptroller General, and the respec-
tive SOEs to create an inter-institutional technical commission (Comisión Técnica Inter-
institucional - CTI) responsible for calculating and verifying the legitimacy of accrued
debits and credits that were maintained between the SOEs and the central administra-
tion over time.




59 According to SOEs reported data collected by the UMEP.




                                                                                     109     The Case of Paraguay
Challenges Ahead
        115. Despite significant progress achieved over the last few years, Paraguay still
faces several challenges. One main challenge is to strengthen the institutional frame-
work for supervision of SOEs. To this end, a key hurdle is to ensure the sustainability
of the reform effort by approving the draft law for the legal establishment of the CNEP,
which was submitted to Congress in 2011. Another important challenge in the medium
term is to create a consolidated regulatory framework. Among other measures, this
would involve the creation of an independent regulatory body for the energy sector, as
well as further progress towards the effective implementation of the water and telecom-
munication regulators and the eventual harmonization of standards governing these
bodies.
        116. Recent achievements represent the initial phase of a more ambitious me-
dium-term plan. Next steps would include, inter alia, the implementation of strategic
plans in five SOEs, the repayment of debt held by several SOEs and public sector enti-
ties, and to carry out accounting, financial and tax audits on five SOEs which have not
yet been subjected to this level of scrutiny.




110
111   The Case of Paraguay
                                                       The Case of Peru
                                                                                                          II.5




II.5.1                                                    State-Owned Enterprises Portfolio
                   117. Despite an intense wave of privatization in the 1990s, State-Owned Enter-
         prises (SOEs) in Peru remain important actors in the national economy.60 For instance,
         in 2012 SOEs employ around 22,000 people (0.3 percent of total employment in the
         country)61 ; SOE aggregate (operating) expenditures are nearly 3.1 percent of GDP; and
         total investment by SOEs amounts to roughly 0.33 percent of GDP. At the same time they
         contribute to the government finances through taxes and direct transfers in an amount
         that reaches almost 2.4 percent of the GDP.62
                   118. The universe of SOEs in Peru includes 31 companies overseen by the cen-
         tralized ownership agency National Fund for Financing State Business Activity (Fondo
         Nacional de Financiamiento de la Actividad Empresarial del Estado - FONAFE). The cen-
         tral government of Peru is owner of at least 87 percent of each SOE, and owns 24 SOEs
         in full.63 Moreover, the Peruvian state holds a small percentage of another 13 companies
         (with state participation up to 10 percent), and 13 companies are in process of liquida-
         tion due to bankruptcy.
                   119. SOEs in Peru operate in both competitive and non-competitive markets.
         Their activities are concentrated in the electricity sector (generation and distribution),
         the financial sector, the oil and gas sectors, and in environmental rehabilitation. Aggre-
         gate expenditures by SOEs that operate in the electricity sector are nearly 1.3 percent of
         GDP; aggregate expenditures in the financial sector are 0.6 percent, and in oil and gas
         and environmental rehabilitation 0.6 percent. SOEs are also active in sectors such as
         transportation and communications, and in sewage sanitation and port infrastructure,

         60 	This work only focuses on SOEs linked to the central government and overseen by FONAFE, which includes 31 com-
         panies. The national oil company Petróleos del Perú – PETROPERU S.A is overseen by Ministry of Energy and Mining.
         It is also important to note that the social and health insurance company (Seguro Social de Salud (ESSALUD), the
         maintenance company Servicios Integrados de Limpieza S.A. (SILSA), and the security company Empresa de Seguridad,
         Vigilancia y Control S.A.C. (ESVICSAC) are not included in this work; these were incorporated under FONAFE’s budget-
         ary oversight through the 2011 Budget Law. (Ley N° 29626, Ley de Presupuesto del Sector Público).
         61 Press Release N° 064-30 Abril 2013, Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática
         62 The figures are for 2012 and were calculated using official data obtained from FONAFE.
         63 Annex D shows a complete list of SOEs.




          112
but, as indicated in table II.8, their contribution is relatively less significant. The cat-
egory “Other Sectors” includes companies in the defense sector (weapons production,
maintenance, and engineering), in trade, and companies engaged in shipbuilding and
metalworking. In terms of distribution of firms across sectors, the table below indicates
that half of Peru’s SOEs operate in the electricity sector. In fact, almost 27 percent of
the energy distributed through the National Interconnected Electrical System (Sistema
                     Number -of
de Electricidad Interconectado        SOEs
                                  SEIN)  is generated by national SOEs, and state-owned
electric distribution companies satisfy 60 percent of total demand.


                                         Figure II.7: Number of SOE by sector
                                                                                       Source: FONAFE



                                                                  Financial services

                                                                                  4



    Transportation and
                                                                                            Electricity
    Communications

                                                                                                   16
    4
                                               Total 31
Water and Sanitation

1


             Other Sector

             4
                                                             Enviromental remediation
                                                                      and oil and gas

                                                                                       2


                 Table II.8: SOE contribution to the budget by sector

                                      Sector                      Budget as % of GDP

                 Electricity                                                 1.3 %

                 Environmental remediation and oil and gas                   0.6 %

                 Financial services                                          0.6 %

                 Water and Sanitation                                        0.4 %

                 Transportation and Communications                           0.2 %

                 Other Sectors                                               0.1 %

                 TOTAL                                                       3.2 %



                                                                                                  113     The Case of Peru
II.5.2	            Ownership Function: Institutional Framework andO-
                                                         Organization
               120. The main actors in the Peruvian model of SOE ownership are the sector min-
      istries, the National Fund for Financing State Business Activity (FONAFE), and the SOE
      management (boards of directors and CEOs). Other institutions play a key role in ensur-
      ing the accountability of SOEs: the Comptroller General’s Office, the National Congress,
      and regulatory bodies, such as the Institutional Control Office.
               121. The ownership function for SOE management and oversight in Peru has been
      centralized since the creation of FONAFE in 1999. The creation of FONAFE established
      legal separation between SOE ownership and other state functions,64 as the agency
      functions as a public holding company, responsible to the Ministry of Finance (MF), and
      charged with regulation of all state enterprises (expect PETROPERU S.A.) linked to the
      national government, including oversight of SOE budgets.
      	        122. Among other duties, FONAFE is responsible for:
      •	   Regulating and supervising the state’s business activity;
      •	   Exercising ownership of the shares of SOEs (under any legal form) and the rights 	
      	    over any company under public law;
      •	   Approve the consolidated budget of SOEs;
      •	   Establishing corporate governance regulations for all SOEs;
      •	   Managing resources generated by the exercise of the ownership function; and
      •	   Designating members for SOEs’ shareholders meetings and boards.
      	        123. FONAFE is also in charge of ensuring that SOEs comply with applicable ad-
      ministrative systems in the execution of their activities. These norms include budgetary,
      procurement of goods and services, acquisitions, investment, recruiting of new staff,
      and accounting and auditing norms. General corporate law and civil law may also be
      applicable and may supplement administrative guidelines.
      	        124. FONAFE’s institutional structure reflects the inter-ministerial coordinating
      role of the holding. FONAFE is led by a board of directors composed of the following min-
      isters: (i) Minister of Economy and Finance, who presides; (ii) President of the Council
      of Ministers; (iii) Minister of Transport and Communications; (iv) Minister of Housing,
      Construction and Sanitation; and (v) Minister of Energy and Mines. FONAFE’s executive
      director is appointed by the Minister of Economy and Finance. Figure 6.1 shows its orga-
      nizational structure.




      64 	 FONAFE’s legal framework is Law Nº 27170 and Legislative Decree Nº 1031. These rules were enacted through
      Supreme Decree 072-2000-EF and Supreme Decree Nº 176-2010-EF, respectively.




          114
                        Figure II.8: FONAFE’s Organizational Structure


                                                    Board of
                                                                                           SEOs
                                                    Directors



                          Control Office



                                                   Executive
                                                   Directorate




  Administration                                  Planning and                                    Liquidation and
                               Legal                                       Operations
   and Finance                                    Development                                        Recovery




        125. In the past few years, FONAFE has begun to put into practice a new ap-
proach for the management of SOEs, which involves the creation of business networks.
Each business network is formed by CEOs of different companies, who collaborate to
identify common projects (or strategies) that would increase the value of the participat-
ing companies. By encouraging the creation of these networks, FONAFE aims to optimize
the use of resources, enhance corporate integration and collaboration, and strengthen
good practices of corporate governance across the companies of the holding.65
        126. FONAFE has also been leading reforms in areas such as human resources
and IT. FONAFE has introduced higher standards in the selection of board members
and CEOs, and taken steps to make the process more transparent. In IT, FONAFE has
implemented a System for Electronic Documentation Interchange (Sistema para Inter-
cambio de Documentación Electrónica - SIED), a software package that connects SOEs
to FONAFE, and allows them to share documents and improve communications through
electronic signatures. Recently, a data sharing system and paper recycling were also
introduced.




65 One example is the “Business Portfolio Network,” formed by CEOs from electric generation and distribution, finan-
cial, and non-electrical infrastructure companies, among others. Another example is the “Cross-Corporate Business
Processes Network,” which integrates a series of different key processes, including those related to budget, invest-
ment, information technologies and communication, and corporate acquisitions.




                                                                                                               115     The Case of Peru
II.5.3                                 Accountability and Oversight Mechanisms
     Statements of Objectives & Planning Documents
     	       127. Management/performance contracts. SOEs’ 5-year strategic plans. Peru-
     vian SOEs are required to produce a 5-year strategic plan with specific objectives, as
     well as to explicitly outline how they plan to achieve these objectives, which in turn,
     as mentioned above, have to be aligned with the Strategic Corporate Plan approved by
     FONAFE.
     	       128. For the period 2012-2016, FONAFE has established the following general
     strategic objectives: (i) foster dynamic SOE growth to contribute to the country’s devel-
     opment; (ii) increase efficiency through operational excellence; (iii) foster the creation
     of social value; iv) strengthen human resources and develop talent, corporate organiza-
     tion, and the use of information and communication technology in FONAFE.


                                            Figure II.8: General Strategic Objectives

                     Forster growth                      Increment efficiency                                Create social value


                     Increase economic
                                                                                                               Create social value
                           value

                                                                                              Stakeholders
         Financial




                                                          Increase efficiency
                                                                                                                   Position the
                      Promote growth                                                                                corporation


                     Increase access to                  Reach excellence in                                   Improve CSP
                          financing                        the processes                                       management
         Process




                                                  Optimize the portfolio management of SOEs


                                                Foster improvement in the regulatory framework



                                          Strengthen the talent, the organization an the ICT
         Learning




                                                                                  Strengthen talent, culture and
                         Improve the use of ICT
                                                                                     corporation organization




     	       129. SOEs’ Strategic Plans. These plans provide a management instrument de-
     fining the institution’s short, medium, and long-term objectives. They are formulated by
     each SOE in accordance with FONAFE’s directives, corporate policies, and strategic plan,
     and are required to be aligned with their sector’s policy plans. They should also be put




         116
in place for a 5-year period, and incorporate a diagnostic description of a company‘s
current state of health, along with the company’s strategic objectives, financial and non-
financial performance indicators and goals linked to the achievement of those indicators.
These plans are first approved by the board of the company, the sector ministry and
then by FONAFE’s board. Upon approval, they must be ratified by the General Meeting of
Shareholders of each company and published online.66 The strategic plans are updated
frequently, and approved changes are also published on the corresponding websites.
	         130. Budget formulation and approval. The budgetary process of SOEs is gov-
erned by the National Budgetary Law, which regulates this process for the entire Peru-
vian state aparatus. However, the annual national budget is not applicable to FONAFE
and its SOEs unless stated explicitly in the law. Typically, FONAFE consolidates all SOEs’
budgets following the guiding principles of the National Budgetary System and submits
them for approval to FONAFE’s board.
	         131. FONAFE has developed several guidelines to inform SOEs about planning
instruments, including their strategic plans and budgets. As stated above, FONAFE is
the main entity in charge of managing SOE budget processes. In 2008 FONAFE approved
Directives to formulate SOE Strategic Plan67 and, in 2010, Directives of Programming,
Formulation and Approval of Operational Plan and Budget.68 These directives establish
a set of guidelines, rules and principles to foster enhanced planning of SOEs’ activities
in accordance with their objectives. Also, they contain detailed forms that allow FONAFE
to gather information from all SOEs in a standardized way.


Reporting: Monitoring of Performance & Ex post Disclosure
	         132. FONAFE’s electronic document exchange system, SIED. This system is
used by FONAFE to centralize the submission of SOEs’ reports. It also facilitates ex-
change of documents between SOEs. Table 6.1 outlines the reports required by FONAFE
to individual SOEs.




66 For instance, the strategic institutional plan of CORPAC S.A. can be found at http://www.corpac.gob.pe/Main.
asp?T=4529
67 Directiva de Formulación del Plan Estratégico de las Empresas bajo el ámbito de FONAFE, approved by Board Agree-
ment N° 001-2008/019-FONAFE.
68 Directiva de Formulaciónon del Plan Operativo y Presupuesto de las empresas bajo el ámbito de FONAFE, approved
by Board Agreement Nº 001-2010/014-FONAFE.




                                                                                                              117     The Case of Peru
                              Table II.9: SOE reports required by FONAFE


 Type of
                     Documents                                 Frequency            Specifications
 information

 Strategic           Operational Plan’s Control                Quarterly
 management          Report
                     Evaluation of compliance                  Annually
                     with goals and objectives
                     established in the Operational
                     Plan and the Strategic Plan


 Budgetary           Financial statements                      Monthly,
 information                                                   Quarterly,
                                                               Annually
                     Executive report                          Monthly,             Financial and bud-
                                                               Quarterly, An-       getary analysis in
                                                               nually               comparison with the
                                                                                    same period under
                                                                                    evaluation from previ-
                                                                                    ous year
 Audit               Short- and Long-form Audit                Annually             Short- and Long-form
 information         Reports                                                        audit reports on
                                                                                    financial statements
                                                                                    as of 31 December
 Corporate           Executive Report on the imple-            Annually
 Governance          mentation of good corporate
                     governance




	         133. In general, all information regarding the management of SOEs is avail-
able to the public and published at both FONAFE’s and SOEs’ websites.69 FONAFE has
issued a specific resolution regarding transparency regulations with which SOEs must
comply, entitled “Transparency in the Management of State Owned Enterprises under
FONAFE”70, and closely monitors compliance with it. Table II.9 contains the information
that SOEs must publish on their websites:




69 Refer to http://www.fonafe.gob.pe/portal
70 Directiva de transparencia en la gestión de las empresas bajo el ámbito de FONAFE, approved by Executive Direc-
tion’s Resolution No. 010-2009/DE-FONAFE, published on February 11th, 2009.




 118
                                   Table II.10: SOE Reports Available Online

 Type of information                    Documents

 Budgetary information                  Budgetary information: Initial budget of income and
                                        expenditures; Modification to the Initial budget of in-
                                        come and expenditures; implementation of the budget of
                                        income and expenditures
 Financial information                  Initial budget of Income Statement, Balance sheet and
                                        Cash Flow forecast; Modifications to the Income state-
                                        ment, Balance sheet and Cash Flow forecast; Budget
                                        execution of the Income Statement, Balance sheet and
                                        Cash Flow forecast; Financial statements, including notes
                                        to these Financial Statements and the auditors’ opinion
 Public investment projects             List of projects
 in execution
 Performance indicators                 Compliance report on Operational Plan’s indicators
                                        Compliance report on Strategic Institutional Plan’s
                                        indicators




	         134. According to the provisions of the Transparency and Public Information
Law SOEs can classify certain information as “restricted access.” This information can
be classified as secret, reserved or confidential, e.g. in areas related to national security,
or to banking, trade, or industrial secrecy.71
	         135. An annual report is prepared by FONAFE, and publicly disseminated. The
report aggregates fiscal and financial SOE-related information, and it is submitted to
the ministries, the Presidency of the Republic, the cabinet, and the Comptroller General,
among other institutions.
	         136. The Budget Law establishes that once a year FONAFE has to report to
Congress’ Budget Commission. During the session FONAFE presents, and may be re-
quired to explain or justify, the results of the previous fiscal year, and introduces the
consolidated budget of SOEs for the following fiscal year. The Congress has the author-
ity to request information from FONAFE, or from any SOE at any time.


Auditing of SOEs
	         137. In 2006, FONAFE approved the Code of Internal Control for all SOEs under
its supervision. The code was developed accordingly to the National Control Law and
its objective is to provide guidelines for the implementation of measures regarding the
internal control of the enterprises. This code proposes a standard system and internal
control structure to support the implementation of internal control processes, in turn




71 This information may be technical, trade or business related, including secret processes, formulas, programs, mar-
keting plans, research and development information, studies, special pricing plans or other information that may merit
a reasonable effort at maintaining secrecy, particularly insofar as it derives commercial value from its secrecy.




                                                                                                                 119     The Case of Peru
fostering an ethical environment, preventing risks and promoting the permanent im-
provement of SOE management. In 2008, the Comptroller General approved guidelines
for the implementation of the internal control system and FONAFE instructed the SOEs
to comply with the guidelines for implementation of internal control.
	         138. Internal control measures implemented by SOEs are supervised by the
Institutional Control Office (ICO). Each SOE has an ICO unit within its organizational
structure. It reports directly to the board of directors, and it is responsible for monitor-
ing administrative, financial and economic resources and assets of SOEs, in line with the
National System of Controlled by the National General Comptroller (CGR). The CEO of
the ICO is appointed by the CGR, and reports to and is remunerated by this institution.
	         139. SOEs’ annual financial statements are audited by external independent
auditors selected through an open “request for proposal” process. This process is man-
aged by the CGR and includes technical requirements proposed by the SOEs. Further-
more, additional external audits may be requested by a general shareholders meeting at
any time. Audit results are required to be submitted to FONAFE and the CGR, and must
report on the following topics: (i) achievement of objectives and goals outlined in the
Strategic and Operational Plans; (ii) execution of budget process and procedures; (iii)
compliance with tax obligations; and (iv) the financial state of the company.


SOEs Boards of Directors and Management
	         140. All SOEs in Peru are governed by a board of directors, while CEOs are
responsible for the daily operations of the companies. After the general shareholder
meeting, the SOE Board of Directors is the highest authority of the company, with the
responsibility to oversee the company and establish its strategies, plans and objectives,
as well as ensure compliance with these. The companies’ bylaws determine the number
of board members. In no case, however, is this number less than three or larger than
seven. For the majority of SOEs, directors are appointed by FONAFE (through its board).
The line ministry and/or MF proposes a candidate or candidates to FONAFE, which then
makes an official nomination to the General Assembly of the Shareholders, which then
confirms the candidate. The board regularly convenes twice a month.
	         141. In general, professional requirements and the appointment/selection pro-
cedure for board members are established by law.72 According to the Decreto Legislativo
1031, board members must be professionals with strong ethics, be familiar with the
business of the SOE, and have extensive experience in strategic and business manage-
ment. However, FONAFE defines additional rules for companies under its supervision,73
establishing detailed procedures for the designation and dismissal of board members.
This includes strengthening the professional requirements established by the law; for
instance, the candidate must hold a university degree, and between five and 10 years
of professional experience or 10 years of professional experience in the sector in which
the SOE operates. FONAFE also sets several restrictions that on individuals becoming
board members; for example, on-going judicial process involving the SOE, having been


72 	The evaluation procedure is defined in the Supreme Decree 085-2006-EF. This decree establishes precise steps that
should be followed in the evaluation process. It defines several categories and assigns scores to each categories that
prospective candidates should meet.
73 	 The guidelines are entitled Directivas aplicables a los directores de las Empresas públicas en las que FONAFE par-
ticipa como accionista” (Directives applicable to Directors of the State Owned Enterprises in which FONAFE participates
as shareholder). The rules are also applicable to board members in companies where the state participates as a minor-
ity shareholder.




 120
sanctioned or dismissed due to an administrative fault from any public institution or
public enterprise, or being in a commercial relationship with the SOE.
	         142. In August 2010, a decree supported by FONAFE established that at least
one of the board members shall be selected through a public, competitive search. This
search is conducted by the National Authority for Civil Service (Autoridad Nacional de
Servicio Civil - SERVIR) or by a private recruitment firm or “head hunter.” When the
selection is the result of such an open search, candidates are required to meet higher
professional standards (such as holding a master’s degree in a field related to the SOE
sector) and additional qualifications.74
	         143. Board members do not have a contractual relationship with the SOE.
Therefore, they are not considered employees in legal terms and do not have the ben-
efits or protections provided by private or public labor regulations. Members of SOE
boards may have their SOEs appointments revoked by FONAFE at any time without
cause. Board members receive an honorarium for attending board meetings. The regu-
lations specify that these payments should be set at a level appropriate to create incen-
tives for improved productivity and performance, but in practice they are lower than
those received in the private sector.75 The duration of the appointment is effectively in-
definite since it has not been established in any regulation. However, usually at the end
of a presidential term, several changes take place in public administration and tending
also to affect SOE boards.
	         144. FONAFE establishes certain guidelines to evaluate board members.76
However, the guidelines focus on SOE performance rather than on the specific contri-
butions of the board. In 2006, FONAFE approved the Code of Ethics for State Owned
Enterprises’ Workers, which also applies to board members77 and the Directive on Neu-
trality and Transparency of State Owned Enterprises during electoral processes78 which
regulates the behavior of SOE boards during electoral campaigns.
	         145. CEOs are selected through a public, competitive job search conducted by
private head hunters, and appointed by the SOE board. In 2009, FONAFE established a
general policy to select CEO and other managerial positions using private recruitment
agencies or “head hunters,” and develops guidelines for this purpose.79 CEOs are ac-
countable to the SOE’s board and to FONAFE. Since 2010 administrative regulations
mandate that FONAFE develop mechanisms to evaluate the performance of CEOs, but
these mechanisms have not yet been approved.80 In general, managerial personnel in
the SOEs are hired under private labor laws. This practice grants SOEs more flexibility
in managing human resources compared to other public entities. There are no specific
rules for dismissing CEOs since they are hired “at will” by the SOE boards.
	         146. In Peru, the mandate of an SOE CEO is supposedly not tied to the govern-
ment’s mandate. However, political interference in bureaucratic institutions is still high
74 For instance, board members should not be related to SOE’s personnel, management, board or shareholders; shall
not be a public official or have had a direct or indirect contractual, commercial or labor relationship with the company
for at least two years before the designation. See D.S. 126-2010-EF, art.15.
75 	This practice prevents FONAFE from attracting competitive professionals to the boards. Recently, in an attempt to
foster directors’ involvement in the SOEs, FONAFE included a variable amount in these payments. However, this mea-
sure has not yet been implemented.
76 	No information, however, is available regarding the results of these evaluations.
77	Agreement No. 010-2006/004-FONAFE of the Board of Directors, published on February 3, 2006.
78 	Agreement No. 001-2006/003-FONAFE of the Board of Directors, published on January 18, 2006.
79 	Directive applicable to the selection of managers and equivalent positions in the SOEs under FONAFE. Approved by
the Agreement of FONAFE’s Board of Directors No. 006-2009/09-FONAFE on the 04.09.09 (Published on October 20,
2009).
80 	In practice, FONAFE evaluates CEOs’ performance through the performance of the SOE. This means that if SOEs
objectives are achieved, it is assumed that the CEOs have performed well.




                                                                                                                   121     The Case of Peru
      in the country, so changes in ministerial positions may affect SOEs’ management stabil-
      ity, in particular in the nomination of the boards.




II.5.4	                                                              Reform Initiatives
      	          147. The SOE ownership framework in force in Peru until 1990 did not deliver
      good results. The supervision and accountability mechanisms were inadequate and un-
      clear. In practice, the sector ministries exercised the ownership function: they were in
      charge of appointing board members, and deciding and implementing sector-specific
      policies. However, these decisions were generally driven by political motives and there
      was no coordination across sectors. MF intervened in budgetary issues or salary poli-
      cy, but it did not effectively control the companies. All this led to poor performance by
      SOEs, an inefficient provision of goods and services, and consequently, low investment
      levels in the sector.
      	          148. In 1990, an aggressive privatization process led by the MF began in Peru.
      This wave of privatization transformed Peru’s SOE portfolio from over 300 companies
      owned by the central government to the 31 currently under FONAFE’s oversight. The
      main sectors that participated in the privatization process were energy (hydrocarbon
      and electricity transmission) and infrastructure (ports and airports). The main purpose
      of this process was not to separate the ownership functions from regulatory or public
      policy functions, but was mostly aimed at downsizing and reorganizing SOEs to privatize
      them.
      	          149. A new constitution, approved in 1993, established that state business
      activities must be authorized by law, must be complementary to private activities, and
      must serve the public interest. To organize and carry out the privatization process of
      SOEs, the Peruvian government created the Oficina de Instituciones y Organismos del
      Estado (OIOE), an office with financial autonomy, under the MF. All supervision and con-
      trol functions pertaining to public enterprises were transferred to this new office which
      had absolute control over SOE management (procurement, investment, salaries) and
      budget. In 1998, when the privatization process came to an end with some SOEs still
      under state control, the OIOE adopted measures to improve SOE management at three
      levels: budget, personnel costs, and management agreements.
      	          150. In 1999, FONAFE was created as the holder of all state shares and as the
      governing body for state business activities. All public entities that held shares in a SOE
      transferred them to FONAFE. The creation of FONAFE as a governing body of state busi-
      ness activity effected a separation of the ownership function from public policies.
      	          151. The following table summarizes the level of legal protection granted to
      the new institutional arrangement in SOE ownership and oversight in force since the
      creation of FONAFE in 1998.




          122
                      Table II.11: Legal Protection of the Reforms

                                               Level of Legal Protection
                                       Constitution                    Lower-rank
                                                      Law    Decree
                                        Protection                       Norm

Division of Responsibilities between
Ministries in the ownership function                  X


Creation of SOEs Monitoring Unit                      X

SOEs Board/CEO’s appointment &
                                                      X         X          X
dismissal rules


Reporting Requirements from SOEs                      X         X


Auditing Requirements from SOEs                       X         X          X

Assessment Mechanisms of SOEs
                                                      X         X          X
Performance




                                                                               123   The Case of Peru
                                                  The Case of Spain
                                                                                                             II.6




II.6.1                                                     State-Owned Enterprises Portfolio
         	         152. Overall, the size of the public enterprise sector in Spain is relatively
         small.81 Aggregate current expenditures of the entire sector amount to nearly 5 per-
         cent of GDP or 13 percent of the central administration’s budget; and total investment is
         roughly 0.5 percent of GDP or 1.3 percent of the government’s consolidated budget. At
         the same time SOEs contribute to the government finances through taxes, profits, and
         other transfers in an amount that reaches almost 1.3 percent of the GDP or 3.6 percent
         of total government revenue.82
         	         153. The public enterprise sector83 in Spain is composed of approximately 260
         state-owned enterprises (SOE). This number includes companies directly controlled by
         the central administration through the Ministry of Finance and Public Administration
         (Ministerio de Hacienda y Administraciones Públicas - MHAP)) and/or sector ministries
         (Industry, Agriculture, Development), and public companies under the supervision of
         the Public Holding for Industrial Participations (Sociedad Estatal de Participaciones In-
         dustriales - SEPI), a public entity attached to the MHAP .84
         	         154. SEPI is the biggest holding of the public sector. As of December 31, 2012,
         SEPI had a direct and majority participation in 18 companies that together employ more
         than 80,000 workers. Under its economic and financial control are also the public radio
         and television company Corporación de la Radio y Televisión Española (CRTVE)85, cur-
         rently a public foundation. In addition, SEPI participates as a minority direct sharehold-
         er in seven companies (of which 5 are traded at the stock market), and indirectly in more
         than 100 companies. Total current expenditures of companies in the SEPI group add up



         81 	 This work only focuses on SOEs linked to the central administration.
         82 	The figures are for 2010 and were calculated using official data obtained from the Ministry of Finance.
         83	 The public enterprise sector is defined by the National General Budget Law 47/2003, art. 3.
         84 	 See www.igae.pap.minhap.gob.es/sitios/igae/es-ES/ClnInvespe/Paginas/invespe.aspx for more information on
         the structure of the central administration.
         85 	 In 2006, the public entity RTVE declared bankruptcy (under the supervision of SEPI) and the Corporación de Radio
         y Televisión Española S.A., was founded




          124
to almost 0.4 percent of the GDP and 1 percent of the central administration’s budget.86
	         155. Table II.12 groups SOEs by percentage of state participation. As indicated
in the table, most of the SOEs are entirely owned by the government.


                                     Table II.12: State Participation in SOEs
                                                                              Source: MF



 State Participation                             Number of Entities                   %

 100%                                                                192          73.28

 ≥ 90% and < 100%                                                     17            6.49

 ≥ 70% and < 90%                                                      10            3.82

 ≥ 60% and < 70%                                                          7         2.67

 > 50% and < 60%                                                      35          13.36

 ≤ 50%                                                                    1         0.38

 TOTAL                                                               262         100.00


	
	        156. activities SOEs in Spain operate in both competitive and non-competitive
markets. Their are spread across the economy. Table II.13 below describes SOE par-
ticipation by sectors calculated by aggregating SOEs current expenditures by SOEs in
each respective sector. As the table indicates, SOEs in Spain tend to concentrate their
operations in trade, transportation, and tourism activities (SOE aggregate expenditures
in this sectors are nearly 2.6 percent of the GDP and seven percent of the central admin-
istration’s budget), artistic and recreational activities (one percent of GDP and almost
three percent of the budget), and financial and insurance activities. SOE participation in
other sectors is relatively minor.




86	 A complete list of companies in the SEPI group is shown in Annex E.



                                                                                     125     The Case of Spain
                           Table II.13: Participation of SOEs across Sectors
                                                                                                                 Source: MF



                                                                                  SOE Sectoral Budget
                                Sector
                                                                        As % of Budget                As % of GDP


         Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry, Fishing                            0.07%                       0.02%

         Artistic, Recreational                                               2.00%                       0.74%

         Construction                                                         0.96%                       0.35%

         Defense, Education, Sanitary and Social
                                                                              0.24%                       0.09%
         Service Activities

         Extractive Industries, Manufacturing,
                                                                              2.06%                       0.76%
         Energy, Water, Sanitation

         Financial, Insurance                                                 0.37%                       0.14%

         Information, Communications                                          0.20%                       0.07%

         Professional, Scientific, Technical,
                                                                              0.79%                       0.29%
         Administrative

         Real Estate                                                          0.18%                       0.07%

         Trade, Transportation, Hospitality                                   6.04%                       2.22%

         TOTAL                                                               12.92%                       4.74%




II.6.2
     		                          Ownership Function: Institutional Framework
                                                                            87
                                                           and Organization
     	         157. SEPI centralizes the ownership function of the state as applied to the
     public companies under its control – that is, when it holds the majority of the shares.
     SEPI was initially constituted by the Law 5/1996 for the creation of specific legal entities
     as a public corporation of the Central Administration, and under the responsibility of
     the Ministry of Industry. This responsibility was transferred to the Ministry of Finance in
     2011.88 The legal framework which regulates the current functioning of SEPI is based on
     the General Budget Law No. 47/2003.
     	         158. The law defines SEPI as a body, whose economic activities and contrac-


     87 	 The institutional framework and the oversight mechanisms described in the next sections are those that apply to
     SOEs under the supervision of SEPI.
     88 	 This law was then partially modified by the following: Law 13/1996, on fiscal and administrative matter; Decree-Law
     15/1997; Law 66/1997, on fiscal and administrative matters and social order; and Law 20/2006. 	




         126
tual obligations are governed by the civil, mercantile and labor stipulations from the
private-sector legal code. However, in certain areas (such as recruitment of staff, pro-
curement and budgeting), its activities are governed by public law and subject to the
same control mechanisms (budget oversight, audits, public control, etc) as the rest of
the public sector.
	           159. SEPI acts as an instrument of government policy in the restructuring and
modernization of public enterprises. Furthermore, SEPI plays an important role in pro-
moting economic development. According to its internal regulation and guiding norms,
its main functions are:
•	   promoting and coordinating the activities of the entities it controls;
•	   setting strategy and supervising the planning processes of the enterprises in 		
	    which it holds the majority share;
•	   managing the portfolio of its shares and SOEs in which it participates as a 		
	    shareholder;
•	   carrying out all active and passive financial operations related to its own capi-		
	    tal and the capital of the entities in which it directly and indirectly participates89
•	   facilitating the process of privatization in SOEs it controls, as well as other 		
	    processes delegated to it by the government
	           160. SEPI functions fundamentally as a financially autonomous corporation.
In order of significance, the main sources of SEPI’s financing are: (i) management of its
own assets; (ii) revenues from privatization proceeds; (iii) dividends from participation
in enterprises (as majority or minority shareholder); (iv) borrowing from private financial
markets, within the limits laid out by the annual general budget law. Also, since 2006,
SEPI has had the option to receive, if necessary, transfers from the general budget;
however, at the time of writing, fiscal year 13, this had not been necessary.
	           161. To exercise the delegated supervisory and control functions for the enter-
prises of the SEPI Group, SEPI applies the following two management instruments:
•	   An integrated planning and oversight mechanism called the Integrated Planning, 	
	    Follow-up, and Monitoring System. This is a series of formal instruments through 	
	    which SEPI exercises strategic economic and financial control of the management 	
	    of the companies and foundations in its group. Through this system SEPI applies 	
	    homogeneous guidelines to SOEs for accounting, fiscal, and financial issues. It is 	
	    implemented in three stages; (i) oversight of the companies’ budgetary process, 	
	    (ii) periodic control (monthly or quarterly) of budget execution, and (iii) required 	
	    reporting of companies’ results and a final evaluation of the companies’ perfor-		
	    mance.
•	   A series of regulations which govern the relationship between SEPI and its compa	
	    nies, which also establish functions and operations executed by the companies. 	
	    These regulations must be submitted for previous authorization by SEPI’s gover-	
	    ning bodies (Administrative Council and Directorate Committee).




89 In some cases those operations require a previous administrative authorization. Also, the maximum debt level for
SEPI is determined annually in the government’s Budget Law.




                                                                                                             127      The Case of Spain
II.6.3                              Accountability and Oversight Mechanisms
     Statements of Objectives & Planning Documents
     	         162. Management/performance contracts. The General Budget Law assigns
     SEPI the responsibility of monitoring SOE performance. Generally, the companies are
     required to meet some minimum performance levels (in terms of rate of return, service
     provision, etc.) set by SEPI at the first stage of the Planning, Control and Monitoring
     System. The conditions are laid out in performance contracts between each company
     and SEPI. At the end of the year, SEPI reviews the information provided by the firm,
     evaluates each company’s success in achieving these objectives, and, based on this per-
     formance, establishes the course of action for the following year. Detailed information
     about performance indicators is published in the companies’ websites and frequently
     incorporated into the companies’ annual reports. The General Comptroller and Account-
     ing Directorate’s (Intervención General de la Administración del Estado - IGAE) also in-
     cludes information about the companies’ performance in the report Empresas Estatales:
     Informe Provisional, but with some lag.90
     	         163. Annual and multi-annual budgeting formulation and approval. At the be-
     ginning of each fiscal year, SOEs are required to prepare an Annual Operative Plan (Plan
     Operativo Annual - POA) and a four-year projected budget (Plan a Largo; PL) for SEPI’s
     approval. The POA also lays out the objectives for each company, the basis for the appli-
     cation of the incentive system (this is a variable portion of the salary) for the managers
     of the companies, and submits these to the Directive Committee of SEPI for approval.
     Once the POAs and PLs of all companies have been compiled, the Multi-Annual Action
     Plan (Plan de Actuación Plurianual; PAP) of SEPI and its group is consolidated. It is then
     approved by the Administrative Council of SEPI and submitted to the Ministry of Finance
     for the preparation of the general budget. SEPI also prepares annually an operating and
     capital budget (for each company individually, and on a consolidated basis for the group
     as a whole), which is integrated into the general budget of the government in each bud-
     get cycle.


     Reporting: Monitoring of Performance & Ex Post Disclosure
     	        164. SEPI’s comprehensive “Integrated Planning, Follow-up and Monitoring
     System” constitutes the main reporting tool throughout the year, including ongoing
     and ex post reporting and review processes. The type of reports and their frequency are
     described in the table below.




     90 	 http://www.igae.pap.minhap.gob.es




         128
                        Table II.14: Types of Reports and Frequency

 Type                    Documents                             Frequency

 Ex Ante                 POA (Annual Operative Plan),          Annually
                         PL (Long Term Projected Budget,
                         for 4 years)
 Ongoing                 POA and PL monthly and                Monthly/Quarterly
                         quarterly execution report

 Ex Post                 Annual Comprehensive Report           Annually
                         (business trends, performance,
                         financial statements, proposed
                         targets and actions for next
                         year)




	         165. Budget execution. SEPI performs regular (monthly and quarterly) assess-
ments regarding the level of POA-PL budget execution, sector trends, the level of prog-
ress in the implementation of planned activities, and monitoring of follow-up indica-
tors. The type of oversight exerted by SEPI is less administrative and more managerial,
focused on results and on increasing the competitiveness and profitability of the SOE
portfolio. This approach facilitates significant management autonomy within the SOEs,
and SEPI’s role is more focused on supervision and authorization of strategic decisions
and actions. SEPI also submits annually to Congress and publishes its Annual Report,
which presents the consolidated budget execution of all SOEs under its supervision.
	         166. Other key SOE reports. At the end of the fiscal year, SOEs are required to
provide a comprehensive annual report to SEPI. As part of this global evaluation, which
is submitted for approval to the Directive Committee of SEPI, it is determined which
proposals will be submitted for authorization to the Administrative Council of SEPI. This
includes proposals on functions and operations of the companies, which subsequently
will be submitted to the respective General Shareholder Meetings. Furthermore, SEPI
evaluates the work of the management team of the enterprises during the past fiscal
year. Specifically, the achievement of the objectives set for the companies in the POA-PL
are used for the application of the incentive system (that is, the award of a variable por-
tion of the salary to the management teams).


SOEs Boards of Directors and Management
	         167. As established in Law 5/1996 (Art 15), SEPI is headed by a President
and its Administrative Council (Consejo de Administración). The President of SEPI is
appointed by the government, as nominated by the Ministry of Finance and Public Ad-
ministration, and is considered a high-level position. His or her remuneration is set by




                                                                                      129     The Case of Spain
the government. The board of directors is composed of the president and a maximum
of 15 board members, who themselves nominate up to two vice-presidents from among
their number.91 The council members are nominated by the MHAP based on proposals by
other ministries. Usually, the counsels are political designees holding high level public
posts (State Secretaries Undersecretaries and General Directors) and represent the min-
istries linked to the activity of the company. With the exception of the president and the
vice president, the members of SEPI’s board do not receive compensation for attending
the board meetings.




                                  Figure II.10: SEPI’s Organizational Structure



                                                     President
                 Director of the Office
                    of the President
                                                                                        External audit
                                                                                           Director
                   Communications
                      director




      Director                                         Vice                                     General Secretary
      General                                        President                                     and Coucil



                                Communications
                                                                   Defense Division
                                Division                                                            Legal Affairs
                                                                                                      Director




                                Energy Division                   Food and
                                                                  Enviroment Division




	       168. In general, the functioning of the boards of directors of public enterprises
is regulated by public commercial law92 and does not have a specific body of regulation
that applies to it. Some characteristics common to the boards of SOEs under SEPI are
laid out below:

•	    Board Composition: State representation in the board of SOEs is proportional 	
	     to the ownership of the SOE. The most common proportion of public participation
	     is 100%, sometimes accumulated through different public institutions, e.g. partici	
	     pation by the Ministries of Industry or Agriculture.


91 	 In early 2013, there was only one vice president.
92 	 Through the Ley de Sociedades de Capital (Real Decreto Legislativo 1/2012, July 2) and Normativa reguladora del
Registro Mercantil.




    130
	   There are no independent board members, with the exception of some of the SOEs
	   in the SEPI Group which have private minority shareholders represented 		
	   at the board. Also, in some enterprises, unions have representation on the board 	
	   by agreement with the particular enterprise. In 2012, the government established
	   by law a maximum number of board members for all SOES.
• 	 Nomination: The members of the boards of public enterprises under SEPI are
	   typically proposed by the relevant ministry, and then officially appointed to the 	
	   respective boards by the Ministry of Finance and Public Administration.
	   SEPI’s board then communicates this appointment to the board of directors of 		
	   the respective company.
•	  Meetings and Regulation: The legal framework governing commercial enterprises 	
	   requires the boards to meet regularly and at least for the discussion of the annual 	
	   statements.
•	  Board Evaluation: There is no formal board evaluation.
•	  Remuneration: Board members are not remunerated, except stipends to defray the 	
	   cost of attendance. In the cases of high-ranking officials (General Director and 		
	   above), the remuneration is not received by the member of the board, but 		
	   transferred to the Treasury.
	       169. In the case of very senior management staff (President, Vice President,
and SEPI Executives), the government sets their maximum remuneration. As explained
above, the president of SEPI is the only manager directly appointed by the government.
The directors of the SOEs are nominated by their respective boards, based on the pro-
posal of SEPI’s Board. SEPI and SOE management staff members are recruited through
the same mechanisms as other private companies, and the lower-level employees of
SEPI and its enterprises are hired through public recruitment processes.


Auditing of SOEs
	        170. SOEs are subject to the same auditing mechanisms as the rest of the public
sector. External audits on economic and financial issues are performed by the Office of
the State Comptroller (IGAE) and the Court of Auditors (Tribunal de Cuentas); and audits
on labor relations are performed by specific commissions (Comisión de Seguimiento de
la Negociación Colectiva and Comisión Interministerial de Retribuciones - CECIR). As a
result, the companies are subject to very stringent audit mechanisms.
	        171. The legislative branch also exercises an oversight function in several differ-
ent ways. One the one hand through the legislative committees’ ad hoc oversight. Both
legislative chambers and/or any parliamentary group may request the presence of SEPI
and SOE representatives to discuss issues related to their performance. Furthermore
through financial oversight; SEPI and the SOEs are required to submit economic and
financial information to the legislature on a regular basis. Finally, the European Union,
through specialized committees, controls SOEs’ performance on issues concerning sec-
tor-specific policies and anti-competitive practices.




                                                                                        131    The Case of Spain
II.6.4                                                                                    Reform Initiatives
     	       172. Over the last two decades, the role and importance of SOEs in Spain de-
     creased notably due to the privatization process that started in the early 1980s. Be-
     tween 1982 and 1996 public stakes in 70 enterprises were sold, and in some cases the
     state pulled out completely. The privatization process accelerated in 1996, when the
     government approved a cabinet agreement which organized and regulated the proce-
     dures for the selling of shares in public companies. Between 1996 and 2009, shares
     from 60 companies were sold, bringing in some 34 million euros. These sales included
     significant disinvestments in all major state monopolies and affected some of the larg-
     est national companies in Spain.93
     	       173. The creation of SEPI and the consolidation of results-based SOE oversight
     (1997-2004). The reform of SOE oversight in the 1990s and 2000s has been led by both
     the Ministry of Industry and the Ministry of Finance. SEPI was created as a public-law
     entity by decree in 1995; its status was then protected by law in 1996. A notable event
     in the evolution of SEPI was the decision by the government to restructure the public
     enterprise sector through government agreements94. Since then, and through succeed-
     ing legal reforms, other enterprises and corporations were transferred to SEPI and given
     possession of minority participation in some companies in strategic sectors (electricity,
     gas).
     	       174. SEPI was put in charge of supervising a portfolio of SOEs that supposedly
     performed under competitive and unregulated markets. To succeed in that environ-
     ment, SEPI requested the firms to implement a results-based management focus. Within
     this framework, the industrial policies remained under the control of the line ministries,
     the regulating authority was implemented by technically savvy autonomous regulating
     agencies, and SEPI was in charge of supervising the financial management and perfor-
     mance of the supervised firms.
     	       175. The key legislation reforming SOE oversight in Spain was promoted by Eu-
     ropean Union directives which were in turn incorporated into the government’s strategy.
     Initiated by the Ministry of Finance and approved by Congress, the new legal framework
     for SOE oversight established lines of accountability, and mechanisms for enforcing
     these; both from SOEs to SEPI, and from SEPI to the rest of government, including the
     Ministry of Finance, the Wage Bill Inter-Ministerial Committee, the Advisory Commit-
     tee on Privatizations, Parliament, and the Court of Accounts/Auditors. The progressive
     reform of SOE oversight took almost two decades (1983-2001) to complete the transfor-
     mation of the institutional regime into a results-based management framework govern-
     ing SOEs in competitive markets.
     	       176. The European Union has played a fundamental role in pushing forward re-
     form of SOE portfolio management. During the 1980s and 1990s, European institutions
     and treaties transformed the role of the state in the economy. New directives and agen-
     cies were established to ensure the protection of the single market and guarantee fair
     competition within sectors, which forced EU members to adapt their national legisla-
     tion. The resulting EU guidelines enacted in the last two decades promoted the restruc-



     93 	These companies remain large, and have grown to become large-scale multinationals such as Repsol (oil production
     and distribution), Telefónica (telecoms), Iberia (national airlines), ARCELOR-MITTAL (steel industries), Endesa (electric-
     ity production and commercialization), Red Eléctrica de España (electricity distribution), and ALTADIS (tobacco produc-
     tion and distribution).
     94 	Through the Ley de Patrimonio de las Administraciones Públicas (Ley 33/2003, de 3 de noviembre).




         132
turing (or privatization) of uncompetitive SOEs, the removal of subsidies for SOEs, the
establishment of a results-based approach to SOE management, and the rationalization
of regulatory frameworks. Finally, the EU also added an additional layer of public over-
sight of SOEs, by stipulating that SEPI, the public holding, would be accountable to EU
agencies in charge of sectoral regulation and the guarantee of fair competition.
	       177. The latest reforms of the public enterprise sector have been taken up by
the government in 2010 and 2012. These efforts have included the approval of regula-
tion establishing the close-out of some companies and the sale of others, as well as the
transfer of an important SOE to SEPI – the postal company Grupo Correos y Telégrafos in
March 2012.
	       178. The analysis here has focused on those companies under SEPI oversight.
However, an important number of SOEs in the Spanish public enterprise sector remain
under direct ownership of the central administration, either through the MF or sector
ministries. The main challenge for the government in the area of corporate governance
is to continue developing and adopting measures that could benefit a much broader set
of SOEs.




                                                                                    133    The Case of Spain
                                      The Case of Uruguay
                                                                                                             II.7




II.7.1                                                     State-Owned Enterprises Portfolio
         	           179. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) play a major role in Uruguay.95 A few
         key items of information confirm their relevance in the economy. SOEs employ around
         35,000 people (2.3 percent of total employment in Uruguay and 16.8 percent of public
         sector employment); SOE aggregate current expenditures are approximately 12 percent
         of GDP; and total capital expenditures amount to roughly 1.7 percent of GDP.96
         	           180. There are about 15 significant SOEs in Uruguay that operate in both com-
         petitive and non-competitive markets. Their activities are concentrated in the oil, elec-
         tricity, telecommunications, financial, water and sanitation, and infrastructure sectors.
         The six largest SOEs in Uruguay (measured in terms of employment and current expen-
         ditures) represent nearly 70 percent of the SOE sector. Table 8.1 below shows several
         indicators that describe the relevance of these companies in the economy.97 Current ex-
         penditures of the state-owned oil company Administración Nacional de Combustibles,
         Alcoholes y Portland (ANCAP) amount to 6 percent of Uruguay’s GDP and almost 30
         percent of central government current spending; in the electricity sector, current ex-
         penditures of the State Power & Electricity Utility (Administración Nacional de Usinas y
         Transmisiones Eléctricas - UTE) are approximately 2.6 percent of GDP and 16 percent of
         government spending; and in the telecommunication sector, ANTEL’s current expendi-
         tures represent 1.7 percent of GDP and 10 percent of government spending. Aggregate
         expenditures by SOEs operating in other sectors represent around 2 percent of GDP.




         95 	This work only focuses on SOEs linked to the central government and regulated by public law (autonomous entities
         and decentralized services). There are no subnational public enterprises.
         96 	The figures are for 2010 and were calculated using official data obtained from the Ministry of Finance.
         97 	 Additional information about these companies is shown in Annex F.




          134
     Table II.15: Significance of the Six Largest SOEs in Urugu-
                                                              ay

                                                                                                     SOE
                                                                                   Current Expenditures
    Name                                          Sector                Employment       As % of
                                                                                                   Gov. Current
                                                                                           GPD
                                                                                                   Expend. (*)

    Administración Nacional de       Oil                                     2353          6.0            29
    Combustibles, Alcohol y Pórtland
    (ANCAP)

    Administración Nacional de                    Electricity                6150          2.6            16
    Usinas y Transmisiones Eléctri-
    cas (UTE)

    Administración Nacional de                    Telecommuni-               6034          1.7            10
    Telecomunicaciones (ANTEL)                    cations

    Banco República (BROU)                        Finance                    4279          1.1             5
    Obras Sanitarias del Estado                   Water and                  4605          0.6             4
    (OSE)                                         Sanitation

    Administración Nacional de                    Infrastructure             1087          0.2             1
    Puertos (ANP)                                 (port adminis-
                                                  tration)

    TOTAL                                                                   24508          12.1           65
(*) Central Government current expenditures




	                  Ownership Function: Institutional Framework and
                                                                                                                         II.7.2
                                                       Organization
	       181. The ownership function of SOEs98 in Uruguay is based on a hybrid model,
which combines several aspects of both the centralized and dual arrangements. The
Office of Budgeting and Planning (Oficina de Planeamiento y Presupuesto - OPP), along
with the Ministry of Finance (MF), sector ministries, and, in some cases, other autono-
mous control agencies, are jointly responsible for SOE oversight.
	       182. SOEs enjoy some budgetary and financial autonomy. However, they still
report all economic and financial decisions and ongoing SOE business documentation
to the OPP, which is in charge of the public sector general planning system. The OPP is
directly responsible to the President of the Republic; its director holds the same rank as


98 	 These entities are collectively referred to as Entes Autónomos y Servicios Descentralizados del Dominio Comercial
e Industrial del Estado, Article 221 of the Constitution.




                                                                                                                135       The Case of Uruguay
     a minister, and maintains direct communication with ministries and other government
     entities. Its director, however, in contrast to other ministers, is exempt from parliamen-
     tary questioning. OPP advises the president on various economic and technical issues,
     and jointly with the MF and the sector ministries is responsible for the national budget
     and assessing budget performance.
     	        183. OPP is directly linked to SOEs through its Department of Public Enterpris-
     es (Departamento de Empresas Públicas, DEP).99 The main tasks of this department
     include: (i) to generate budgetary and policy guidelines100 that SOEs should follow in
     the preparation of their budgets; (ii) to examine and approve the budgets proposed by
     SOEs; (iii) to collaborate in the preparation and monitoring of management agreements
     signed between the Executive and SOEs; (iv) to examine SOEs’ fee structures; (v) to
     modify and adjust SOEs’ organizational and compensation structures; (vi) to examine
     SOEs’ balance sheets; (vii) to assess SOEs’ investment projects whose costs exceed a
     certain minimum threshold; and (viii) to collaborate in the preparation and monitoring
     of financial programs.
     	        184. The MF also plays a role in the supervision of SOEs. MF sets, through its
     Macroeconomic Advising Unit, the macroeconomic guidelines that the OPP (and, conse-
     quently, SOEs) should follow in developing their investment plans. Given the significant
     fiscal impact of SOEs’ aggregate operating results, and to ensure that SOEs work within
     the government’s financial program established by both the five-year budget plan and
     the annual budget reviews (Rendición de Cuentas), MF along with OPP (through DEP),
     also monitors the financial position of SOEs on a monthly basis.


II.7.3                                Accountability and Oversight Mechanisms
     Statements of Objectives & Planning Documents
     	       185. Management/performance contracts. The use of management and perfor-
     mance contracts in Uruguay is still in early stages of development. The Constitution of
     Uruguay (articles 221 and 231) establishes general guidelines for the use of performance
     indicators and performance agreements, and approves the use of a variable pay scale
     depending on performance. The government, through DEP, has been working lasting re-
     cent years on the implementation of performance agreements between the government
     and those SOEs101 which receive subsidies to their general income. The contracts drafted
     by DEP specify a series of financial and non-financial or operating performance indica-
     tors, such as indicators that assess the provision of services, and indicators that evalu-
     ate internal management (human resources, control systems, technical aspects, etc.).
     These contracts also include penalties for poor performance: the board may be pressed
     to resign, board members may not be entitled to incentive payments, and the govern-
     ment may deny financial assistance and/or support for access to external financing. Fur-
     thermore, DEP is developing a variable compensation system which implies improved
     compensation subject to the achievement of global, sectoral, and individual goals.
     	       186. Budget formulation and approval. Uruguay’s National Constitution and its

     99 	 OPP’s activities focus on five main areas: Public Budgeting, Public Enterprises, Regional Policies, Development
     Strategies and Investment Policies, and State Management and Performance Evaluation.
     100 The policy guidelines are determined by the executive through sector ministries and MF.
     101 Article 752, Law 18.719 requires of the use of performance agreements. The law also establishes that these con-
     tracts should be supervised by OPP and MF.




         136
associated current legal framework allow for a multiplicity of budget formulation and
approval mechanisms, depending on which entity is involved.102 SOEs are considered
“decentralized services,” and as such, they prepare their own budget annually, which
is then submitted for evaluation to OPP. Once the evaluation report has been prepared,
the budget proposal is approved by the executive branch which requires signatures
from the appropriate sectoral ministry, the Ministry of Finance, and the President of
the Republic. The Parliament intervenes only to resolve eventual disagreements that
may arise in the course of this approval process. Those disagreements could stem from
various interests of the executive branch or the legal mandate of the Court of Auditors.
If within 40 days, the Parliament does not issue a statement, then it is presumed that
observations of the Court of Auditors are lifted, and that any observations issued by the
executive branch will prevail.
	       187. Multi-annual investing and planning. Every SOE is required by law103 to
prepare long-term investment and financing plans. These reports should contain an
explanation of plans, goals, and projects, extending through the current government’s
mandate. However, OPP requests SOEs to prepare five-year plans on a rolling annual
basis. This information is submitted to OPP and the corresponding sector ministry for
approval. A similar approval mechanism applies to ongoing investments, contracts, as-
set sales, and tariff structures.


Reporting: Monitoring of Performance & Ex post Disclosure
	       188. Budget execution reports. All SOEs submit annual financial statements, in-
cluding information on budgeted expenditures, revenues, assets and liabilities to the
Accounting General Office (Contaduría General de la Nación - CGN), OPP, and the Court
of Accounts (Tribunal de Cuentas de la República - TCR104), Uruguay’s Supreme Audit
Institution. Additionally, given the fiscal importance of SOEs operating results, there is
continuous internal reporting on actual financial results between each SOE, the Ministry
of Finance, and OPP.105 SOEs publish at the companies’ website their annual financial
statements, net worth, and aide memoires.106
	       189. SOEs are subject to a uniform accounting regime, essentially the same as
that applied to private companies, including the requirement to report according to the
2003 version of IFRS. SOEs in Uruguay enjoy special privileges under the Constitution,
including operational autonomy vis-à-vis the government. They are governed by stat-
utes or bylaws specific to each entity and also fall within the scope of the laws on public
sector accounting and auditing. Article 211 F) of the Constitution empowers the Court of
Accounts with accounting standard-setting authority in relation to SOEs. In December
2002, the TCR issued Ordinance no. 81, Preparation and Presentation of Financial State-


102 For example, the Constitution requires a 5-year budget for the central government and a yearly budget for SOEs
and other decentralized entities. However, Law 16211, Art. 4, establishes that decentralized services and autonomous
entities (with the exception of BROU, BCU and BPS) are responsible for preparing an “informative report” containing
information about plans and goals for the following five years. For SOEs, Article 221 of the Constitution of the Republic
is applied.
103 See previous footnote.
104 The TCR is the supreme audit institution and is independent of the executive branch of government. The President
of the TCR is appointed by the legislative branch.
105 Budget execution is monitored using the information collected through an integrated financial information system
(SIIF). SIIF allows OPP and MF to examine SOEs’ financial situation and assess their compliance with the government
financial program on a monthly basis.
106 For example, information on ANCAP can be found at http://www.ancap.com.uy/




                                                                                                                   137      The Case of Uruguay
ments, which mandates accounting standards. The upshot of this ordinance is that, with
the exceptions already mentioned, in practice SOEs report under the 2003 version of IFRS.
	       190. The 2006 Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC)
examines reporting practices followed by a sample of four SOEs. The report focuses on
financial statements audited under Ordinance 81. The report concludes that the overall
presentation of SOEs’ 2004 financial statements is good. The following detailed com-
ments were also indicated:
•	  Comparative information: Unlike most private companies reviewed, Uruguayan 		
	   SOE financial statements present comparative information and had a very user-		
	   friendly lay out.
•	  Audit reports: Two companies did not publish their audit reports even though such 	
	   audits did take place.
•	  A number of disclosures required by IFRS were missing: cash and cash equiva-		
	   lents, employee benefits, details of foreign exchange gains and losses, interest- 	
	   rate for borrowing costs capitalized, compensation for management, risk 		
	   management policies (IAS 32), and relevant explanations on contingent liabilities.
•	  Impairment of assets: Except in one case, the financial statements did not indicate 	
	   whether assets had been tested for impairment, and if loss of value had been reco-	
	   gnized.
•	  Other: In one case, loans were not carried at amortized cost and other financial 		
	   instruments were not measured at fair value, as required by IAS 39. Moreover, one 	
	   company made no tax allocation (in equity) to a transaction recognized in equity.


Auditing of SOEs
	       191. Under Uruguay’s Constitution, the body charged with the annual control
over SOE financial management and reporting is the TCR. TCR regulations mandate
the use of international standards of accounting and audit.107 Its role has traditionally
focused on verifying the legal conformity of expenditures with budget appropriations
made by the Congress. TCR does not have the ability to sanction SOEs or their auditors;
its monitoring activity is limited to pointing out problems uncovered by the audit.
	       192. Most SOEs in Uruguay hire independent professional firms to conduct an
external and independent audit even though they are not required by the companies’
bylaws. The majority of SOEs choose to have their financial statements reviewed by one
of the four largest international audit firms to assure better compliance of the audit with
international standards.108 More recently, the TCR has begun to conduct external audits
of SOE financial statements as well. Although some level of coordination exists between
the TCR and private auditing firms, there is much room for improving their coordination.
One of the main issues has to do with the timing of TCR’s audits, which usually end later
than those of their private counterparts.109 The independent external auditor’s opinion
and report are published by the SOEs at their websites, alongside the annual financial
statements. Publication of audit reports in the official gazette, the “Diario Oficial,” is
mandated by law.110

107 Ordenanza 81 of the Tribunal de Cuentas (TCR).
108 KPMG, Deloitte, PricewaterhouseCoopers, and Ernst & Young are the largest four audit firms. It should also be
noted that, as in many other countries in the region, these international accounting firms tend to dominate the market
for audit services in Uruguay. SOEs typically contract external auditors for two- to three-year engagements, with the
option to renew.
109 TCR’s monitoring activity is limited to pointing out problems they have uncovered in the course of conducting an
audit; it lacks the ability to impose sanctions on SOEs.
110 http://www.impo.com.uy


 138
SOEs Boards of Directors and Management
	       193. Article 185 of the Constitution establishes that state-owned industrial and
commercial services are to be managed by boards. The article also states that board
members shall be appointed by the President in in consultation with the Council of Min-
isters, and approved by the Senate.111 In practice, the appointment of SOE board mem-
bers has usually been shaped by political concerns, hindering the implementation of
effective accountability arrangements in these organizations.
	       194. SOE boards were previously all composed of five members, but some com-
panies have recently modified their bylaws to reduce this number to three. Traditionally,
the political arrangement is that the majority party in Parliament appoints 60 percent
of members, and the opposition appoints the rest. Boards are majority or 100 percent
executive, which has some shortcomings. First, top management is changed with each
government election, and has a limited opportunity to specialize in the job. Second, it is
not possible for the board to exercise the usual oversight function on management.
	       195. Most SOE boards in Uruguay do not form specialized committees. There are
some exceptions, such as the Bank of the Republic (Banco de la República Oriental del
Uruguay - BROU), whose board has planning, credit approval, and audit committees.
In general, the respective sector ministries and government agencies wield consider-
able influence over decision-making by SOE boards. Boards do not seem to fully engage
with, or benefit from, their relationship with auditors. For example, directors do not
engage in regular contact with the external audit team, delegating instead such commu-
nication to the government audit agency, do not actively monitor the accounting, audit,
and control processes.




	                                                                                 Reform Initiatives                     II.7.4
	         196. Since 1992, a series of reforms were introduced in the Uruguayan public
sector, including the privatization of several SOEs. At the same time, other reforms were
proposed to improve accountability and transparency in the public sector, including
SOEs. These included the implementation of a program oriented budgeting including
the definition of precise objectives and goals, and performance agreements, and vari-
able remuneration scales depending on performance.
	         197. However, most of these reforms have not addressed the fact that SOEs are
subject to public sector law with the consequence that several SOEs have created cor-
porations operating under private law to achieve their objectives. Examples include the
construction of a sanitation and rainwater system in Ciudad de la Costa, a regasification
plant, and an energy conversion project with Brazil. In the last few years, Uruguay has
initiated a drive to boost SOE efficiency by introducing a few important changes:
•	   SOEs are now subject to international accounting and reporting standards;
•	   It is now mandatory that SOEs undergo an external audit;
•	    Some monopoly rights have been relaxed; and
•	    The DEP has started to design a model to systematically evaluate the performance 	
	    of all SOEs.


111 National Constitution article 187. Directors are appointed by the Executive Branch with 3/5ths approval by Parlia-
ment.




                                                                                                                139       The Case of Uruguay
Challenges Ahead
	       198. The level of professionalism of SOE board members and the follow-up of
audit recommendations are two areas that require further attention. The level of profes-
sionalism of SOE board members could be strengthened even further. Effective boards
are difficult to achieve, even in the private sector, and require training, legally binding
imposition of duties and liabilities, and business expertise. The Uruguayan government
has recently begun to address this issue by supporting the appointment of SOE board
members with a higher degree of technical formation. It is also extremely important to
follow up on all significant issues reported by auditors, and monitor their timely resolu-
tion. Mechanisms should be introduced to ensure that observations raised by auditors
(internal and external) are properly and promptly addressed by SOEs.
	       199. Other more general issues related to SOE ownership structure present
some challenges that would also need to be addressed. SOEs’ decisions are sometimes
constrained by political factors; this undermines SOE governance, and may lead to
sub-optimal outcomes in terms of performance and competitiveness. Additionally, the
fact that several ministries or other government agencies exercise authority over SOEs
may result in the issuance of conflicting objectives for these countries. As a result, SOE
management may not receive a clear set of performance goals, and therefore may not
be held accountable for the company’s performance. Lastly, the government typically
performs several roles vis-à-vis SOEs (owner, regulator, supplier, customer, financier,
etc.). These roles need to be disentangled, and insulated from one another. Other coun-
tries have addressed this issue by creating a single government agency in which SOE
oversight (and frequently the ownership function as well) is consolidated. This agency
is empowered to appoint the board of directors, as well as to exercise control over the
SOE’s business.




140
141   The Case of Uruguay
                         Leading State Owned
                         Enterprises: The Cases
                          of the Panama Canal
                                  and PEMEX
                                                                                   II.8

II.8.1   	
                                                                               Introduction
                 200. This chapter examines the models of corporate governance adopted by two
         large SOEs: the Panama Canal and PEMEX, the Mexican state-owned oil company. Even
         though these two companies operate in completely different sectors, both play leading
         roles in their respective economies: the Panama Canal generates revenues that amount
         to 8 percent of the country’s GDP and represent 10 percent of government’s revenue,
         while PEMEX’s sales are nearly 9 percent of Mexico’s GDP and generate one third of
         government revenues.
         	       201. Given their economic significance, the performance of the companies is un-
         der permanent public scrutiny, and the assessment typically falls on the models of cor-
         porate governance chosen to organize their activities. At the same time, and due to the
         characteristics of the markets where they operate, these companies also face significant
         global exposure, which obliges them to implement corporate governance practices con-
         sistent with international standards.
         	       202. The practices adopted by these two companies show some clear differ-
         ences. Moreover, each model presents a few novel features. For instance, the Panama
         Canal’s management is supported by the expert opinion of an Advisory Board. This Ad-
         visory Board complements the work of the Board of Directors, and is formed by highly
         recognized international professionals in the area of global maritime transportation.
         PEMEX, for its part, was legally authorized in 2008 to issue “citizen bonds,” which are
         debt securities that grant their holders a return linked to the entity’s performance. The
         implementation of this type of financial instrument is intended to, among other things,
         encourage citizens’ interest in the company, and, consequently, to add another layer of
         oversight to the company’s supervising structure.
         	       203. Given the nature of the SOEs involved, the organization of this chapter
         slightly departs from the previous ones. Section 9.2 characterizes the institutional
         framework that supervises and regulates the activities of the Panama Canal, and briefly
         describes some of the corporate governance practices implemented in that company,
         focusing on accountability, transparency, information disclosure, and audit. Section 9.3
         presents the case of PEMEX and follows a similar organization.
         	


             142
                                            The Case of the Panama Canal                           II.8.2
Background
	       204. The Panama Canal is approximately 80 kilometers long and connects the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. It first opened on August 14, 1914, and provides transit
service to vessels of all nations: approximately 14 thousand vessels navigate the Canal
every year. Commercial transportation activities through the Canal represent approxi-
mately five percent of the world trade. Most of the traffic through the Canal moves be-
tween the east coast of the United States and the Far East. Movements between Europe
and the South American coast constitute the second major trade route using the water-
way. The Canal is also vital for the development and trade of neighboring countries of
Central and South America.
	       205. The Canal makes various significant contributions to Panama’s economy.
Its workforce is composed of approximately 9,000 employees; traffic through the Canal
generates a net income that represents 6.2 percent of Panama’s GDP; a fraction of that
net income is directly transferred to the National Treasury (an amount that represents
3.9 percent of the GDP or 8.0 of the central government’s revenue); it also contributes
to the government’s finances through taxes, social security tax, and the educational in-
surance tax (0.84 percent of GDP or 1.75 percent of the central government’s revenue);
and the Canal’s activities amount to 4 percent of the country’s total exports. Table 9.2.1
below summarizes these indicators.




     Table II.16: Economic Contribution of the Panama Canal
                                                    Source: Canal de Panamá, 2011 Annual Report.



                                                As % of GDP        As % of Gov. Revenue

 Net Income                                          6.20

  · Total Revenues                                   8.60

  · Total Expenses                                   2.40

 Direct Contribution to National Treasury            3.90                     8.00
 Indirect Contribution to National Trea-
                                                     0.84                     1.75
 sury
  · Income Tax                                       0.20                    0.45

  · Social Security                                  0.04                     0.08

  · Educational Insurance Tax                        0.60                     1.22

 Total Exports                                       4.00




                                                                                           143      The Case of the
                                                                                                    Panama Canal
Institutional and Organizational Framework
	        206. The Panama Canal constitutes an inalienable property of the Republic of
Panama, which means that it may not be sold, mortgaged, or transferred. The model of
corporate governance chosen to administer its operations includes:
•	   The Panama Canal Authority (Autoridad del Canal de Panamá - ACP) established
	    under Title XIV of the National Constitution of Panama (the ACP’s constitutional
	    mandate serves to protect it from political interferences);
•	   A Board of Directors formed and appointed in accordance with internationally re-
	    commended principles and standards;
•	   The Director of the Canal Authority is also the President of the Board of Directors, 	
	    holding the rank of Minister of State for Canal Affairs, and serving as the ACP’s
	    effective nexus with the government.
•	   A layer of management and administration that is independent of the board;
•	   An independent Advisory Board formed by Canal users, knowledgeable parties,
	    and specialists in maritime transportation.
	        207. Panama Canal Authority (ACP). The ACP is the entity that exercises the own-
ership function on behalf of the Government of Panama. Title XIV of the National Con-
stitution grants ACP an exclusive mandate to operate, administrate, manage, preserve,
maintain, and modernize the Canal, as well as its activities and related services. The
Organic Law of June 11, 1997, provided ACP with the legal tools to set up its organiza-
tion and operation. ACP is financially autonomous, owns its assets, and has the right to
administer them.
	        208. ACP is headed by an Administrator and a Deputy Administrator under the
supervision of a Board of Directors. The Administrator is the highest-ranking executive
officer and legal representative of the Authority, and is responsible for its administration
and the implementation of the policies and decisions of the Board of Directors. The Ad-
ministrator is appointed for a seven-year term, and may be re-elected for one additional
term.




144
                          Figure II.11: Organizational chart of the ACP


                                        Office of the Manager
                                                  CEO
                                               Manager




          Vicepresidency of Corporate
               Managment (CO)

                                                               Vice-presidency of
                                                              Legal Assistance (AJ)

          Vicepresidency of Corporate
             Communications (CC)




 Executive Vice-      Executive Vice-                         Executive Vice-          Executive Vice-
  presidency of        presidency of                           presidency of            presidency of
	 Enviroment,        Management and                            Planning and                Human
   Water, and          Finance (FA)                             Commercial             Resources (RH)
     Energy                                                  Development (ME)

	

                      Executive Vice-      Executive Vice-        Executive Vice-
                       presidency of        presidency of          presidency of
                      Operations (OP)        Information          Engineering and
                                            Technilogies           Systems, (IA)




                                                                Engineering Division




	       209. Board of Directors. The ACP Board is responsible for establishing policies
for the operation, improvement, and modernization of the Canal, as well as supervis-
ing its management. The board of directors is formed by eleven members, who are ap-
pointed as follows:
•	   Nine directors are appointed by the President of the Republic of Panama, with the 	
	    consent of the Cabinet Council, and ratified by an absolute majority of the mem-
	    bers 	of the Legislative Assembly;
•	   One director is designated by the legislature, and may be freely appointed or 		
	    removed by that branch;
•	   The President of the Republic designates one director, who chairs the board of
	    directors. The director has the rank of Minister of State for Canal Affairs. The Canal 	
	    Affairs Minister attends Cabinet Council meetings, having the right to voice and
	    vote; and
•	  The directors serve for nine years.


                                                                                                    145   The Case of the
                                                                                                          Panama Canal
	        210. To ensure independence from political influence, members of the first board
of directors were appointed for overlapping terms.
	        211. Advisory Board. In December 1999, the Panama Canal Authority established
the advisory board. The advisory board serves as a consultative body for the Canal en-
terprise. Its main responsibility is to provide guidance and recommendations to the
Board of Directors and the Canal administration. The Advisory Board is formed by highly
recognized professionals with broad experience in maritime transportation, trade, busi-
ness, telecommunications, construction and development, academia, and the banking
sector. There are no citizenship requirements for members of the advisory board: both
Panamanian and non-Panamanian citizens are eligible.
	        212. The Panama Canal Authority Board of Directors makes the appointment of
the Advisory Board members for an initial period of two years. This period can be ex-
tended at the discretion of the board of directors. The advisory board meets at least
once a year, at the request of the board of directors.
Accountability, Transparency, and Disclosure of Information
	        213. The good economic performance of the Panama Canal is based, among
other things, on the implementation of key accountability tools. Those tools include a
reliable accounting system, a clearly defined financial planning and budgeting process,
high reporting standards, an adequate risk management policy, and effective oversight
mechanisms.
	        214. Accounting System. The accounting system includes the necessary internal
controls to assure that assets are protected; disbursements are duly approved and sup-
ported; revenues applicable to the assets and operations of the authority are charged
and accounted for properly; and financial reports are reliable and timely.
	        215. Financial Planning. The administration operates under a regime of planning
and financial administration for a period of three years, with annual implementation and
control. However, given the nature of the activities developed by the company, longer
projection period are usually considered at the planning stage. The Administrator orga-
nizes and coordinates the marketing strategy and marketing of the Canal in accordance
with the guidelines dictated by the board. New activities are backed by a cost-benefit
analysis, then approved by the board.
	        216. Budgeting. The Administrator prepares a draft of the annual budget accord-
ing to financial planning policies adopted by the board of directors. The Administration
also issues frequent reports about ongoing activities and projects, and the implemen-
tation of other aspects of the budget. The Administrator submits a draft of the annual
budget for consideration by the board at least five months before the beginning of the
next fiscal year. Once approved by the board, the Administration submits the draft for
consideration of the Cabinet Council at least three months prior to the beginning of the
next fiscal year. The budget is executed by the Administration, with internal control ex-
ercised by the authority designated by the Board of Directors. The Comptroller General
of the Republic only exercises ex-post control and audit functions.
	        217. Reporting. ACP requires the Canal administration to prepare (unaudited)
quarterly and semi-annual interim financial statements, and an annual report. The Board
of Directors reviews this information, and may require the preparation of additional
reports at their discretion. The annual report includes financial information (balance




146
sheet, income statement, cash flow report, and complementary notes, management re-
ports, and explanatory material describing the financial position of the company, as well
as the risks that it faces), and information about the Canal’s operations and projects. All
of these reports, in addition to the audit results for those subject to audit, are available
online at the Canal’s website.112
	        218. To increase accountability and promote transparency, the ACP also disclos-
es other types of information. For instance, the Administration reports salary and of
every employee, as well as foreign trips by staff and associated expenses. Furthermore,
the ACP publishes an ethics and conduct code for ACP and its staff (Reglamento de ética
y conducta de la Autoridad del Canal de Panamá). This document provides a compre-
hensive framework for a code of good conduct with clear definitions; overall ethical
principles, particularly regulations for top executives; a guide for conducting internal
activities as well as relations with external parties; and other information such as guide-
lines for the availability of reports. The ACP has made all these mechanisms available for
the public on its transparency section on its website.113
	        219. Risk Management. The Administration is also in charge of assessing the
financial outlook of the company. The Board of Directors is responsible for establish-
ing and monitoring risk management policies so that the Canal’s profitability can be
improved without significantly increasing risk. The main risks identified are:
•	  Market Risk: The Administration is authorized to sign hedging contracts to mitigate
	 exposure to volatility in commodity prices related to the operation, maintenance,
	 and expansion of the Canal and capital investments, interest rates, and exchange
	 rates.
•	  Credit Risk: The company is allowed to invest its funds in short-term investment
	 grade instruments.114 Article 43 of the Financial Regulations sets the parameters for
	 the investment of assets of the institution. It states that it should be done through-	
	 highly negotiable short term financial instruments and can only be placed in banks
	 and financial instruments, which have more than an international investment irri-
	 gation score of no less than a-2 by Standard & Poor’s, P-2 by Moody’s Bank Deposit
	 Ratings or F-2 by Fitch Ratings.
•	  Liquidity Risk: The company funds its regular operations and investments with its
	 own resources. As a consequence, it has to monitor on a daily basis the availability
	 of liquid funds to meet its cash obligations with suppliers, contractors, employees,
	 and the state.
•	  Operating Risk: The Panama Canal mitigates operating risk through internal con-
	 trols, quality management systems and routine audits performed by the Office of 	
	 the Auditor General, and the Comptroller General of the Republic. The internal con-	
	 trol system provides reasonable assurance that ACP properties, assets and other
	 financial resources are properly used and safeguarded to prevent waste, damage, 	
	 destruction, and misappropriation.



112 The reports can be found at http://www.pancanal.com/eng/fn/index.html
113 For more information refer to http://www.pancanal.com/esp/rend-ctas/index.html. The published list of salary
and representation allowances offers a full overview for each of the permanent and temporary workers at the ACP. It
includes their position, salary scale, and basic wage as well as representation costs. This information is supported by
a list that tracks official foreign trips and their costs on an annual basis (it contains information about destination,
purpose of the trip, duration, and cost of each trip). In addition to improving transparency, this list allows the ACP
administration to make a more accurate estimate of the money spent in traveling.
114 However, these funds may not be used to buy financial investment instruments from other public or private enti-
ties, Panamanian or foreign, or to grant loans to such entities or the national government.




                                                                                                                  147      The Case of the
                                                                                                                           Panama Canal
     Audit Mechanisms
     	       220. The internal monitoring and control system of the Canal is assigned to the
     Auditor General. The board of directors also hires external independent auditors. The
     Office of the Comptroller General is in charge of reviewing all acts (ex-post).
     	       221. Every year, the Administrator submits to the Board the company’s financial
     statements for their approval after review by an external auditor, within three months
     after the end of the respective fiscal year. Nonetheless, the financial statements (even
     if they have not been audited) are required to be made available to the Board upon
     request. The Board evaluates the accounting principles and estimates that have been
     employed by the Administrator in preparing the budget.
     	       222. The procedures for external audit follow international standards and the
     report includes an opinion about the accuracy of the financial statements. This provides
     a reasonable assurance that financial statements are free of significant errors, and are
     presented in accordance with international accounting standards. The Auditor General
     is responsible for evaluating the quality of the external audit.


II.8.3                                                                           The Case of PEMEX
     Background
     	       223. PEMEX holds exclusive rights to exploit and manage Mexico’s oil and gas
     reserves since the nationalization of these resources in 1938.115 From an institutional
     standpoint, PEMEX is a decentralized public body of the Mexican Government. It is a
     vertically integrated company, whose legal mandate is to commercialize oil and oil by-
     products, and to satisfy the national demand for oil.
     	       224. Since its creation, PEMEX has been one of the major pillars of the Mexi-
     can economy. For instance, PEMEX’s total sales amount to almost 9 percent of Mexico’s
     GDP; its exports represent 4 percent of the GDP; and it contributes to the government’s
     finances by generating 30 percent of the government’s total revenue. Moreover, PEMEX
     is the only producer of crude oil, petroleum and natural gas in the country; and the
     sole company responsible for the exploration and development of coal reserves. Fur-
     thermore, it is the only supplier of refined petroleum products (imports 40 percent of
     domestic consumption of gasoline); the main company in charge of hydrocarbon stor-
     age and transportation; and the sole provider of first-hand gas sales (regulated market);
     and
     	       225. PEMEX is one of the most important oil companies in terms of its level of
     production, exports, and crude oil reserves. Relative to other international companies,
     PEMEX ranks as follows:
     •	  11th producer of oil and gas;
     •	  3rd in crude oil production;
     •	  12th in oil reserves; 16th in gas production;
     •	  13th in refining capacity; and
     •	  35th gas reserves.




     115 PEMEX’s structure consists of a Corporate Office and four subsidiary entities: PEMEX Exploración y Producción
     (Exploration and Production), PEMEX Refinación (Refining), PEMEX Gas y Petroquímica Básica (Gas and Basic Petro-
     chemicals), and PEMEX Petroquímica (Petrochemical).




         148
Institutional and Organizational Framework
	        226. The 2008 Energy Reform. The year 2008 marks the beginning of a new era
for corporate governance at PEMEX. In October of 2008, the Mexican House of Rep-
resentatives approved seven initiatives, which together made up what is commonly
known as the Energy Reform. These initiatives defined new guidelines for the institu-
tional framework in which PEMEX should operate. One of the fundamental objectives of
the reform was to strengthen and modernize the company’s management by establish-
ing a new corporate governance structure consistent with international practices. Some
of the most salient features of the reform are:
•	   Strengthening corporate governance by granting the Board of Directors (Consejo de
	 Administración - CA) greater autonomy and decision power.
•	   Professionalization of the board by bringing in four independent directors
	 (consejeros profesionales).
•	   Creation of seven executive committees to support the board.
•	   Creation of an audit and performance evaluation committee (Comité de Auditoría y 	
	 Evaluación del Desempeño - CAED) that is responsible to the board.
•	   Issuance of “citizen bonds.” Citizen bonds are debt securities that grant their
	 holders a return based on the issuers performance. This tool served two functions: it
	 provided a new source of funding for PEMEX, while also introducing a new mecha-
	 nism of social oversight.
•	   The overhaul of regulation to grant PEMEX greater autonomy for taking on external 	
	 financing, and issuance of debt in international markets.
•	   Establishment of a special procurement system, lease, public works, and services, 	
	 which is more flexible, considers the complexities of the activities developed by 		
	 PEMEX.
	        227. Regulatory and institutional context. The Energy Reform also overhauled
the regulatory framework for PEMEX, and established more clear definition of respon-
sibilities for all actors involved in the sector. Under the new regulatory framework the
Energy Secretariat (Secretaría de Energía - SENER) is the chief authority for the sector
and is in charge of setting sectoral policy. The Secretary of Energy is the President of
Board and the Undersecretary of Hydrocarbons serves as a member of the Board. The
Finance and Public Credit Secretariat (Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público - SHCP)
determines the macroeconomic framework used in the company’s budget process, and
sets the goal for primary and financial balance that must be met each year. The SHCP is
represented on the board of the company by the Finance Minister.
	        228. The reform created the National Commission of Hydrocarbons (Comisión
Nacional de Hidrocarburos -CNH). The CNH is a technical, decentralized body of the
SENER, in charge of establishing technical guidelines for the exploration and production
of hydrocarbons.The Energy Regulatory Commission (Comisión Reguladora de Energía
- CRE) is responsible for the economic regulation of the “industrial processing” of hydro-
carbons. The CRE is a decentralized body of the SENER, with full technical, operational,
management, and decision-making autonomy. It is also a decentralized body of the
SENER. The Secretariat of Public Administration (Secretaría de la Función Pública - SFP)
sets the external auditor’s annual audit program and monitors its implementation. The
SFP reports to the Committee on Auditing and Performance Evaluation (CAED).
	        229. Board of Directors. The board of directors and a CEO lead and manage the




                                                                                     149     The Case of the
                                                                                             PEMEX
company. The Board of Directors of PEMEX is composed of 15 members: six representa-
tives designated by the Federal Government, including the President of the Board of Di-
rectors; five representatives of the National Oil Workers’ Union and four “professional”
board members.116
	       230. Professional board members must meet certain requirements. Members
are expected to have a deep knowledge of the oil and gas industry; relevant experi-
ence as public servants; proven technical skills; and strong academic credentials. The
appointment lasts for six years and can be renewed once. Professional board members
have also been granted a differentiated “vote”: at least two professional board mem-
bers should vote favorable on certain issues considered by the board. The appointment
of professional board members does not coincide with the presidential term. The board
meets every two months, with additional meetings taking place in extraordinary ses-
sions if necessary to discuss special topics.
	       231. The board’s activities are supported by seven committees: auditing and
performance evaluation (CAED); strategy and investment (CEI); procurement, leasing
and works and services (CAAOS); transparency and accountability (CTRC); remuneration
(CR); development and technological research (CDIT); environment and sustainable de-
velopment. State and professional board members participate in the committees, with
their representation set at the proportions shown in Table 9.3.




                                                          Table II.17: Board Committees
                                                                                                     Source: PEMEX

                                                                               Board Members
                        Committee
                                                                        State                   Professional

 Auditing and performance evaluation                            4                           3

 Strategy and investments                                       4                           1

 Lease, procurement, and works and services                     4                           1

 Transparency and accountability                                3                           1

 Remuneration                                                   3                           1

	 Technological research and development                        4                           1

 Environment and sustainable development                        3                           3


	
	       232. The representation in the committees is important for the decision-making
of the board or Administrative Council. The government representatives have the power
to influence decision-making as the resolutions are approved with a simple majority of


116 In 2013, the six government representatives designated by the executive branch are: the Secretary of Energy,
who chairs the board, the Sub-Secretary of fossil fuels (hidocarburos), the Secretary of Finance, the Sub-Secretary of
Revenues, the Secretary of Communications and Transport, and the Coordinator of Cabinets and Special Projects of the
Office of the President’s Office.




 150
the members present.
	        233. The board is responsible for a number of key functions, including:
•	  Approving the budget, business plan, and operating and financial programs of the 	
	 company;
•	  Reviewing and approving the annual report prepared by the CEO, which is then sub-
	 mitted to Congress; and
•	  Reviewing and approving the quarterly and annual financial statements, which are	
	 later made publicly available.
	        234. The law grants the board an important role in the operation of PEMEX,
which the board executes through its committees. However, the latter has complicated
even further the operations of the company: by allowing the board to be involved in dai-
ly decision-making processes, it has significantly hindered the company’s operations.
In many cases, the lack of business experience of some board members has caused
unnecessary delays in important and urgent decisions.
	        235. General Director or CEO. The President of Mexico appoints the Director
General or CEO of PEMEX, who, by law, must not be a member of the board. The board
cannot dismiss the CEO; it is limited to recommending removal, but the President of
Mexico or the board has the final say in whether to follow the board’s recommenda-
tion. The CEO is by law117 charged with the duties to “implement the strategic plan” and
“providing to the Ministry of Finance and Credit” budgetary and financial information
required”. The CEO is also in charge of PEMEX’s subsidiaries. In practice, however, there
is no clear separation of responsibilities between the CEO and the board. The rest of the
management team consists of four general directors (one for each of the four business
lines), and five corporate directors.


Accountability, Transparency, and Disclosure of Information
	        236. Budgeting process. The company initiates its budget cycle by presenting a
business plan and a budget draft to the board. The figures in the final draft are calcu-
lated employing estimates of domestic prices and levels of production supplied by the
company, while the government is supplies the macroeconomic framework and financial
and primary balance which inform the budget. Once approved by the board, the budget
draft is submitted for consideration by the SHCP. By this time, the SHCP sets the level of
domestic prices for the oil sector and current expenditures and investment ceilings. The
financing of investment projects which have been registered with and authorized by the
government are included in the budget at this stage. The final budget of the company is
approved by Congress jointly with the approval of the central government’s budget. The
drafting of the budget does not consider the use of performance indicators.
	
237. The final approval of the budget involves the following stages:




117 Law of Petróleos Mexicanos, 2008.




                                                                                      151    The Case of the
                                                                                             PEMEX
    Business Plan        Draft            Preliminary draft          Project               Internal
                         budget           sent to Congress           Final                 project
                         prepared
	
    The company          Proposed by      SHCP defines               Congress approves     Company
    formulates the       the company.     expenditure and            the budget (Revenue   reallocates
    budget tied to                        investment ceilings,       Law and the Federal   resources
    the Business Plan.   Sent for         and reviews and            Expenditure Budget)   as needed.
                         approval to      integrates the company’s
    The CA approves.     SENER and SHCP   budget into the federal
                                          budget.




	       238. The Energy Reform granted the board more budgetary flexibility. It can now
approve its own annual budget, subject to only two requirements: (i) the deficit cannot
exceed certain limits specified by the federal fiscal budget; and (ii) it cannot increase
spending on staff and pensions.
	       239. The new legal framework lays out a transition period of five years, to give a
greater budget and financial autonomy throughout the year. The company’s flexibility in
managing its finances is subject to previously established rules on the maintenance of
financial and primary balance.
	       240. Reporting. The company must prepare and submit the following reports:
•	  Quarterly financial statements: The reports should include total sales, tax pay-		
	 ments, rights and land use, cost of sales and operating expenses, oil and natural
  	 gas production, international trade, assets and liabilities, and short- and long- term
	 debt;
•	  Annual “Consolidated Financial Statements”, information about the external
	 auditor’s reports;
•	  Bi-monthly and annual reports on the company’s performance, prepared by the CEO
	 and submitted to the board;
•	  Quarterly and annual reports on the company’s performance, elaborated by the CEO
	 and submitted to the Congress; and
•	  Annual report on short- and long-term debt submitted to the Congress.
	       241. In addition, PEMEX annually publishes the following reports: Annual Re-
port, Statistical Yearbook, sustainable development report; hydrocarbon reserves,
minutes (Memoria de Trabajo), statistical report, collective labor agreement (every two
years), and financial reports pertinent to its issue of bonds in the national and interna-
tional markets.


Audit Mechanisms
	         242. Internal audit. Internal auditors constantly monitor the company and sup-
port the external evaluations. The internal audit function is performed by two commit-
tees of the Board of Directors: the Transparency and Accountability Committee (Comité
sobre Transparencia y Rendición de Cuentas - CTRC), and the Audit and Performance
Evaluation Committee (Comité de Auditoría y Evaluación del Desempeño - CAED). These
committees are joined by the Commissioner in addition to the Internal Control Agencies
(Órganos de Control Interno - OIC).
	       243. The CTRC determines what information should be published, ensures that
reports are prepared to standard, and presents accountability mechanisms to the board.
The CAED assesses the financial and operative performance of the company, verifies the
sufficiency of the information, and, when it deems necessary, orders specialized internal



    152
audits, among others. However, this committee does not define the work programs or
the type of risks that should be monitored. The CAED is formed by three professional
board members and is also responsible for choosing, monitoring, and evaluating a firm
to perform the external audit.
	       244. By law, the commissioner, who is directly appointed by the President of
the Republic, is responsibility for representing the interests of citizen bondholders. It
oversees and formulates an annual report on the accuracy, completeness, and rational-
ity of the information submitted by the Board. The commissioner is also in charge of
anti-corruption efforts and compliance with legal guidelines.
	       245. As an entity within the public sector, PEMEX is subject to the control of the
Federal Public Administration structure through the Internal Control Agencies (OIC) of
the SFP. There are five OICs whose members are appointed by the executive through
the SFP. As part of their responsibilities, the OICs receive general complaints and com-
plaints from breach obligations in the provision of public services, and are empowered
to impose sanctions upon individuals that do not comply with laws and regulations.
	       246. Internal audits have focused mostly on combating corruption. While focus-
ing on the company’s compliance with laws and regulations, they do not assess the
company’s performance.
	       247. External audit. The Auditoria Superior de la Federación (ASF) is the Con-
gressional oversight body. It is a highly professionalized body, with technical autonomy
and management. The ASF monitors resources used by all federal public entities and
audits their performance. The ASF audits the completed results for the full fiscal year,
and is only empowered to make nonbinding recommendations. Since PEMEX is under
the authority of the executive, it is also subject to congressional oversight. Finally, the
CAED is in charge of appointing the external auditor of PEMEX, which must be approved
by the board. The external auditor audits the financial statements of the company, and
its consolidated accounts.


Challenges Ahead
	       248. Even though there have been important improvements in transparency and
accountability, public opinion still associates PEMEX with a distinct lack of opacity. To
change this perception, it is essential that the company continues to press forward with
the implementation of good corporate governance practices.
	       249. Some of the specific challenges that the company still needs to tackle are
listed below:
•	   Ensure that the board does not become excessively entangled in the administration
	 of the company. The role of the board is essentially to provide a strategic guide,
	 which enables it to exercise a more effective oversight function. The proliferation of
	 board activities not focused on core functions results in a high number of lengthy
	 board meetings, and a plethora of board committees.
•	   Even though the board has been professionalized, the executive, by law, still con-
	 centrates a significant amount of power in the decision-making process of the com-
	 pany.
•	   Reconfiguration of lines of authority, to ensure that the internal auditor is responsible
  	 to the CAED, ensuring that internal control of operations and performance audits
	 are performed in accordance with best practices.
•	   Commit to publishing more information in areas where disclosure remains deficient
	 (for example, bidding and contracting processe



                                                                                         153     The Case of the
                                                                                                 PEMEX
                                                                  Annexes



Annex
                A      List of Brazilian SOEs under DEST Federal Oversight

Name                                                      Acronym       Sector Ministry
                                                                        Oversight

Companhia das Docas do Estado da Bahia                    CODEBA        Presidency
Companhia Docas do Ceará                                  CDC           Presidency
Companhia Docas do Espírito Santo                         CODESA        Presidency
Companhia Docas do Estado de São Paulo                    CODESP        Presidency
Companhia Docas do Pará                                   CDP           Presidency
Companhia Docas do Rio de Janeiro                         CDRJ          Presidency
Companhia Docas do Rio Grande do Norte                    CODERN        Presidency
Empresa Brasil de Comunicação S.A                         EBC           Presidency
Empresa Brasileira de Comunicação S.A.                    RADIOBRÁS     Presidency
Centrais de Abastecimento de Minas Gerais S.A.            CEASAMINAS    MAPA
Companhia de Armazéns e Silos do Estado de Minas Gerais   CASEMG        MAPA
Companhia Nacional de Abastecimento                       CONAB         MAPA
Companhia de Entrepostos e Armazéns Gerais de São Paulo   CEAGESP       MAPA
Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária               EMBRAPA       MAPA
Alcantara Cyclone Space- Binacional Brasil/Ucrania        ACS           MCT
Centro de Excelência em Tecnologia Eletrônica Avançada    CEITEC S.A.   MCT
Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos                        FINEP         MCT
Indústrias Nucleares do Brasil S.A.                       INB           MCT
Nuclebrás Equipamentos Pesados S.A.                       NUCLEP        MCT
ATIVOS S.A. - Securitizadora de Créditos Financeiros      ATIVOS S.A.   MF
Banco da Amazônia S.A.                                    BASA          MF
Banco do Brasil S.A.                                      BB            MF
Banco do Estado de Santa Catarina S.A.                    BESC          MF
Banco do Estado do Piauí S.A.                             BEP           MF
Banco do Nordeste do Brasil S.A.                          BNB           MF
Brasilian American Merchant Bank                          BAMB          MF



                       154
BB Administração de Ativos - Distribuidora de Títulos e Valo-   BB DTVM            MF
res Mobiliários S.A.
BB Administradora de Cartões de Crédito S.A.                    BB CARTÕES         MF
BB Administradora de Consórcios S.A.                            BB CONSÓRCIOS      MF
BB Banco de Investimento S.A.                                   BB INVESTIMENTOS   MF
BB Banco Popular do Brasil S.A.                                 BPB                MF
BB Corretora de Seguros e Administradora de Bens S.A.           BB CORRETORA       MF
BB Leasing Company Limited                                      BB LEASING         MF
BB - Leasing S.A. - Arrendamento Mercantil                      BB LAM             MF
BBTUR - Viagens e Turismo Ltda.                                 BB TURISMO         MF
BESC Distribuidora de Títulos e Valores Mobiliários S.A.        BESCVAL            MF
BESC Financeira S.A. - Crédito, Financiamento e Investimen-     BESCREDI           MF
tos
BESC S.A. Arrendamento Mercantil                                BESC LEASING       MF
Caixa Econômica Federal                                         CAIXA or CEF       MF
Casa da Moeda do Brasil                                         CMB                MF
COBRA Tecnologia S.A.                                           COBRA              MF
Empresa Gestora de Ativos                                       EMGEA              MF
IRB - Brasil Resseguros S.A.                                    IRB                MF
Serviço Federal de Processamento de Dados                       SERPRO             MF
Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre                            HCPA               MEC
Agência Especial de Financiamento Industrial                    FINAME             MDIC
Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social            BNDES              MDIC
BNDES Participações S.A.                                        BNDESPAR           MDIC
Alberto Pasqualini - REFAP S.A.                                 REFAP              MME
Baixada Santista Energia Ltda.                                  BSE                MME
Boa Vista Energia S.A.                                          BVENERGIA          MME
Braspetro Oil Company                                           BOC                MME
Braspetro Oil Services Company                                  BRASOIL            MME
Centrais Elétricas de Rondônia S.A.                             CERON              MME
Centrais Elétricas do Norte do Brasil S.A.                      ELETRONORTE        MME
Centrais Elétricas Brasileiras S.A.                             ELETROBRÁS         MME
Centro de Pesquisas de Energia Elétrica                         CEPEL              MME
Companhia de Eletricidade do Acre                               ELETROACRE         MME
Companhia de Geração Térmica de Energia Elétrica                CGTEE              MME
Companhia de Pesquisa de Recursos Minerais                      CPRM               MME
Companhia Energética de Alagoas                                 CEAL               MME
Companhia Energética do Piauí                                   CEPISA             MME
Companhia Hidro Elétrica do São Francisco                       CHESF              MME
Downstream Participações Ltda.                                  DOWNSTREAM         MME
Eletrobrás Participações S.A.                                   ELETROPAR          MME


                                                                                   155    Annexes
Name                                                        Acronym              Sector Ministry
                                                                                 Oversight

Eletrobrás Termonuclear S.A.                                ELETRONUCLEAR        MME
Empresa de Pesquisa Energética                              EPE                  MME
ELETROSUL Centrais Elétricas S.A.                           ELETROSUL            MME
Fafen Energia S.A.                                          FAFEN ENERGIA        MME
Fronape International Company                               FIC                  MME
FURNAS - Centrais Elétricas S.A.                            FURNAS               MME
Indústria Carboquímica Catarinense S.A.                     ICC                  MME
Ipiranga Asfaltos S.A.                                      IASA                 MME
Liquigás Distribuidora S.A.                                 LIQUIGÁS             MME
Manaus Energia S.A.                                         MANAUS ENERGIA       MME
Biocombustível S.A.                                         PETROBIO             MME
Petrobras Comercializadora de Energia Ltda.                 PCEL                 MME
Petrobras Distribuidora S.A.                                BR                   MME
Petrobras Gás S.A.                                          GASPETRO             MME
Petrobras International Braspetro B.V.                      PIB BV               MME
Petrobras International Finance Company                     PIFCo                MME
Petrobras Negócios Eletrônicos S.A.                         e-PETRO              MME
Petrobras Netherlands B.V.                                  PNBV                 MME
Petrobras Química S.A.                                      PETROQUISA           MME
Petrobras Transporte S.A.                                   TRANSPETRO           MME
Petroquímica Triunfo S.A.                                   TRIUNFO              MME
Petróleo Brasileiro S.A.                                    PETROBRAS            MME
Refinaria Abreu e Lima S.A.                                 RNEST                MME
SFE - Sociedade Fluminense de Energia Ltda.                 SFE                  MME
Termobahia S.A.                                             TERMOBAHIA           MME
Termoceará Ltda.                                            TERMOCEARÁ           MME
Termomacaé Ltda.                                            TERMOMACAÉ           MME
Termorio S.A.                                               TERMORIO             MME
Transportadora Associada de Gás S.A.                        TAG                  MME
Transportadora Brasileira Gasoduto Bolívia-Brasil S.A.      TBG                  MME
5283 Participações Ltda.                                    5283 PARTICIPAÇÕES   MME
Empresa de Tecnologia e Informações da Previdência Social   DATAPREV             MPS
Empresa Brasileira de Hemoderivados e Biotecnologia         HEMOBRÁS             MS
Hospital Cristo Redentor S.A.                               REDENTOR             MS
Hospital Fêmina S.A.                                        FÊMINA               MS
Hospital Nossa Senhora da Conceição S.A.                    CONCEIÇÃO            MS
Companhia de Navegação do São Francisco                     FRANAVE              MT



                         156
 Companhia Docas do Maranhão                                    CODOMAR                  MT
 VALEC - Engenharia, Construções e Ferrovias S.A.               VALEC                    MT
 Empresa Brasileira de Correios e Telégrafos                    ECT                      MC
 Telecomunicações Brasileiras S.A.                              TELEBRÁS                 MC
 Companhia de Desenvolvimento de Barcarena                      CODEBAR                  MMA
 Empresa Brasileira de Infra-Estrutura Aeroportuária            INFRAERO                 MD
 Empresa Gerencial de Projetos Navais                           EMGEPRON                 MD
 Indústria de Material Bélico do Brasil                         IMBEL                    MD
 Companhia de Desenvolvimento dos Vales do São Francisco        CODEVASF                 MI
 e do Parnaíba
 Companhia Brasileira de Trens Urbanos                          CBTU                     MCidades
 Empresa de Trens Urbanos de Porto Alegre S.A.                  TRENSURB                 MCidades
 Itaipu Binacional-Binacional Brasil/Paraguai                   Itaipu                   MME/MRE



Note: MAPA (Ministry of Primary Sectors), MC (Ministry of Communications), MC (Ministry of Communications),
MCidades (Ministry of Cities), MCT (Ministry of Science and Technology), MD (Ministry of Defense),
MDIC (Ministry of Development, Industry and Trade), MEC (Ministry of Education), MF (Ministry of Finance),
MI (Ministry of National Integration), MMA (Ministry of Environment), MMA (Ministry of Environment),
MME (Ministry of Mines & Energy), MPS (Ministry of Social Security), MRE (Foreign Affairs)
MS (Ministry of Health), MT (Ministry of Transport).




                                                                                        157    Annexes
Annex
                 B    List of SOEs in Chile

Sector               Company              Full Name                                        State-ow-
                                                                                             ned %

Transportation       METRO S.A.           Empresa de Transportes de Pasajeros                100       X
                     EFE                  Empresa de los Ferrocarriles del Estado            100       X
                     EPA                  Empresa Portuaria Estatal Arica                    100       X
                     EPI                  Empresa Portuaria Estatal Iquique                  100       X
                     EPA                  Empresa Portuaria Estatal Antofagasta              100       X
                     EPCO                 Empresa Portuaria Estatal Coquimbo                 100       X
                     EPV                  Empresa Portuaria Estatal Valparaíso               100       X
                     EPTHNO               Empresa Portuaria Estatal Tahno-San Vicente        100       X
                     EMPORMOTT            Empresa Portuaria Estatal Puerto Montt             100       X
                     EPCHA                Empresa Portuaria Estatal Chacabuco                100       X
                     EPA                  Empresa Portuaria Estatal Austral                  100       X
                     EPSA                 Empresa Portuaria San Antonio                      100       X
Mining and Oil       ENACAR S.A.          Empresa Nacional del Carbon S.A.                   100       X
                     CODELCO              State Copper Mining Company                        100
                     ENAMI                Empresa Nacional de Minería                        100       X
                     ENAP                 Empresa Nacional del Petróleo                      100
Service              ZOFRI S.A            Zona Franca de Iquique S.A.                        72.7      X
                     CASAMONEDA           Casa de la Moneda de Chile S.A.                    100
                     S.A.
                     CORREOSCHILE         Empresa de Correos de Chile                        100       X
                     POLLA S.A.           Polla Chilena de Beneficencia S.A.                 100       X
                     COTRISA S.A.         Empresa Comercializadora de Trigo S.A.             97.2      X
                     SASIPA LTDA.         Sociedad Agrícola y Serv. Isla de Pascua Ltda.     100       X
                     SACOR LTDA.          Sociedad Agrícola Ltda.                            100       X
                     EMAZA                Empresa de Abastecimiento de Zonas Aisladas        100       X
Finance              BECH                 Banco Estado de Chile                              100
Water and            ECONSSA Chile S.A.   Empresa Concesionaria de Serv. Sanitarios S.A.     100       X
Sewage
                     PEÑUELAS S.A.        Empresa de Serv.Sanitarios Lago Peñuelas S.A.      98.7      X
Communications       TVN                  Televisión Nacional de Chile                       100
                     LA NACION            Empresa Periodística La Nación S.A.                69.3
                     GPM                  Puerto Madero Impresores S.A.                      69.3
Defense              ASMAR                Astilleros y Maestranzas de la Armada              100
Companies
                     ENAER                Empresa Nacional de Aeronáutica                    100
                     FAMAE                Fábrica y Maestranzas del Ejército                 100


                       158
159   Annexes
Annex
                  C    List of Colombian National SOEs

Sector                Company                                                         Characteristics
                                                                                                  Mar-
                                                                            GDP     Gov. Budget            Type
                                                                                                  ket

Oil                   Ecopetrol                                             6.81%     19.70%       M     MCC (b)
Postal                Servicios Postales Nacionales S.A.                    0.01%     0.04%        M      SOICE
Transp.               Centro de Diagnóstico automotor de Cúcuta LTDA                  0.00%        M      SOICE
                      Centro de Diagnóstico automotor de Caldas LTDA        0.00%     0.00%        M      SOICE


                      Centro de Diagnóstico automotor de Tolima LTDA                  0.00%        M      SOICE


Telecom.              Sociedad Canal Regional de Televisión                 0.00%     0.01%        O      SOICE
                      Sociedad Canal Regional Limitada                                0.00%        O      SOICE
                      Canal Regional de Televisión del Caribe               0.00%     0.01%        O      SOICE


                      Radio Televisión Nacional de Colombia                           0.00%        O      SOICE


Energy / Elect.       Empresa Multiproposito de Urra S.A.                   0.05%     0.19%        O     MCC, PDU


                      Centrales Eléctricas de Nariño S.A.                   0.04%     0.15%        O     MCC, PDU


                      Gestión Energética S.A. E.S.P.                        0.09%     0.34%        O     MCC, PDU
                      Empresa de Energía del Amazonas                       0.00%     0.02%        O     MCC, PDU


                      Empresa Distribuidora del Pacífico                    0.01%     0.04%        O     MCC, PDU


                      Generadora y Comercializadora de Energia del Caribe   0.20%     0.60%        O     MCC, PDU
                      Empresa de Energia de Boyaca S.A.                     0.05%     0.19%        O     MCC, PDU
Financial             Almagrario S.A.                                       0.01%     0.04%        C       MCC
                      Banco Agrario S.A.                                    0.31%     1.11%        C       MCC
                      Fondo Financiamiento Sector Agropecuario              0.07%     0.25%        M       MCC




                      Central de Inversiones                                0.01%     0.04%        M      SOICE
                      Fiduagraria                                           0.01%     0.03%        C     MCC, EICE
                      Fiduciaria La Previsora                                         0.02%        C     MCC, EICE
                      Fiducoldex                                            0.00%     0.02%        C       MCC
                      Bancoldex S.A.                                        0.20%     0.74%        C       MCC




                        160
                                        Ownership Function
State Particip. (c)             Shareholders                 Type of Partic. (d)         Sector Ministry


      89%                             MF                             D                       MME
      93%                 Postal management (in liq.)                 I                      MITC
     82.50%                           MT                             D                        MT
      57%                             MT                             D                        MT
      20%                          Local gov.                         I
     13.20%                           MT                             D                        MT
     48.45%                 Gobernación del Tolima
      98%             Reg. gov. Risaralda, Quindioy Caldas          D/I                      MITC
     90,4%                           MITC                            D                        NTC
      21%                            MITC                           D/I                      MITC
      79%                        Regional gov.
      70%                      Teveandina Ltda.                       I                      MITC
      30%                        Par Adpostal
      77%                             MF                             D                       MME
      22%                            MME
     64.90%                          IPPES                          D/I                      MME
      35%                             MF
     95.21%                           MF                             D                       MME
     90.70%                          IPPES                          D/I                      MME
     0.93%                         Local gov.
      75%                            MME                             D                       MME
      25%                             MF
      100%                            MF                             D                       MME
     99.40%                           MF                             D                       MME
     64,6%                       Banco Agrario                        I                      MARD
     99,99%                           MF                            D/I                      MARD
     65.30%                          MARD                           D/I                      MARD
     12.90%                           MF
     21,8%                       Private banks
     99.90%                           MF                             D                        MF
     93.70%                      Banco Agrario                        I                      MARD
     99.90%             La Previsora S.A Co. de Seguros               I                       MF
     89.10%                       Bancoldex                           I                       MIC
     91.90%                           MIC                            D                        MIC
     7.80%                            MF




                                                                                   161   Annexes
 Sector                Company                                                           Characteristics
                                                                                                       Mar-
                                                                             GDP       Gov. Budget                   Type
                                                                                                       ket

 Financial             La Previsora S.A. Compañía de Seguros                0.12%         0.43%           C        MCC, EICE


                       Findeter                                             0.07%         0.26%           O        SOICE
                       Fondo Nacional de Garantías                          0.03%         0.11%           M        MCC, EICE


                       Financiera Energética Nacional S.A.                  0.03%         0.11%           M        MCC, EICE
                       Fondo Ganadero de Córdoba S.A.                       0.00%         0.00%           M        MCC, PSHC
                       Positiva Compañia de Seguros S.A.                    0.00%         0.00%           O        MCC
                       Bolsa Nacional Agropecuaria S.A.                     0.01%         0.02%           M        MCC
 Others                Sociedad Hotelera Tequendama                                       0.00%           C        MCC, EICE
                       Artesanías de Colombia S.A                           0.00%         0.01%           M        MCC, EICE




                       Vecol S.A.                                           0.01%         0.04%       C            MCC, PSHC
                       Corporación de la Ind. Aeronáutica Colombiana        0.01%         0.03%       M            MCC, EICE
                       Central de Abastos de Cucuta S.A.                    0.00%         0.00%       C            MCC


                       Central de Abastos del Caribe                        0.00%         0.00%       C            MCC




References:
IPPES: Institute for Planning and Promotion of Energy Solutions
MARD: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
MF: Ministry of Finance
MIC: Ministry of Industry and Commerce
MITC: Ministry of IT and Communications
MME: Ministry of Mining and Energy
MND: Ministry of National Defense
MSD: Ministry of Social Development
MT: Ministry of Transportation
NTC: National Television Commission
PDU: Public Domiciliary Utilities
PSHC: Public stock-holding corporation
SOICE: State-owned industrial, commercial enterprise.

Notes:
(a) C: competitive; O: oligopolistic; M: monopolistic.
(b) Ecopetrol S.A. is a MCC organized as a Public stock-holding corporation. See www.ecopetrol.com.co.
(c) MCC in which the State owns ninety percent (90%) or more of its share capital are subject to the regulati-
ons for State Industrial and Commercial Enterprises.
(d) Direct participation means that the government institution exercises the ownership rights directly. Indirect
participation implies that the government institution exercises its ownership rights through an enterprise
which is the shareholder.




                         162
                                           Ownership Function
State Particip. (c)                Shareholders                   Type of Partic. (d)         Sector Ministry

     99.50%                              MF                               D                         MF
      0.17%                             MSD
     92.50%                              MF                               D                         MF
      61,6%                              MF                              D/I                       MIC
     17.30%                             MIC
     95.36%                             MME                              D/I                       MME
       15%                             MARD                               D                       MARD
     90.50%                              MF                              D/I                        MF
     11.80%                            MARD                               D                       MARD
     97.97%               Armed Forces, Retirement Funds                   I                       MND
       57%                           Proexport                            D                        MIC
      23,5%                              MF                                I
      4.30%                             MIC
     61.70%                            MARD                              D/I                      MARD
     99.96%                             MND                               D                        MND
     75,15%                            MARD                               D                       MARD
     24,85%                Other companies, subnat. gov.
     31,09%                     Ministry of Finance                       D                       MARD
     17,17%                            MARD
     51,74%           Public institutions/companies, local gov.




                                                                                        163   Annexes
Annex
              D    List of Peruvian SOEs under FONAFE’s Oversight

     Sector                   Name                      Line of business                State Participa-
                                                                                              tion


Electricity       ADINELSA                  Management of electrical infrastructure         100%
                                            developed by state agencies.

                  EGASA                     Generation and commercialization                100%


                  EGEMSA                    Generation and commercialization                100%


                  EGESUR S.A.               Generation and commercialization                100%


                  ELECTRO ORIENTE S.A.      Generation, transmission distribution and       100%
                                            commercialization

                  ELECTRO PUNO S.A.A.       Distribution and commercialization             99.59%


                  ELECTRO SUR ESTE S.A.A.   Distribution and commercialization             99.61%


                  ELECTRO UCAYALI S.A.      Generation, transmission distribution and      99.90%
                                            commercialization

                  ELECTROCENTRO S.A.        Distribution and commercialization              100%


                  ELECTRONOROESTE S.A.      Distribution and commercialization              100%


                  ELECTRONORTE S.A.         Distribution and commercialization             99.99%


                  ELECTROPERU S.A.          Generation and commercialization                100%


                  ELECTROSUR S.A.           Distribution and commercialization              100%


                  HIDRANDINA S.A.           Distribution and commercialization             95.11%


                  SAN GABAN S.A.            Generation and commercialization                100%


                  SEAL S.A.                 Distribution and commercialization             87.33%




                    164
Financial and Real   AGROBANCO             Financial services to agricultural producers     100%
Estate

                     BANCO DE LA NACION    Financial services                               100%


                     BANMAT S.A.C.         Construction. Housing development                100%


                     COFIDE S.A.           Financial services to the export sector and      98.70%
                                           micro and small enterprises.

                     FONDO MIVIVIENDA      Financial services to develop housing pro-       100%
                                           jects and housing acquisitions.

Transportation       CORPAC S.A.           Operate, equip and maintain airports and air     100%
and Communica-                             navigation systems
tions
                     EDITORA PERU S.A      Printing, publishing and distribution of         100%
                                           the official newspaper and news, graphic

                     ENAPU S.A.            Manage and provide port services in publicly     100%
                                           owned ports.

                     SERPOST S.A.          Postal services                                  100%


Water and Sani-      SEDAPAL               Provision of water and sewage services           100%
tation

Oil and Mining       ACTIVOS MINEROS       Mining, industrial and complementary             100%
                                           activities.

                     PERUPETRO S.A.        Promote investment in exploration and            100%
                                           exploitation of hydrocarbons.

Other Sectors        ENACO S.A.            Domestic trade: Production and com-              100%
                                           mercialization of coca leaf products and

                     FAME SAC              Defense.                                         100%


                     SIMA IQUITOS S.R.L.   Shipbuilding and metalwork: Construction,        100%
                                           maintenance and repair of ships for Peruvian
                                           Navy in the Amazon region.

                     SIMA PERU S.A.        Shipbuilding and metalwork: Construction,        100%
                                           maintenance and repair of ships for Peruvian




                                                                                          Annexes
Annex
            E     SOE Portfolio Managed by SEPI

          SOE                           SECTOR               OWNERSHIP      STAFF
                                                                %

                       FULLY-OWNED OR MAJORITY SHAREHOLDER SOES

     1. Agencia EFE                      Media                100.00%        1,253
 2. Alimentos y Aceites              Portolio Mgmt.            91,96%          90
       3. CETARSA                       Tobacco                79.00%         573
  4. Corporacion RTVE                    Media                 52,19%        6,397
  6. Grupo Cofivacasa             Portfolio Management        100.00%    In Liquidation.

    7. Grupo Defex                      Defense                51.00%          19
     8. Grupo Ensa                    Manufacture             100.00%         689
    9. Grupo Enusa                       Energy                60.00%         939
   10. Grupo Hunosa                      Mining               100.00%        2,347
     11. Grupo Izar                 Civil Shipbuilding        100.00%    In Liquidation

   12. Grupo Mercasa                Food Distribution          51.00%         161
   13. Grupo Navantia              Navy Shipbuilding          100.00%        5,665
   14. Grupo Sepides                Investment Fund           100.00%          56
    15. Grupo Tragsa                  Agro-industry            51.00%       21,520
 16. Hipodromo Zarzuela              Entertainment             96.00%         145
       17. Mayasa                        Mining               100.00%    In Liquidation

        18. Saeca                        Finance               80.00%          32

                                MINORITY SHAREHOLDER

        1. Enagas                        Energy                5.00%           --
        2. Enresa             Radioactive Waste Management     20.00%          --
     3. CASA-EADS                      Aerospatial             5.48%           --
       4. Hispasat                 Telecommunications          7.41%           --
  5. Red Electrica Corp.                 Energy                20.00%          --

         6. IAG                     Air Transportaion          2,71%           --
         7. P4R                      External Trade            11,87%          --




                     166
       SOE                SECTOR            OWNERSHIP      STAFF
                                               %

                           ADSCRIBED

   1. Ente RTVE            Media              100%      In Liquidation

                       PUBLIC FOUNDATIONS

1. Fundacion Laboral     Foundation           100%           51
 2. Fundacion SEPI       Foundation           100%           18




                                                         Annexes
Annex
                   F                    Six Largest SOEs in Uruguay

                                   Name                      Sector       Description             Type of
                                                             Ministry                             Market


  Oil State Company (Administración
                                                                Autonomous                Fuels = M
           Nacional de Combustibles,     ANCAP    MIEM
                                                                   entity                  Rest = C
                  Alcohol y Pórtland)


              Power State Company                                                      Generation = C
                                                                Autonomous
 (Administración Nacional de Usinas       UTE     MIEM                                   Rest = M
                                                                   entity
         y Transmisiones Eléctricas)


   Telecom State Company (Adminis-                                                  Land phone lines = M
                                                                Decentralized
                 tración Nacional de     ANTEL    MIEM                                    Rest = C
                                                                   service
               Telecomunicaciones)


        Bank of the Republic (Banco                             Autonomous
                                         BROU      MF                                         C
                        República)                                 entity


    Water & Sewage State Company                                Decentralized                M
                                         OSE     MUPEP
      (Obras Sanitarias del Estado)                                service


    National Administration of Ports
                                                                Decentralized                M
        (Administración Nacional de      ANP      MTPW
                                                                   service
                           Puertos)



References: MIEM: Ministry of Industry, Energy and Mining; MUPEP: Ministry of Urban Planning and Environment
Protection; MTPW: Ministry of Transportation and Public Works; MF: Ministry of Economy and Finance; M: mono-
poly; C: competitive.




                        168
      Bibliographical References
Allen, R. & S. Vani. (2013). Financial Management and Oversight of State-Owned Enter-
     prises, in The International Handbook of Public Financial Management, ed. R. Hem-
     ming, R. Allen and B. Potter. London: Palgrave McMillan.
Bernal, A., et al., (2012). Gobierno Corporativo en América Latina. Importancia para las
    Empresas de Propiedad Estatal, Serie Políticas Públicas y Transformación Produc-
    tiva, No. 6.
Colombia Capital, (2009). Código País, Bolsa de Valores de Colombia, en
    http://www.colombiacapital.com.co/phocadownload/cartilla_codigopais_2009.pdf
Ceb otari, A. (2008). Contingent Liabilities: Issues and Practice. IMF Working Paper
     08/245. Washington: IMF. Available in: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
     wp/2008/wp08245.pdf
Ceb otari, A., J. Davis, L. Lusinyan, A. Mati, P. Mauro, M. Petrie and R. Velloso. (2009).
     Fiscal Risks: Sources, Disclosure and Management. Washington: IMF. Available in:
     http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dp/2009/dp0901.pdf
Chivakul, M. & R. York. (2006). Implications of Quasi-Fiscal Activities in Ghana. IMF
     Working Paper WP 06/24. Washington: IMF. Available in: http://www.imf.org/exter-
     nal/pubs/ft/wp/2006/wp0624.pdf
Corp oración Andina de Fomento, (2010). Lineamientos para el Buen Gobierno Corpora-
      tivo de las Empresas del Estado, CAF.
Franco. B., Muñoz. I., Sánchez. P., & Zavala. V. (2000). Las privatizaciones y concesiones,
     en R. Abusada. F, Du Bois. E. Morón, & J. Valderrama. La Reforma Incompleta: res-
     catando los noventa (Págs. 13-105), Instituto Peruano de Economía y Universidad
     del Pacífico, Lima
Fond o Nacional de Financiamiento de la Actividad Empresarial del Estado (FONAFE),
      (2013). Código de Buen Gobierno Corporativo para las Empresas bajo el ámbito de
      FONAFE, FONAFE.
Gobi erno de Chile (2001). Institucionalidad y Criterios de Gestión para las Empresas
      Públicas. Ministerio Secretaría General de la Presidencia
Hard y, K. (2010). Managing Risk in Government: An Introduction to Enterprise Risk Man-
      agement. Financial Management Series, IBM Center for the Business of Govern-
      ment. Available in: http://worldriskday.com/wp-content/uploads/RiskinGovern-
      ment.pdf
IMF. (2005). Public Investment and Fiscal Policy--Lessons from the Pilot Country
      Studies. Washington: IMF. Available in: http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/
      eng/2005/040105a.pdf
IMF. (2005a). Government Guarantees and Fiscal Risks. Washington: IMF. Available in:
      http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2005/040105c.pdf
IMF. (2007). Manual on Fiscal Transparency. Washington: IMF. Available in: http://www.
      imf.org/external/np/pp/2007/eng/101907m.pdf
IMF. (2007a.) Barbados: Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes -- Fiscal
      Transparency Module. Washington: IMF. Available in: http://www.imf.org/exter-
      nal/pubs/ft/scr/2007/cr07338.pdf
IMF. (2011). El Salvador: Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes -- Fiscal
      Transparency Module. Washington: IMF. Available in: http://www.imf.org/exter-
      nal/pubs/ft/scr/2011/cr11147.pdf
IMF. (2012). Fiscal Transparency, Accountability, and Risk. Washington: IMF. Available in:
      http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/080712.pdf
Irwin , T. (2012). Accounting Devices and Fiscal Illusions. IMF Staff Discussion Note




                                                                                       169     Bibliographical
                                                                                               References
      SDN/12/02. Washington: IMF. Available in: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
      sdn/2012/sdn1202.pdf
     national Finance Corporation (IFC) (2012), Corporate Governance Methodology,
Inter
     Washington
Kopits, G. & J. Craig. (1998). Transparency in Government Operations. IMF Occasional
     Paper No. 158. Washington: IMF. Available in: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/
     ft/op/158/op158.pdf
Long more, R., Riveira, M. & Verhoeven, M. (2014). A framework to assess the fiscal risks
      of public bodies: Jamaica. Economic premise; No. 146. Washington, DC, World Bank
      Group
Núñe  z G. & Oneto, A. (coords.), (2012). Gobernanza Corporativa en el Brasil, Colombia y
       México. La determinación del riesgo en la emisión de instrumentos de deuda cor-
       porativa, Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe, Comisión Económi-
       ca para América Latina y el Caribe, Marzo 2012
OECD (2005). Guidelines for Corporate Governance of State-Owned Enterprises. OECD
       Publishing, Paris: Available at: http://www.oecd.org/daf/ca/corporategovernan-
       ceofstate-ownedenterprises/34803211.pdf
OECD(2010). Corporate Governance: Accountability and Transparency, a Guide for State
       Ownership, OECD Publishing, Paris
OECD (2011). State-Owned Enterprise Governance Reform. An Inventory of Recent
       Change, OECD Publishing, Paris
OECD (2013), Boards of Directors of State-owned Enterprises: An overview of National
       Practices, OECD Publishing, Paris
Oliva, C., & Ugarte. M, (2006). Uso y efectividad de los convenios de gestión. Consul-
       toría para la Unidad Ejecutora Programa de Modernización y Descentralización del
       Estado - Presidencia del Consejo de Ministros, Lima
Petrie , M. (2013). Managing Fiscal Risk. In The International Handbook of Public Finan-
        cial Management, ed. R. Hemming, R. Allen and B. Potter. London: Palgrave McMil-
        lan.
Polac kova, H. & A. Schick. (2002). Contingent Liabilities and Fiscal Risk. Washington:
       World Bank.
Tomm   asi, D. (2013). The Coverage and Classification of the Budget."In The International
        Handbook of Public Financial Management, ed. R. Hemming, R. Allen and B. Pot-
        ter. London: Palgrave McMillan.
Torero  , M. (2002). La privatización peruana: impactos sobre el desempeño de las em-
         presas. Benefits and costs of privatization: What should we do next? Lima: Banco
         Interamericano de Desarrollo.
Verho  even, M., Le Borgne, E., Medas, P. & Jones, L. (2008). Assessing Fiscal Risk from
        State-Owned Enterprises. Washington, DC, International Monetary Fund
WorldBank. (1995). Bureaucrats in Business: The Economics and Politics of Government
        Ownership. New York: Oxford University Press.
World Bank. (2006). Held by the Visible Hand: The Challenge of SOE Corporate Gover-
        nance in Emerging Markets. Washington: World Bank. Available in: http://docu-
        ments.worldbank.org/curated/en/2006/05/7124122/held-visible-hand-chal-
        lenge-state-owned-enterprise-corporate-governance-emerging-markets
World Bank (2006a). Held by the Visible Hand: The Challenge of EP Corporate Gover-
        nance for Emerging Markets. The World Bank Corporate Governance. Washington.
World Bank (2006b). EP Corporate Governance Country Assessment Peru. Corporate
        Governance Policy Practice. Private Sector Vice Presidency. Washington.



170
World Bank (2014). “Toolkit for Corporate Governance of State Owned Enterprises”.
     Washington (forthcoming).
     -García, R. & J. Dana. (2012). Mitigating Vulnerability to High and Volatile Oil
Yépez
     Prices: Power Sector Experience in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington:
     World Bank. Available in: http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/book/10.1596/978-
     0-8213-9577-6


Laws, Regulations, and Good Governance Codes consulted
(in original text)

Brazil
Decreto-Lei no. 200, de 25 de fevereiro de 1967, que dispõe a organização da Administ-
ração Federal, estabelece diretrizes para a Reforma Administrativa e dá outras providên-
cias

Decreto no. 6021 de 22 de janeiro de 2007, que cria a Comissão Interministerial de Gov-
ernança Corporativa e de Administração de Participações Societárias da União – CGPAR,
e dá outras providências

Decreto-Lei no. 200 de 25 de fevereiro de 1967, estabelece diretrizes para a Reforma
Administrativa e dá outras providências

Lei No. 5.662, de 21 de junho de 1971, que enquadra o Banco Nacional do Desenvolvi-
mento Econômico (BNDE) na categoria de empresa pública, e dá outras providências

Lei No. 6.404 de 15 de dezembro de 1976, sobre as Sociedades por Ações

Lei No. 10303 de 31 de outubro de 2001, que altera e acrescenta dispositivos na Lei no.
6404, de 15 de dezembro de 1976, que dispõe sobre as Sociedades por Ações, e na Lei
no 6.385, de 7 de dezembro de 1976, que dispõe sobre o mercado de valores mobiliários
e cria a Comissão de Valores Mobiliários

Lei No. 11638 de 28 de dezembro de 2007, que altera e revoga dispositivos da Lei no
6.404, de 15 de dezembro de 1976, e da Lei no 6.385, de 7 de dezembro de 1976, e este-
nde às sociedades de grande porte disposições relativas à elaboração e divulgação de
demonstrações financeiras


Chile

Ley núm. 20.392, que modifica el Estatuto Orgánico de la Corporación Nacional del Co-
bre (CODELCO) y las normas sobre disposición de sus pertenencias mineras que no for-
man parte de yacimientos en actual explotación

Ministerio de Hacienda, DFL 211, que fija normas por que se regirá la Corporación de
Fomento de la Producción, de 26 de marzo de 1960

Sistema de Empresas SEP, Código SEP



                                                                                    171    Bibliographical
                                                                                           References
Colombia

Código de Comercio de 1971

ECOPETROL, Declaración de la Nación en su calidad de Accionista Mayoritario de 26 de
julio de 2007

Ley 142 de 1994, por la cual se establece el régimen de los servicios públicos domicili-
arios y se dictan otras disposiciones

Ley 489 de 1998, por la cual se dictan normas sobre la organización y funcionamiento
de las entidades del orden nacional, se expiden las disposiciones, principios y reglas
generales para el ejercicio de las atribuciones previstas en los numerales 15 y 16 del
artículo 189 de la Constitución Política y se dictan otras disposiciones

Ley 964 de 2005, por la cual se dictan normas generales y se señalan en ellas los obje-
tivos y criterios a los cuales debe sujetarse el Gobierno Nacional para regular las activi-
dades de manejo, aprovechamiento e inversión de recursos captados del público que se
efectúen mediante valores y se dictan otras disposiciones

Ley 1118 de 2006, por la cual se modifica la naturaleza jurídica de Ecopetrol S.A. y se
dictan otras disposiciones, Diario Oficial No. 46.494 de 27 de diciembre de 2006

Superintendencia Financiera, Circular Externa 028 de 2007 sobre Adopción Encuesta de
Mejores Prácticas Corporativas

Superintendencia Financiera, Circular Externa 056 de 2007 sobre Modificación de la Cir-
cular Externa 028 de 2007


Ecuador

Ley Orgánica de Empresas Públicas


Spain

Ley 6/1997, de 14 de abril, de Organización y Funcionamiento de la Administración Gen-
eral del Estado

Ley 33/2003, de 3 de noviembre, del Patrimonio de las Administraciones Públicas


Mexico

Ley Federal de las Entidades Paraestatales

Ley de Petróleos Mexicanos




172
Ley Federal de Presupuesto y Responsabilidad Hacendaria

Ley Federal de Responsabilidades Administrativas de los Servidores Públicos

Ley Orgánica de la Administración Pública Federal


Panama

Ley no. 19 de 11 de junio de 1997 por la que se organiza la Autoridad del Canal de Pan-
amá


Paraguay

Decreto no. 163 por el cual se crea el Consejo de Empresas Públicas, 25 de agosto de
2008

Decreto no. 955 por el cual se reglamentan las funciones de la Unidad de Monitoreo de
las Empresas Públicas, órgano interno del Consejo de Empresas Públicas, creado por
Decreto no. 163 del 25 de agosto de 2008, 26 de noviembre de 2008


Peru

Decreto Legislativo no. 1031, que promueve la eficiencia de la actividad empresarial del
Estado

Corporación FONAFE, Código de Buen Gobierno Corporativo para las Empresas bajo el
ámbito de FONAFE, Marzo 2013

Ley del Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento de la Actividad Empresarial del Estado, no.
27170

Reglamento del Decreto Legislativo no. 1031, que promueve la eficiencia de la actividad
empresarial del Estado

Reglamento de la Ley del Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento de la Actividad Empresarial
del Estado


Uruguay

Constitución de la República Oriental del Uruguay




                                                                                    173    Bibliographical
                                                                                           References
174                   Bibliographica
      Banco Mundial
                      References
