                                                                                      89482
What is a mountain? - Background Paper to definition of mountains and

mountain regions



Introduction

Is there a globally accepted definition of a mountain? The answer, currently, is no.

Numerous definitions of what constitutes a mountain have been proposed. Mountains

are very diverse landforms and there appears to be little consistency in defintion,

description and anlaysis. The definition of a single mountain might also differ from

that of a mountainous area or region. A mountain region is usually more than the sum

of individual mountains. Thus, the geographical scale is probably an important part of

the definition of a mountain region. Many of these issues have been discussed by

Veyret and Veyret (1962), Gerrard (1990) and Bandyopadhyay (1992).

   The criteria most often used in defining mountains are elevation, volume or size,

relative relief, steepness, ruggedness or density of dissection, as well as spacing and

continuity. The Oxford English Dictionary defines a mountain as ‘a natural elevation

of the earth surface rising more or less abruptly from the surrounding level and

attaining an elevation which, relative to adjacent elevation, is impressive or notable’.

In Webster’s Dictionary a mountain is ‘any part of a land mass which projects

conspicuously above its surroundings.’ Such definitions convey an image of what a

mountain is but are of little use in demarcating mountain areas from non-mountain

areas. Peattie (1936), even more subjectively, suggests that mountains should be

impressive, possess individuality and should enter into the imagination of the people

who live near them. In fact, in a recent paper, Debarbieux (1992) argues that most

definitions, however scientific, arise from a posteriori reasoning and rely heavily on

intuition in the first instance.
    As mountains enter more into the political agenda, definitions have been produced

to suit particular purposes. In Italy, communita montane are defined as areas above

600m (Rommano, 1995). In the 1975 European Community Less Favoured Areas

scheme, a mountain has been defined as an area above 600m with slopes over 15%.

Also, Thorsell and Harrison (1992) and Thorsell (1997) have summarised the

characteristics that have been adopted to form the basis for including or excluding

mountains in categories for conservation. To be designated mountainous, a landscape

must have relative relief higher than 1500m and cover an area larger than 10,000 km2.

This definition excludes many European mountain areas, including the Pyrenees.

  Some of the issues and inconsistencies raised by these definitions have been

discussed by Strahler (1946). Most early writers used the term to emphasise the

rugged nature of mountain terrain. According to Preston James (1935) a mountain

should possess sufficient relief to produce a marked vertical zonation of vegetation

and Finch and Trewartha (1936) saw mountains as being characterised by steep

slopes, small summit areas and strong relief. These definitions are still essentially

subjective and it is necessary to try to define what is meant by high elevation, steep

slopes and relief. It is also clear that a single criteria is not sufficient to define a

mountain. Mountains need to be defined by a combination of these characteristics.

    Elevation is clearly an important characteristic. In their recent book, Messerli and

Ives (1997) include a map showing that 48% of the Earth’s surface lies above 500m,

11% exceeds 2,000m and 2% lies above 4,000m. But, altitude alone is not sufficient

to define mountains. The high plateaus of Bolivia and Peru and the high interior

Tibetan Plateau are not mountains or mountainous terrain. The Colorado Plateau of

the southwestern United States of America and the East African Plateau are other

examples. Mountains rise above these plateaus but the plateaus themselves could not
be defined as mountain areas even though those in Bolvia and Peru occur within the

Andes Mountain Range. Thus, it is generally agreed that any definition should

include relative relief and perhaps also slope steepness and land volume. Some have

argued that an isolated mountain or inselberg (island mountain) might not be a

mountain but a hill (e.g. Waldbaur, 1952; Rutkis, 1971). The question arises as to

what value of relative relief to use. This needs careful consideration as too high a

value may exclude some areas that most people would consider as mountains. As

Price (1981) has noted, using a relative value of 900m would include the European

Alps, Pyrenees, Caucasus, Himalayas, Andes, Rockies, Cascades and the Sierra

Nevada but not the Appalachians or the old, degraded mountains of Scandinavia and

the British Isles.

   Relative relief itself, as a criteria, has to be qualified by the horizontal distance

over which it is measured. The horizontal distances between ridges and valleys are

just as important to the definition of mountains as are the vertical distributions that

establish the relief. These ideas prompted Price (1981, p. 5) to define a mountain as

‘an elevated landform of high local relief e.g. 300m with much of its surface in steep

slopes, usually displaying distinct variations in climate and associated biological

phenomena from its base to its summit’. This figure of 300m seems on the low side

and most scientists working in mountain areas would argue that relative relief should

be larger than this. A figure of 700m has ben widely suggested (e.g. Derrau, 1968;

Temple, 1972; Brunsden and Allison, 1986).

  More confusion is created by attempts to distinguish high mountains (the German

Hochgebirge), with altitudes over 1500m and relative relief over 1000m from lower

and intermediate mountains (Mittelgebirge). The only areas in western Europe with

relative reliefs greater than 1500m are the Alps and the central Pyrenees. Areas such
as the Scandinavian and Carpathian Mountains would be excluded. Hammond (1954,

1964) separated high and low mountains in North and South America also on the

basis of relative relief. High mountains possessed a local relief of 3000 feet whereas

low mountains were defined as possessing a local relief of 1000-3000 feet. Low

mountains included the Appalachian Mountains, the Guyana Highlands and coastal

mountains of Brazil. Except for very specific purposes, there seems little reason for

distinguishing high from low mountains.

   As mountains exhibit vertical zonation of processes, climate and vegetation and

the upper parts of high mountains possess a distinctive suite of features, a

geoecological approach to defining mountains has been suggested. Thus high

mountains should rise above the Pleistocene snow line, should extend above the

regional timber line and should display processes characterised by ice and snow

(Troll, 1973b; Hollermann, 1973a). This has often been called the ‘Alpine’ zone, but

it is a term and a concept that has been criticised (e.g. Love, 1970; Ives and Barry,

1974; Barsch and Caine, 1984; Ives, 1985, 1987). The major problem with this

definition is that it varies with latitude as the lower limit for snow and ice processes is

4000m in the southern Rocky Mountains and European Alps and 700m in Alaska,

Iceland, northern Scandinavia and Iceland. Using the height of the timberline suffers

from the same problems. The upper timberline on mountains in arid areas is different

to the timberline in other climatic environments. The highest elevation at which trees

grow anywhere in the world is 300N and 300S in the arid zones of the Andes and the

Himalayas and not in the humid tropics as might be expected (Troll, 1973a). Thus,

although it appears that it may be possible to define mountains in particular areas on

the basis of ecology, it is not possible to produce an ecological definition that will be

consistent in all areas of the world. There seems to be no other solution than to define
mountains on the basis of some combination of elevation, relative relief and

horizontal scale.

Criteria

On the basis of the previous discussion and practical experience of a wide variety of

mountains in many countries and continents the mountain area percentages of specific

countries were assessed using the following criteria:

 a general minimum altitude of 1000m was required although small proportions of

      defined mountain areas could be below this minimum value to take account of very

      deep incision by rivers.

 One of the characteristics of mountain areas are deeply cut river valleys. Thus,

      large valleys have been included in the definition of a mountain area where they

are

      clearly part of that mountain area. Large rivers that clearly separate two distinct

      mountain areas were excluded and the two areas treated as separate mountain

      areas. For the same reason, large intermontane basins have been excluded from

      the definition; the mountain ranges surrounding the basins have been measured

      separately.

 A mimum relative relief of 500m was required to differentiate mountain areas from

      high, level plateaus.

 The emphasis was on the definition of mountain areas rather than individual

      mountains. Thus, single isolated volcanic peaks were excluded from the definition

      unless they covered a minimum area of 100 km2 and/or were intensely dissected to

      produce mountain landscapes rather than individual peaks. In reality, there were

      very few instances of such isolated peaks.
These three criteria of elevation, relative relief and area enabled the mountain areas to

be identified.

Methodology

A consistent methodology was required that could be applied to all countries. It was

necessary to obtain the information from topographic maps as there was no relaible

and consistent data base available. A map scale was required that could be used with

large and small countries alike. It was thought that a 1:1 million scale was the most

appropriate and was the scale adopted in this analysis. The mountain areas of each

country were defined from 1:1M maps using the criteria outlined above. The areas

were obtained by grid sampling at a scale of 5km. To overcome the problem of the

orientation of the grid corresponding to lineations in the topography the grid was

rotated three times and the average value obtained. The total area of the countries was

obtained in the same way and the proportions covered by mountains calculated. It is

believed that this methodology provides a consistent indication of the proportion of a

country that is mountainous according to the criteria defined earlier.



John Gerrard

School of Geography and Environmental Science

The University of Birmingham

Birmingham B15 2TT, UK




References
Bandyopadhyay, J. 1992 On the perceptions of mountain characteristics, World

 Mountain Network Newsletter, 7, 5-7.

Barsch, D. and Caine, N. 1984 The nature of mountain geomorphology, Mountain

 Research and Development, 4, 287-298.

Brunsden, D. and Allison, R.J. 1986 Mountains and highlands, in Fookes, P.G. and

 Vaughan, P.R. (eds.), A Handbook of Engineering Geomorphology, Surrey

 University Press, Guildford, 150-165.

Debarbieux, B. 1993 Du haut en général et du Mont Blanc en particulier, L’Espace

 Géographie, 1, 5-13.

Derrau, M. 1968 Mountains, in Fairbridge, R.W. (ed.), The Encyclopedia of

 Geomorphology, Reinhold, New York, 737-739.

Finch, V.C. and Trewartha, G.T. 1936 Elements of Geography, McGraw-Hill, New

 York.

Gerrard, A.J. 1990 Mountain Environments, Belhaven, London and MIT, Boston.

Hammond, E.H. 1954 Small-scale continental landform maps, Annals of the

 Association of American Geographers, 44, 33-42.

Hammond, E.H. 1964 Classes of land-surface form in the forty eight states, USA,

 Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 54, Map supp. 4.

Hollermann, P. 1973 Some reflections on the nature of high mountains with special

 reference to the western United States, Arctic and Alpine Research, 5, 149-160.

Ives, J.D. 1985 Mountain environments, Progress in Physical Geography, 9, 425-433.

Ives, J.D. 1987 The mountain lands, in Clark, M.J., Gregory, K.J. and Gurnell, A.M.

 (eds.), Horizons in Physical Geography, Macmillan, London, 232-249.

Ives, J.D. and Barry, R.G. (eds.) 1974 Arctic and Alpine Environments, Methuen,

 London.
Love, D. 1970 Subarctic and subalpine: where and what? Arctic and Alpine Research,

 2, 63-73.

Messerli, B. and Ives J.D (eds.) 1997 Mountains of the World: A Global Priority,

 London, Parthenon.

Peattie, R. 1936 Mountain Geography, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Preston James 1935 An Outline of Geography, Ginn and Co., Boston.

Price, L.W. 1981 Mountains and Man, University of California Press, Berkeley.

Rommano, B. 1995 National Parks policy and mountain depopulation: A case study in

 the Abruzzo region of the Central Apennines, Mountain Research and Development,

 15, 121-132.

Rutkis, J. 1971 Tables on Relative Relief in Middle and Western Europe, Uppsala

 University Naturgeografisk Institutt, report no. 9.

Strahler, A.N. 1946 Geomorphic terminology and classification of land masses,

 Journal of Geology, 54, 32-42.

Temple, P.H. 1972 Mountains, in Brunsden, B. and Doornkamp, J. (eds.), The

 Unquiet Landscape, David and Charles, Newton Abbot, 15-20.

Thorsell, J.W. 1997 Protection of nature in mountains, in Messerli, B. and Ives, J.D.

 (eds.), Mountains of the World: A Global Priority, London, parthenon, 237-248.

Thorsell, J.W. and Harrison, J. 1992 National Parks and nature reserves in mountain

 environments and development, GeoJournal, 27, 113-126.

Troll, C. 1973a The upper timberlines in different climatic zones, Arctic and Alpine

 Research, 5, 3-18.

Troll, C. 1973b High mountain belts between the polar caps and the equator: their

 definition and lower limit, Arctic and Alpine Research, 5, 19-28.

Veyret, P. and Veyret, G. 1962 Essai de definition de la montagne, Revue de
 Géographie Alpine, 50, 5-35.

Waldbaur, H. 1952 Die Reliefenergie in der morphographischen Karte, Petermanns

 Geographische Mittleilungen, 96, 156-167.
