                                                                                       89501
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development / The World Bank. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent.
The material in this publication is copyrighted.




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

REPUBLIC OF KOREA
INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES

DETAILED ASSESSMENT OF
OBSERVANCE
MAY 2014




This Detailed Assessment Report was prepared in the context of a joint World Bank-IMF
Financial Sector Assessment Program mission in in April and July 2013 led by Krishnamurti
Damodaran, World Bank and Ghiath Shabsigh, IMF, and overseen by Finance and Private
Sector Development Vice Presidency, World Bank and the Monetary and Capital Markets
Department, IMF. Further information on the FSAP program can be found at
www.worldbank.org/fsap.



                        THE WORLD BANK
                        FINANCIAL AND PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT VICE PRESIDENCY
                        EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC REGION VICE PRESIDENCY
                                                     CONTENTS



I. ASSESSMENT OF INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES ...................................................................... 1
       A. Introduction and Scope ............................................................................................. 1
       B. Information and Methodology Used for Assessment ............................................... 1
       C. Overview—Institutional and Macro Prudential Setting ........................................... 2
       D. Preconditions for effective insurance supervision.................................................... 4

II. DETAILED PINCIPLE-BY-PRINCIPLE ASSESSMENT ................................................................ 10


Text Tables
Table 1. Korea: Summary of Observance with the ICPs…………………………………...….4
Table 2. Korea: Summary of Observance Level…………………………………………....….6
Table 3. Korea: Recommendations to Improve Observance of ICPs…………………...….….7
Table 4. Korea: Detailed Assessment of Observance of the ICPs……………………...…….15




                                                               i
                   GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS

FSC Act   Act on the Establishment, etc., of Financial Services Commission
IBA       The Insurance Business Act
ASIFI     Act on the Structural Improvement of the Financial Industry
MOSF      Ministry of Strategy and Finance
BoK       Bank of Korea
KDIC      Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation
KIDI      Korea Insurance Development Institute
RAAS      Risk Assessment Application System
RBC       Risk Based Capital




                                   ii
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.     The insurance supervisory system in Korea shows a high level of observance of
the Insurance Core Principles (ICPs) of the International Association of Insurance
Supervisors (IAIS). This high level reflects a strong commitment in Korea to international
standards. The engagement of the FSC and FSS with the IAIS, the FSB and through Korea’s
G-20 membership has certainly contributed positively to this commitment and the quality of
implementation.

2.      The regulatory structure, although complex, is well developed compared to
international norms. The authorities have implemented IFRS accounting standards, updated
the capital regime to a sophisticated risk based capital approach, and many other regulatory
requirements in a proactive and timely manner. Limited weaknesses in the regulatory
structure are well understood by the authorities and can be expected to be addressed.

3.     Compared to the previous FSAP, reforms have been made that are now proactive
to achieve best practices rather than remedial in response to the financial crisis of the late
1990s.

4.      Supervisory developments also reflect some significant strength. The authorities
have developed a solid risk assessment application system (RAAS). Attention to insurance
fraud, particularly through the use of a centralized database, is impressive.

5.      The insurance sector in Korea has long been one of the most significant in the
world in terms of penetration. Total premium stood at 149.9 trillion KRW (134 billion
USD) in 2011 ranking it the eighth largest in the world. Insurance penetration stood at 11.6
percent and was ranked 5th in the world and insurance density stood at USD 2,660 per person
ranked 23rd in the world. Despite the high penetration, continued growth is expected
particularly in retirement savings products given the expectations for demographic aging.

6.     There are 55 insurers, up from 50 five years earlier. There are 24 life insurers and
31 non-life insurers. Included in the defined non-life insurance companies are nine reinsurers.
Insurers can operate as local entities or foreign branches, and there are 26 foreign insurers,
including 14 that operate as branches. Seven insurers are part of defined financial groups, six
having a bank holding company. Agency distribution has been the predominant channel.
Insurance market concentration indicates an open and competitive market. Insurers constitute
around 20 percent of total financial sector assets. All of the large insurers are substantially
domestic with both assets and premiums attributable to their domestic business at levels well
above 90 percent. They do not currently meet the expected criteria for either IAIS Global
Systemic Insurers or Comframe IAIG supervision.

7.      Negative interest rate spreads remain an issue but the challenges have been
mitigated substantially by having recognized the issue well before many other
jurisdictions. The late 1990s financial crisis brought the issue to attention and led to timely
corrective actions, well before many other countries addressed similar challenges. An active
program of monitoring these risks through stress testing and other methods, along with
actions by insurers has greatly reduced this risk and it is expected that insurers are sufficiently
resourced. However, the risk remains albeit at reduced levels and needs to be monitored on an
ongoing basis.

                                                iii
8.     Insurer profitability and capital are solid for both life and non-life insurance.
Capital levels have built over time through injections and retained profits, and comfortably
meet requirements.

9.      Supervision of the insurance industry in Korea is the responsibility of the
Financial Services Commission (FSC) and the Financial Supervisory Service (FSS). The
original FSC was established in 1998 but underwent an important change in 2008 when it was
elevated in status and took on additional policy responsibilities. The FSC delegates inspection
and supervision activities, including by specifying procedures, to the FSS.

10.    Industry capacity for enhanced ERM will take time to mature. Continuing the
development of risk management capacity can be supported by current initiatives to enhance
requirements. Observance will be improved further as ongoing initiatives progress. Enhanced
risk management, group supervision will become more important and can be enhanced
progressively using existing platforms for cooperation. G-SIFI and ComFrame could be
relevant for Korea at least as a host supervisor in the short term. Becoming a signatory to the
IAIS MMoU is in progress.




                                               iv
                     I. ASSESSMENT OF INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES

                                 A. Introduction and Scope

1.     This report is an assessment of Korea’s compliance with International
Association of Insurance Supervisors’s Insurance Core Principles (ICPs), as adopted in
October 2011. The review was carried out as part of the 2013 Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP) assessment of Korea, and was based on the regulatory framework in place,
the supervisory practices employed, and other conditions as they existed in April 2013. The
assessment was carried out by Craig Thorburn, Lead Insurance Specialist, Non-Bank
Financial Institutions Group, Capital Markets Practice, World Bank.

                  B. Information and Methodology Used for Assessment

2.      The assessment uses the version of the IAIS Insurance Core Principles (ICPs)
adopted in October 2011. The revised ICPs reflected a range of revisions from the earlier
versions issued in 2003 and 1999. Whilst some of the revisions can be considered to be in the
nature of clarifications in wording, others represent a significant increase in expectations of
supervisory and regulatory requirements compared to the earlier version especially those that
were introduced motivated by the outcomes of the financial crisis of 2007 and following.

3.      The IAIS prescribes a methodology for assessing the ICPs that has been followed
in this assessment. The methodology is substantially unchanged since the first version of the
ICPs was prepared. The assessment considers regulatory requirements and supervisory
procedures as well as actual outcomes in practice based on observed experience. That is, for
example, a well-designed comprehensive law would not be sufficient of itself to secure
observance of principles. The IAIS Thematic Peer Reviews also provide additional guidance
on consistent interpretation of the ICPs for assessment purposes. The assessment
methogology also addresses definitions of gradings and the treatment of proposed reforms.

4.    The level of observance for each ICP reflects the assessment of the various
standards there under. Each ICP is rated in terms of the level of observance as follows:

      Observed—whenever all the standards are considered to be observed or when all the
       standards are observed except for a number that are considered not applicable.
      Not Applicable—when the standards are considered to be not applicable.
      Largely Observed—where only minor shortcomings exist, which do not raise any
       concerns about the authorities’ ability to achieve full observance.
      Partly Observed—where, despite progress, the shortcomings are sufficient to raise
       doubts about the authorities’ ability to achieve observance.
      Not Observed—where no substantive progress toward observance has been achieved.

5.      The assessment is based solely on the laws, regulations, and other supervisory
requirements and practices that were in place at the time of assessment. The assessment
is specific to the date of the analysis. Ongoing regulatory initiatives, new practices that are
proposed, or other potential influences on ratings in the future are noted by way of additional
comments. The assessment drew upon copies of laws and regulations, financial statistics,
                                               1
publications and other market information including material issued by industry associations,
insurers and other stakeholders, relevant to the insurance sector in Korea.

6.      The assessment has been informed by discussions with regulators and market
participants. The assessor met with staff from FSC and FSS, various insurers and reinsurers,
industry associations, professional bodies, and research institutes. The assessor had access to
a complete self-assessment on the ICPs and responses to a detailed questionnaire that had
been provided by FSC and FSS prior to the commencement of the exercise. The assessor also
was informed by reports prepared by the IAIS in their thematic peer review processes where
Korea participated. The assessor is grateful for the full cooperation extended by all. The
efforts required by FSC and FSS to prepare the self-assessment, as well as its tremendous
support during the mission, are especially appreciated.

                    C. Overview—Institutional and Macro Prudential Setting

7.       The insurance sector in Korea has long been one of the most significant in the
world in terms of penetration. Total premium stood at 149.9 trillion KRW (134 billion
USD) in 2011 ranking it the eighth largest in the world after the US, Japan, France, UK,
Germany, China and Italy respectively and larger than Canada (9th) and Australia (11th).
Insurance penetration, premium compared to GDP, stood at 11.6 (12.0 on AXCO) percent and
was ranked 5th in the world (7.1 percent for life insurance and 4.9 percent for non-life) and
insurance density (premium per capita) stood at USD 2,660 (AXCO 2,777) per person ranked
23rd in the world1. Despite the high saturation, continued growth is expected particularly in
retirement savings products given the expectations for demographic aging.

8.      There are 55 insurers, up from 50 five years earlier. There are 24 life insurers and
31 non-life insurers. Both life and non-life insurers have increased in number over the last 10
years. Included in the defined non-life insurance companies are nine reinsurers, one guarantee
insurer and five “single line” specialist companies. Insurers can operate as local entities or
foreign branches, and there are 26 foreign insurers, including 14 that operate as branches.
Seven insurers are part of defined financial groups, six having a bank holding company.
Agency distribution has been the predominant channel and there are over 477,000 agents as at
the end of 2012 (close to one per 100 persons in the population). Banc-assurance has been
introduced and is being advanced by some companies.

9.       Insurance market concentration indicates an open and competitive market
benchmarked against global datasets. The Herfindahl Index in the life sector stood at 1,161
and the non-life sector reported 1,493. The top five insurers have a market share of 71 percent
in the life sector and 73 percent for non-life insurance2.

10.     Insurers constitute around 20 percent of total financial sector assets. Whether or
not they are domestically systemic will be a useful consideration. Although they are
significant in the domestic market, locally owned insurers have expanded outside Korea only
recently. All of the large insurers are substantially domestic with both assets and premiums

1
    Note that figures used for international comparisons are sourced from the AXCO dataset.
2
    For a discussion on benchmarking concentration measures across jurisdictions see Thorburn (2008).

                                                        2
attributable to their domestic business at levels well above 90 percent. They do not currently
meet the expected criteria for either IAIS Global Systemic Insurers or Comframe IAIG
supervision.

11.     Negative interest rate spreads remain an issue but the challenges have been
mitigated substantially by having recognized the issue well before many other
jurisdictions. The late 1990s financial crisis brought the issue to attention and led to
corrective actions well before many other countries addressed similar challenges. An active
program of monitoring these risks through stress testing and other methods, along with
actions by insurers has greatly reduced this risk and it is expected that insurers are sufficiently
resourced. However, the risk remains albeit at reduced levels and needs to be monitored on an
ongoing basis.

12.     Insurer profitability shows solid results for both life and non-life insurance. As is
often the case, some classes of business are not profitable, particularly motor insurance, but
other classes and investment results have offset the class specific losses to generate overall
profit results.

13.   Capital levels have built over time through injections and retained profits, and
comfortably meet requirements. The coverage for life insurers is over three times the
minimum and non-life and reinsurers both have double the minimum on average.

14.     Supervision of the insurance industry in Korea is the responsibility of the
Financial Services Commission (FSC) and the Financial Supervisory Service (FSS). The
FSS and FSC oversee insurers, reinsurers, and insurance distributors. In addition, they also
have responsibilities for banks, other non-bank credit and savings entities including credit
unions and credit cooperatives, and a range of securities market participants. It also oversees
financial holding companies (FHCs) being entities that control financial institutions.

15.     The original FSC was established in 1998 but underwent an important change in
2008 when it was elevated in status and took on additional responsibilities for financial
policy that were formerly in the then Ministry of Finance and Economy3. The FSC has a
broad mandate to oversee and regulate the financial sector.

16.   The FSC delegates inspection and supervision activities, including by specifying
procedures, to the FSS which is well resourced and respected. The Korea Deposit Insurance
Corporation (KDIC) maintains a policyholder protection fund against insurance failure.

17.     The Korea Insurance Development Institute (KIDI) plays a useful role
supporting technical development across the sector. The KIDI was established as a
ratemaking organization in support of a tariff based regime. This regime was abolished in
2000 although KIDI continues to review rating adequacy for non-life insurers on an annual
basis. Membership includes both life and non-life companies. The life and general insurance


3
  In 2008, the financial policy function of the Ministry of Finance was merged with the regulatory function of the
previous FSC, leading to the current FSC; a separation was also introduced between the policy and execution
functions by dividing the of FSC Chairman and FSS Governor positions.

                                                        3
associations also play a role in support of the industry through the collation and publication of
industry sector statistics in addition to the usual industry association roles.


                    D. Preconditions for effective insurance supervision

18.      The Korean Government framework for financial sector policy involves the
MOSF, FSC, FSS, BoK and KIDC. The MOSF, under the Government Organization Act
has responsible for overall formulation of policy whilst price stability and monetary policy
falls to the BoK. The FSC has specific policy responsibilities in terms of financial sector
oversight.

19.     The infrastructure supporting the insurance sector includes an independent
judiciary. The independence of the judiciary is determined by the constitution. A range of
commercial and civil laws provides the usual framework for legal and property rights relevant
to insurance. Korea has implemented IFRS accounting standards. The actuarial profession has
grown strongly since the start of this century and is in the process of full membership of the
International Actuarial Association.

20.     Financial markets are open, efficient and liquid. The Korean financial markets are
well developed and provide a diverse range of instruments in a deep and liquid market as
would be expected of a financial centre in the region. Corporate governance is generally well
regulated, supported by requirements for outside directors and a developed legal system.

21.     Table 1 summarizes the observance of the ICPs arising from this assessment.

                      Table 1. Korea: Summary of Observance with the ICPs
       Insurance Core Principle            Level                     Overall Comments
1 - Objectives, Powers and                   O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
    Responsibilities of the Supervisor                principle.
2 - Supervisor                               LO       The FSS and FSC arrangements are largely in line
                                                      or above with international standards although
                                                      some enhancement to legal protection in practice
                                                      and to reduce the risk of politicization of the
                                                      leadership positions is suggested.
3 - Information Exchange and                 O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
    Confidentiality Requirements                      principle.
4 - Licensing                                O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
                                                      principle.
5 - Suitability of Persons                   LO       The authorities should extend oversight to key
                                                      persons in control functions regardless of their
                                                      formal management position, and should consider
                                                      more formal criteria that relate to collective
                                                      adequacy of boards and the possibility that any
                                                      person (not just those specified) might be over-
                                                      extended. The obligation on insurers to self-monitor
                                                      and report suitability could be made more formal.
6 - Changes in Control and Portfolio         O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
    Transfers                                         principle.
7 - Corporate Governance                     O        The requirements meet the standards of this core

                                                  4
       Insurance Core Principle            Level                     Overall Comments
                                                     principle.
8 - Risk Management and Internal            LO       The approach to regulation, particularly regarding
    Controls                                         internal controls, actuarial obligations, and
                                                     compliance, is fully observed. Risk management is
                                                     one area where observance will be fully achieved
                                                     as industry capacity improves and internalizes risk
                                                     management approaches throughout the business
                                                     operations.
9 - Supervisory Review and Reporting        O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
                                                     principle.
10 - Preventive and Corrective Measures     O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
                                                     principle.
11 - Enforcement                            O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
                                                     principle.
12 - Winding-up and Exit from the Market    O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
                                                     principle.
13 - Reinsurance and Other Forms of         O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
     Risk Transfer                                   principle.
14 - Valuation                              LO       The continued use of historic cost as a part of the
                                                     valuation system will reduce in relevance over time
                                                     but does, in the interim period, reduce the
                                                     transparency and consistency of the approach
                                                     somewhat.
15 - Investment                             O        Noting that larger insurers tend to have more
                                                     advanced risk management processes and their
                                                     limit setting approach tends to be more robust, the
                                                     FSS could reinforce shift to more risk based
                                                     approach within the limit structure.
16 - Enterprise Risk Management for         LO       The FSS and FSC are developing requirements to
     Solvency Purposes                               introduce an ORSA system for insurers based on
                                                     some guidelines that are under discussion. It is
                                                     also planning to have detailed requirements added
                                                     to regulations for ERM. There is a good deal of
                                                     potential detail that can be implemented as ERM
                                                     capacity develops in Korean insurers and the
                                                     approach of doing so of having a guideline would
                                                     be good.
                                                     The rating of LO is justified given the successful
                                                     implementation of major reforms in a timely manner
                                                     in the Korean market.
17 - Capital Adequacy                       LO       The absence of a group capital requirement should
                                                     be addressed.
18 - Intermediaries                         O        Whilst the FSS and the legal requirements are
                                                     sufficient, the FSS might consider some more
                                                     proactive and anticipatory approaches to ensure its
                                                     presence in the area is given a higher profile.
19 - Conduct of Business                    O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
                                                     principle.
20 - Public Disclosure                      O        The requirements meet the standards of this core
                                                     principle.


                                                 5
       Insurance Core Principle             Level                      Overall Comments
21 - Countering Fraud in Insurance           O        The very impressive approach can be further
                                                      leveraged to improve value to clients and efficiency
                                                      in insurers.
22 - Anti-Money Laundering and               LO       The shortcomings in the AML regime, including the
     Combating the Financing of                       need to specifically address domestic politically
     Terrorism                                        exposed persons, should be addressed to achieve
                                                      full observance.
23 - Group-wide Supervision                  PO       The authorities should advance supervisory college
                                                      considerations with respect to larger groups that
                                                      are internationalizing. The FSS should also request
                                                      participation in colleges for foreign insurers utilizing
                                                      their international network to minimize costs.
                                                      Consideration to strengthening the voluntary nature
                                                      of the FHC laws with either stronger indirect
                                                      oversight or compulsion would have merit.
24 - Macroprudential Surveillance and        O        The FSS should continue to develop its capacity to
     Insurance Supervision                            identify emerging risks relevant to the insurance
                                                      sector and the treatment of these in integrated
                                                      stress testing, particularly where insurers are part
                                                      of financial groups, and could further diversify the
                                                      range of sources that might suggest issues for
                                                      further analysis such as consideration of legislative
                                                      changes on insurance experience.
25 - Supervisory Cooperation and             LO       The authorities should look to deepen engagement
     Coordination                                     in cooperation activities relating to groups (FHC
                                                      approved or not) by exploring exchange of
                                                      understanding of supervisory issues at operational
                                                      levels and contingency planning.
26 - Cross-border Cooperation and            LO
                                                      The authorities should look to deepen engagement
     Coordination on Crisis Management
                                                      in cooperation activities relating to groups (FHC
                                                      approved or not) by exploring exchange of
                                                      understanding. Discussion on expectations in the
                                                      event of insurer distress as part of preliminary
                                                      planning with key counterpart jurisdictions to take
                                                      the elaboration to a deeper level of operational
                                                      detail.
                                                      The authorities should continue the IAIS MMoU
                                                      process.


22.     Table 2 provides a summary of the level of observance, consistent with the high
level noted. In large part, the level of observance reflects a high effort on the part of the
authorities to maintain regulatory requirements and practices in lines with best practices, and
their ability to quickly adopt international standards as they are promulgated.

                         Table 2. Korea: Summary of Observance Level
                    Observed (O)                                    16
                    Largely observed (LO)                           9
                    Partly observed (PO)                            1
                    Not Observed (NO)                               0
                    Total                                           26



                                                  6
23.     Table 3 lists the suggested steps for improvement of the already high level of
observance. These tend to reflect actions that are already in progress but yet to be fully
operational. In particular, improvements in the risk management systems in insurers,
supported by a continuing shift toward risk based supervisory approaches, will secure many
of the improvements. Some changes to legal scope are also suggested, most particularly with
respect to supervision of groups.

               Table 3. Korea: Recommendations to Improve Observance of ICPs
      Insurance Core Principle          Recommendations
2 - Supervisor                          Measures to enhance the political independence of the
                                        governing bodies could be considered. Legal protection
                                        arrangements should be strengthened further.
5 - Suitability of Persons              The authorities should extend oversight to key persons in
                                        control functions regardless of their formal management
                                        position, and should consider more formal criteria that
                                        relate to collective adequacy of boards and the possibility
                                        that any person (not just those specified) might be over-
                                        extended. The obligation on insurers to self-monitor and
                                        report suitability could be made more formal.
8 - Risk Management and Internal        Efforts to encourage more effective enterprise risk
    Controls                            management in insurers should be continued.
15 - Investment                         Noting that larger insurers tend to have more advanced
                                        risk management processes and their limit setting
                                        approach tends to be more robust, the FSS could
                                        reinforce shift to more risk based approach within the limit
                                        structure.
16 - Enterprise Risk Management for     The FSC FSS should press ahead with efforts that
     Solvency Purposes                  encourage a risk based approach to implementing ORSA
                                        and ERM processes within insurers, in an effort to ensure
                                        continued focus on the maturing risk management
                                        technical developments that insurers are pursuing.
17 - Capital Adequacy                   The absence of a group capital requirement should be
                                        addressed.
18 - Intermediaries                     Whilst the FSS and the legal requirements are sufficient,
                                        the FSS might consider some more proactive and
                                        anticipatory approaches to ensure its presence in the
                                        area is given a higher profile.
22 - Anti-Money Laundering and          The shortcomings in the AML regime, including the need
     Combating the Financing of         to specifically address domestic politically exposed
     Terrorism                          persons, should be addressed to achieve full observance.
23 - Group-wide Supervision             The authorities should advance supervisory college
                                        considerations with respect to larger groups that are
                                        internationalizing. The FSS should also request
                                        participation in colleges for foreign insurers utilizing their
                                        international network to minimize costs. Consideration to
                                        strengthening the voluntary nature of the FHC laws with
                                        either stronger indirect oversight or compulsion would
                                        have merit.
24 - Macroprudential Surveillance and   The FSS should continue to develop its capacity to
     Insurance Supervision              identify emerging risks relevant to the insurance sector
                                        and the treatment of these in integrated stress testing,
                                        particularly where insurers are part of financial groups,
                                        and could further diversify the range of sources that might
                                                 7
     Insurance Core Principle         Recommendations
                                      suggest issues for further analysis such as consideration
                                      of legislative changes on insurance experience.
25 - Supervisory Cooperation and      The authorities should look to deepen engagement in
     Coordination                     cooperation activities relating to groups (FHC approved or
                                      not) by exploring exchange of understanding of
                                      supervisory issues at operational levels and contingency
                                      planning.
26 - Cross-border Cooperation and
                                      The authorities should look to deepen engagement in
     Coordination on Crisis
                                      cooperation activities relating to groups (FHC approved or
     Management
                                      not) by exploring exchange of understanding. Discussion
                                      on expectations in the event of insurer distress as part of
                                      preliminary planning with key counterpart jurisdictions to
                                      take the elaboration to a deeper level of operational
                                      detail.
                                      The authorities should continue the IAIS MMoU process.


Authorities’ responses to the assessment

The Financial Services Commission and the Financial Supervisory Service of Korea
(FSC/FSS) welcome the IMF/World Bank’s review of Korea’s regulatory and supervisory
framework for the insurance sector. The FSC/FSS are firmly committed to the FSAP process,
as it provides many valuable insights into the authorities’ effort to continuously review and
improve Korea’s regulatory and supervisory framework for the insurance sector. The
FSC/FSS also appreciate this opportunity to comment on the review, and there are some areas
where the authorities do not agree on the assessment or would like to provide further thoughts
on.

With respect to the ‘suitability of persons’ principle, the IMF/World Bank recommends that
the Korean authorities should extend oversight to key persons in control functions regardless
of their formal management position. However, in accordance with Article 13 of the
Insurance Business Act and Article 19 of the Enforcement Decree of the Insurance Business
Act, the FSC/FSS review the fitness and propriety of every key person of an insurance
company who exercises material influence on management decisions, regardless of his or her
formal management position.

On the ‘enforcement’ principle, the assessment noted that the FSS can fine or remove
individuals for 2 or 5 years. The FSC/FSS wish to add that Article 134 of the Insurance
Business Act provides a firm legal basis to impose a wider range of sanctions on insurance
companies and their executives/employees, which include but not limited to monetary penalty
and suspension from duties.

The FSC/FSS would also like to take this opportunity to share one of the key post-assessment
changes in Korea’s regulatory framework for insurance companies. Following the submission
of comments on the IMF/World Bank’s draft assessment in May, the authorities laid the
groundwork for the implementation of consolidated risk-based capital (RBC) regime in order
to strengthen prudential supervision of insurance groups.


                                               8
The FSC/FSS believe that the new consolidated RBC regime will contribute greatly to more
effective group-wide risk management in the insurance sector, as it would help insurance
companies better identify subsidiary risks and prevent the spread of contagion from a
subsidiary to the entire insurance group.

While a partial trial implementation of the new regime already began in August 2013, the
FSC/FSS expect to proceed with full implementation some time in 2015 after necessary
industry and market assessments.

Finally, the FSC/FSS appreciate the IMF/World Bank’s recommendations and fully expect to
utilize the assessment outcome as an opportunity to further improve and strengthen Korea’s
insurance regulation and supervision. The authorities also look forward to a continuing
dialogue with the IMF/World Bank in jointly seeking to improve the stability and effective
supervision of the global financial services sector.




                                             9
                          II. DETAILED PINCIPLE-BY-PRINCIPLE ASSESSMENT


                    Table 4. KOREA: Detailed Assessment of Observance of the ICPs

ICP 1              Objectives, Powers and Responsibilities of the Supervisor
                   The authority (or authorities) responsible for insurance supervision and the
                   objectives of insurance supervision are clearly defined.

Description        The FSC Act and the Insurance Business Act (IBA) allocate responsibility for
                   insurance sector regulation and supervision to the FSC and FSS. Article 17 of the
                   FSC Act allocates responsibilities to the FSC (developing policy) and the FSS
                   (overseeing supervision and inspections within these policies). The FSC Act defines
                   the objectives of supervision including with respect to insurance. The IBA, in Article
                                                                                      4
                   1, notes that the purpose includes the protection of policyholders , the sound
                   management of insurance companies and the balanced development of the national
                   economy.

                   The FSC Act provides the authorities with broad powers to issue and enforce rules
                   by administrative means and to take action promptly to protect the interests of
                   policyholders.

                   The FSC is required under the FSC Act to identify conflicts and improvements to the
                   supervisory arrangements and does so. In most cases, after appropriate and defined
                   (40 day) consultation, proposals are submitted for adoption and the experience is
                   that they are adopted promptly. In a limited number of cases, one involving
                   difficulties that were raised regarding privacy of information transfer and another on
                   the treatment of a proposal under legal requirements administered by other
                   agencies, the solution was not adopted and alternative solutions are being advanced
                   by other authorities. Both are relatively recent and are being progressed under
                   discussion.

Assessment         Observed

Comments           The requirements in Korea meet the standards of this core principle.

ICP 2              Supervisor
                   The supervisor, in the exercise of its functions and powers:
                       is operationally independent, accountable and transparent;
                       protects confidential information;
                       has appropriate legal protection;
                       has adequate resources; and
                       meets high professional standards.

Description        The supervision and oversight of the financial sector rests with the FSC and the
                   FSS. The FSC deliberates on policy matters relating to inspection and supervision of
                   financial institutions and has the authority to issue and revoke licenses. It also drafts
                   legislation relating to the financial sector and submits it to the national assembly.
                   The FSS acts, in general, to carry out day to day policies of the FSC with primary
                   responsibility for supervision and examination of regulated financial institutions and
                   as a mediator of disputes between financial institutions and their clients.
                   In 2008, the Financial Policy Bureau of the Ministry was integrated into the FSC with
                   the consequence that the FSC was elevated in status to that of a Ministry and the



4
    The IAIS ICPs refer to policyholders to include other beneficiaries and the same intent is adopted in this report.

                                                          10
Chairman to the level of Minister.
Internal Governance
The FSC is governed by nine commissioners including the Chairman and the Vice
Chairman. The Chairman is appointed by the President of Korea on the
recommendation of the Prime Minister. The Vice Chair and two standing
commissioners are also appointed by the President on the recommendation of the
FSC Chairman. The remaining five non-standing commissioners are appointed ex-
officio (Vice Minister of the MOSF, Deputy Governor of the BoK, Governor of the
FSS, and President of the KDIC) except for one industry representative who is
recommended by the Chamber of Commerce.
The FSS is headed by a Governor and up to four Senior Deputy Governors, nine
deputy governors, and a Chief Executive Auditor. The Governor and the Chief
Executive Auditor are appointed by the President on the recommendation of the
Chairman of the FSC. The Governor recommends candidates for Senior Deputy
Governor to the FSC and directly appoints the deputy governors. The governance of
the FSS is set out in articles 3 to 22 and 29 to 36 of the FSC Act.
All of the above officers of the FSC and FSS are appointed for three year terms.


Appointment and Dismissal
There are explicit procedures for appointment and dismissal in the FSC Act articles
4, 10, 29 and 32. Dismissal procedures include causes such as bankruptcy,
incapacity, imprisonment, or violation of the FSC Act. In practice, not all heads of the
FSC have not served their full 3 year term as the elevation to ministry status for the
FSC has raised the possibility that the Chairman’s tenure is now also influenced by
the service at the discretion of the President of Korea. The FSS leadership was less
stable in the early years of establishment but more recent Governors and other’s in
leadership positions have tended to serve their full terms uninterrupted.


Institutional Relationships
The governance structure is the main basis for institutional relationships within Korea
although this is supplemented by requirements governing exchange of information
set out in the FSC Act. Explicit procedures are included in the FSC Act covering
exchange and supervisory work that includes the BoK or the KDIC, and exchange of
information with the MOSF. The operational details of exchanges between the BoK
and the KIDC are also elaborated in MoUs between the parties. The defined roles
and delegations between the FSC and FSS are defined in considerable detail.
Arrangements to interact with the prosecutorial and judicial authorities are well
established. The governor of the FSS also has an explicit open power to request the
assistance of administrative or other agencies as is felt necessary to carry out the
duties of the FSS (Article 67).


Independence and Funding
Officers of the FSC are barred from holding any political position or engaging in any
commercial activity during their tenure.
The FSS budget is approved by the FSC. The FSC budget is approved as part of the
national budget by the National Assembly. As the FSC is part of the public service, it
is subject to personnel-related guidance from the Ministry of Public Administration
and Security. The FSS is not subject to personal policies of the Ministry of Public
Administration but, instead, to the policies prescribed by the FSC and its own FSS
leadership.




                                     11
Transparency of Requirements and Procedures
The FSS and FSC have internal governance procedures that are documented and
generally followed. Internal audit is in place that reviews observance of supervisory
practices. Supervisory decision making is also governed by the FSC Act, and
detailed in extensive subsidiary rules starting with the “Enforcement Decree” and
then Regulations and guidance. The FSS has also published extensive details of its
processes, particularly those relating to their supervisory rating approach, the “Risk
Assessment Application System” (RAAS) as it applies to insurers. These legal
instruments and subsidiary requirements are all publicly available on the FSS
website and in hard copy.


Review of Requirements and Procedures
The regulatory requirements have been actively reviewed to maintain them against
international standards and local market conditions in recent times. Public
consultation is the normal practice and the attention of key stakeholders is drawn to
open consultations through official letters and public announcements and on the
website. Reviews are required under the Administrative Procedures Act articles 41 to
47.


Information on the Insurance Sector and the Supervisor
Aside from the publications already mentioned, the FSS produces an annual report
in Korean and English. This report provides both quantitative and qualitative
information on the conduct of supervision, and some industry performance statistics.
Additional insurance sector statistics are published by the Life Insurance Association
and the General Insurance Association respectively as well as financial information
required to be published by insurers directly.


Appeal Against Supervisory Decisions
Decisions of the FSS can, in cases where there is uncertainty raised about FSC
instruments and policies, be reviewed by the FSC. It is also possible to appeal
individual decisions to be subject to an administrative trial under the court system
under Article 70 of the FSC Act if they feel that their rights and interests are infringed
by unlawful or unreasonable actions by the authorities.


Confidentiality
Confidentiality requirements are imposed on FSC and FSS members and staff both
during and after their terms of office. The FSC obligation comes from Article 60 of
the State Public Officials Act and the FSS obligation is imposed by article 35 of the
FSC Act. Breaches are punishable by either imprisonment for up to three years of a
fine of up to KRW 20 million.


Legal Protection
Officials can be liable for damages only in the event that the cause was intentional or
negligent (Article 2 of the State Compensation Act). Under FSS staff regulations,
protection is available for FSS staff however; decisions to provide legal funding are
made on a case by case basis.


Supervisory Resources
The FSS is funded primarily by fees on financial institutions and market participants
and an allocation from the BoK. The budget for the FSS is approved each year by

                                     12
              the FSC. The FSC budget is approved by the national assembly.
              The budget can be used flexibly and it is possible to request adjustments in
              response to supervisory needs in changed circumstances.
              The FSC and the FSS are both well-resourced generally and with respect to
              insurance supervision.


              Integrity and Professionalism
              FSC and FSS staffs have been given extensive opportunities for training and
              development and have benefited very substantially from engagement in international
              activities.
              The Public Service Ethics Act and FSS bylaws set high standards of integrity and
              professionalism for FSC and FSS staffs respectively.


              Outside Experts
              The FSS can secure outside experts who would be subject to the same obligations
              of integrity and professionalism as FSS staff, although this would be achieved
              through the contractual arrangements with the experts. The FSS can appoint
              external experts to conduct emergency reviews at short notice.


Assessment    Largely observed

Comments      Measures to enhance the political independence of the governing bodies could be
              considered. Legal protection arrangements should be strengthened further.

ICP 3         Information Exchange and Confidentiality Requirements
              The supervisor exchanges information with other relevant supervisors and
              authorities subject to confidentiality, purpose and use requirements.

Description   Article 112 of the IBA provides for the collection of information from insurers and
              from substantial shareholders.
              The FSS can and does exchange information without conditions under its
              international cooperation powers (Article 17-7 of the FSC Act). Requests are
              assessed against the relevant policies including the existence of a supervisory
              purpose and the appropriate confidentiality protections in receiving entities and ask
              that the recipient agree to seek the prior consent of the FSS before passing
              information to others. Reciprocity is not required but is a consideration and the
              existence of formal agreements is not a precondition.
              Domestic exchange of information is governed by MoUs with the BoK and the KIDC.
              Regarding taking their own initiative, the FSS tends not to exchange confidential
              information on its own initiative but often shares public information with others for
              their information. Legally, if it felt it was in the interests of cooperation, the FSS could
              make a self-motivated and initiated disclosure.
              The authorities do get requests mostly related to fitness and propriety due diligence
              and approvals of individuals. The international cooperation department has a team
              that acts as a focal point to handle requests coordinating with the line departments.

Assessment    Observed

Comments




                                                    13
ICP 4         Licensing
              A legal entity which intends to engage in insurance activities must be licensed before
              it can operate within a jurisdiction. The requirements and procedures for licensing
              must be clear, objective and public, and be consistently applied.

Description   Licenses are issued for insurers that can be branches or locally incorporated entities.
              It is legally possible to establish a mutual insurer but, at the time of the assessment,
              there were no insurers that had a mutual structure. Licenses authorize insurers to do
              life or non-life insurance and certain special single line companies. Reinsurance is
              provided with a non-life license although they are permitted to operate as composite
              reinsurers.
              Insurance cannot be conducted without a license. The power to issue licenses that
              are conditional or restricted is provided in the IBA in articles 4 and 7. The procedures
              for licensing are set out in Article 6, and further elaborated including in the published
              FSS Handbook. Under article 9 of the Enforcement Decree of the IBA, decisions on
              licenses are made within a two month period and advised to the applicant. The IBA
              Regulations Articles 2-4 require notification of the reasons for the decision regarding
              denied licenses. In practice, the FSC/FSS tend to issue unconditional licenses
              except regarding restrictions to specific classes of insurance.
              As part of the license process, the FSS assesses requirements for capital, adequate
              manpower, systems and facilities, a sound and feasible business plan, and investors
              who are financially able to support the insurer to the extent called for. Board
              members, significant owners (defined in Article 2 of the IBA with a 10% threshold,
              and connected parties) and Senior management (broadly defined as those who
              constitute the executive management regardless of title) are required to be fit and
              proper.
              Key persons in control functions are not definitively set out in the IBA. Rather, they
              would be assessed only if they were appointed to a position that would be
              considered to be "senior management"
              Minimum capital requirements in absolute terms are prescribed on a class of
              business basis varying from KRW 5 billion for engineering, and title insurance to
              KRW 30 billion for credit guarantee insurance and reinsurance. These individual
                                                rd
              class limits can be reduced to 2/3 of the prescribed level if insurers envisage writing
              90 percent or more of their business through direct mail, telephone or electronic
              distribution. Foreign branches are also subject to a minimum of KRW 3 billion.
              The FSC/FSS consult with foreign supervisors when entities or key persons are
              proposed from foreign jurisdictions.
              Cross border services provision is not permitted.

Assessment    Observed

Comments

ICP 5         Suitability of Persons
              The supervisor requires Board Members, Senior Management, Key Persons in
              Control Functions and Significant Owners of an insurer to be and remain suitable to
              fulfil their respective roles.

Description   Articles 6, 13, 15 and 17 of the IBA define the suitability requirements for large
              shareholders, executives, outside directors, and compliance officers. The
              assessment is substantially against formal qualification criteria including criminal
              records, formal qualifications, compliance based integrity measures, and experience
              in technical cases. The financial competence of significant shareholders is also a
              criterion in those cases. Significant shareholdings are defined to exceed 10% or to
              have a similar impact jointly or through related parties or through effective control so
                                                  14
              is able to be broadly enforced.
              In the event of breaches of suitability, once approved, bans for 2 years are legislated
              in violation of the IBA (and for 5 years if a criminal record). Significant owners can be
              required not to exercise their rights or to divest, under Article 6 of the IBA. There is a
              guideline addressing commitment for independent board members recommending
              that they do not hold positions at more than three companies.
              Fitness and propriety is reviewed through licensing, on appointment and as part of
              the ongoing supervisory inspections. There is no legal requirement that a person
              who becomes other than fit and proper is reported to the FSS, instead a reliance is
              on the insurer taking the necessary steps to remove the person from the position.
              There is no whistle blowing situation provided.
              Collective competence is not comprehensively assessed under the law, for boards,
              however it is addressed as part of the composition for requirements for independent
              board members and, in the case of larger insurers, the composition of the required
              compliance committee. However, the FSS does review the effective operation of the
              board including the appropriateness of the balance of skills and experience of the
              board collectively as part of their supervisory review in practice.
              The FSS also does not tend to consider the capacity of competent persons who may
              have multiple, and possibly too many, commitments thus leading to them being over-
              extended.
              The FSS exchanges information with other authorities to check the suitability of
              relevant people.

Assessment    Largely observed

Comments      The authorities should extend oversight to key persons in control functions
              regardless of their formal management position, and should consider more formal
              criteria that relate to collective adequacy of boards and the possibility that any
              person (not just those specified) might be over-extended. The obligation on insurers
              to self-monitor and report suitability could be made more formal.

ICP 6         Changes in Control and Portfolio Transfers
              Supervisory approval is required for proposals to acquire significant ownership or an
              interest in an insurer that results in that person (legal or natural), directly or indirectly,
              alone or with an associate, exercising control over the insurer. The same applies to
              portfolio transfers or mergers of insurers.

Description   Prior approval is required under article 6 of the IBA to become a significant
              shareholder (at or in excess of 10%, or effective equivalents that are indirect but
              present similar effective control including cases involving affiliated owners or where
              control is deemed to be the case due to effective management influence as defined
              in Article 2 of the IBA). The only exception to the requirement for prior approval is if
              the new control is as a result of an enforcement order.
              The composition of ownership and control is monitored by insurers and reported to
              the FSS. Increases of 1% (up or down) in holdings or newly included affiliates are
              reportable. The Act on the Structural Improvement of the Financial Industry (ASIFI
              Act) also has reporting and approval requirements at 25% and 33% thresholds.
              Given that all shareholders are approved at the threshold level against the same
              criteria whether they are at 10% or 100% then the FSS considers that increases do
              not tend to raise concerns in practice.
              Article 6 of the IBA sets out the criteria for the assessment and approval and these
              are substantially the same as are applied to new licenses, although new licenses
              may require additional information depending on the precise nature of the
              shareholder role in the new enterprise. Article 11 of the Enforcement Decree
              includes obligations for both financial and non-financial resources on those applying

                                                    15
              to be approved as significant owners.
              In the event that an incremental situation, or an external development, gives rise to a
              situation of concern even though the significant shareholder met the requirements
              and was approved at the lower level, the FSS can intervene under a range of indirect
              powers although it does not have a direct power to require a change of control or
              revoke a prior approval but it can make recommendations.
              Portfolio mergers are subject to approval by the FSC under articles 137 to 152 of the
              IBA. As there are no mutual insurers currently licensed, the legislative requirements
              for demutualization are not a material issue.

Assessment    Observed

Comments

ICP 7         Corporate Governance
              The supervisor requires insurers to establish and implement a corporate governance
              framework which provides for sound and prudent management and oversight of the
              insurer’s business and adequately recognizes and protect s the interests of
              policyholders.

Description   The commercial act provides the basis for corporate governance supplemented by
              specificities in the IBA.
              Insurers are required to establish a corporate governance and internal control
              framework that is suitable for their business (article 17 of the IBA). When any insurer
              intends to establish or amend its internal control standards, it requires board
              resolution (article 22 of the Enforcement Decree of the IBA).
              The minimum requirements include a series of minimum compliance requirements,
              (50% outside directors), including audit committee (2/3rds outside directors),
              compliance officer, and majority of independent directors. Etc. Need to cover specific
              areas in the insurer plan (asset management etc) leaving the company to develop an
              appropriate approach.
              Independent directors, defined as “outside directors”, and are required under the IBA
              to not be managers or executives and not shareholders and cannot have business
              transactions with the company (such as audit or legal services). A nominations
              “recommendation” committee made up of 2/3rds existing outside directors has to
              identify candidates. Executives from upstream companies and outside directors of
              parent companies could possibly be “outsiders” but the FSS advise that there are no
              such cases at the time of the assessment.
              The board is also required to oversee the system through the audit committee
              responsibilities and that of the mandatory compliance officer. The responsibilities
              and obligations of the board of directors regarding integrity, due care and diligence,
              and other good practices are prescribed in the Commercial Act.
              Sound risk management elements that are needed are defined in articles 7-5, 7-5-2,
              7-6, 7-7, and 7-8 of the BA Regulation requiring attention be taken care of defined
              risk categories, a risk assessment, and to reflect this assessment in business and
              capital plans. Limits are to be established under these categories and enforced.
              For larger insurers (over KRW 300 billion assets) a risk management committee is
              required (effectively all insurance companies in the current market).
              Internal control systems are subject to inspection and recommendations might be
              suggested for improvement. These inspections draw upon the experience of
              assessors and observed best practices at other entities when they form an opinion of
              the risk management and internal control systems of the insurer.
              When there are failures of governance or internal control systems, the

                                                  16
              consequences of the corporate governance laws are relevant but also the FSS can
              use the powers of a breach of the IBA as the controls are required under Article 17.
              The FSC/FSS can impose constraints, bans, and business license conditions.
              Recommendations can be effectively compulsory when they relate to a particular
              article of the IBA. When there is no particular basis in the IBA, the FSS/FSC can use
              a public guidance and best practice approach.
              Changes in governance are required to be reported to the FSC/FSS and publicly.
              The FSC/FSS introduced a “Best Practices for Insurers’ Remuneration Policies”
              guideline in January 2010 to implement the FSB recommendations on remuneration
              practices (banks and securities have their own sister initiatives). This is a
              recommendation which is enforced through supervisory actions.

Assessment    Observed

Comments

ICP 8         Risk Management and Internal Controls
              The supervisor requires an insurer to have, as part of its overall corporate
              governance framework, effective systems of risk management and internal controls,
              including effective functions for risk management, compliance, actuarial matters, and
              internal audit.

Description   Article 17 of the IBA requires insurers to have an effective risk management and
              internal control system overseen by a “compliance officer” appointed by and
              reporting to the board. The compliance officer’s appointment, independence of
              management, and resourcing are further elaborated by requirements in Article 17
              including prohibitions on dual responsibilities and powers to seek and obtain
              information from operations executives of the insurer. The criteria also support the
              adequacy and effectiveness of the control functions by requiring insurers to have the
              independent oversight of the audit committee for the compliance officer and that the
              officer is subject to fitness and propriety requirements including experience.
              Insurers are required to have an effective risk management function (Article 7-6 of
              the IBA Regulation) and this is subject to inspection and verification.
              Actuaries are required under article 181 of the IBA. Each company has a chief
              actuary subject to fitness and propriety requirements. They have to examine and
              report to the company and the FSS regarding provisions and pricing.
              The Article 3-2 of the Regulation on Business Delegation of Financial Institutions
              (under the FSC Act) obliges institutions to have appropriate standards and to comply
              with them regarding delegated activities. These standards are further elaborated in
              the Appendix 2 of the regulation.
              In practice, insurers tend to have internal audit functions and very developed
              systems for internal control and actuarial oversight but their risk management
              systems are more consistent with a compliance based approach. ERM is a
              developing process in Korean insurers. They have implemented risk management
              requirements but are still maturing in terms of fully internalising risk management
              concepts. The RBC implementation provided a strong impetus to develop risk
              management and it is welcome that KIDI and others are helping with capacity
              development.
              The RAAS also lays out specific standards and supplements the guidance in the law
              and regulations. Risk management and internal controls are assessed through onsite
              inspection and offsite analysis, with the consequence that shortcomings flow through
              to insurer supervisory ratings.




                                                 17
Assessment    Largely Observed

Comments      The approach to regulation, particularly regarding internal controls, actuarial
              obligations, and compliance, is fully observed. Risk management is one area where
              observance will be fully achieved as industry capacity improves and internalizes risk
              management approaches throughout the business operations.

ICP 9         Supervisory Review and Reporting
              The supervisor has an integrated, risk-based system of supervision that uses both
              off-site monitoring and onsite inspections to examine the business of each insurer,
              evaluate its condition, the quality and effectiveness of its Board and Senior
              Management and compliance with legislation and requirements. The supervisor
              obtains the necessary supervisory information to conduct effective supervision of
              insurers and evaluate the insurance market.

Description   Risk-based Supervision Approach
              The FSS FSC approach to supervision is building a risk based approach on what
              has been a solid compliance based approach.
              Insurers are assessed using information of a quantitative and qualitative nature as
              well as input from the ongoing supervisory process in a RAAS rating based
              approach.
              Reporting to the FSS occurs on an annual and a monthly basis. Article 118 of the
              IBA requires insurers to submit statements and business reports. Articles 6-2 and 6-
              8 of the IBA Regulation, and Article 4-1 of the Detailed Regulations define the scope,
              content and frequency of reports and information in increasing detail. These
              regulations also require insurers to report off-balance sheet exposures, outsourced
              functions and material changes. Article 133 of the IBA authorizes the FSC to order
              insurers to submit the list of current shareholders, report on their business and
              submit materials in connection with the performance of items raised in inspections.
              Articles 133-1 and 133-2 facilitate ad hoc requests either directed at on or off site
              requirements. Article 2 of the Act on External Audit of Stock Companies requires
              external audit.
              Fines for inaccurate or late information of up to KRW 50 million can be imposed
              under Article 209 of the IBA.
              The FSC FSS continuously reviews reporting requirements. These were last
              amended in September 2012.


              Offsite Surveillance and Analysis
              The FSS RAAS rating system operates along the lines of CAMEL systems. The risk
              assessment system covers a range of categories of risks and ratings on a 1 to 5
              scale including quantitative and qualitative elements, Ratings are assigned by guided
              and judgmental criteria and then aggregated to a single score using a weighted
              average approach with weights selected based on the importance of relevant risks in
              different business sectors (life versus non-life). Additionally, there are some sub tests
              that might apply in cases of subgroups of scores that inform the consequent
              intervention. Ratings are shared with insurers.
              The RAAS system is documented in a public document. There is evidence of
              proportionality in the RAAS system due to different treatments in the level of quality
              expected between smaller simpler insurers and larger more complex insurers.


              Onsite Inspections
              Article 133 of the IBA provides the FSS powers to conduct on-site inspections and
              gather information deemed necessary to perform its duties. According to Article 8-2
                                                  18
              of the Regulations on Examination and Sanctions Against Financial Institutions, a
              prior written notice of examination is not required in prescribed cases.
              The FSS operates an inspection program that is organised into two departments (life
              and non-life). On average general inspections of a full nature for three or four
              companies per year. 27 general insurance targeted inspections were done last year
              for non-life. This year, 13 are planned for non-life.
              Inspections can be general or targeted and can extend to service providers. The
              FSS has an internal manual that provides guidance to staff on the procedures,
              supplementing the legal requirements set out in regulations. Inspections include
              verification of returns and reports, supplementing the FSS engagement with external
              auditors on the quality of financial reports. The FSS issues inspection reports and
              recommended corrective actions to insurers.
              The number of inspections conducted per year varies reflecting RAAS ratings but it
              is usual for all insurers to get either a general or targeted inspection each year to 18
              months.

Assessment    Observed

Comments

ICP 10        Preventive and Corrective Measures
              The supervisor takes preventive and corrective measures that are timely, suitable
              and necessary to achieve the objectives of insurance supervision.

Description   Article 200 of the IBA prohibits the operation of an insurance business without a
              license required under article 4. A person who violates this requirement can be
              penalized by a fine of up to 30 million KRW or imprisonment of up to five years.


              There is a progressive escalation of measures provided for under the IBA article 131
              and 123 and the Regulation articles 7-16, to 7-22. The steps and the numbers of
              actions taken with respect to the insurance sector are as follows:


                                                                            2011                      2012
               Onsite action                                                 81                        101
               Management caution                                            10                         25
               Improvement needed                                            33                         34
               Warning                                                       31                         24
               Request for action                                             2                         26
               Disciplinary action                                           73                         81
               Other                                                          0                          0
                                                                                           Source: FSS Annual Reports
                       Note: 2010 figures are not shown as they are not categorized in a similar manner. The insurance
              supervisory function also sanctions or takes preventative measures that are categorized as covering asset
                     management, accounting, internal control, or IT issues and are not shown in the above table but, in
                                                                                 aggregate, are of a similar magnitude.



              Under article 7-20 of the IBA Regulations, insurers that have corrective actions have
              to develop preventative plans that need to be approved by the FSC.


              Reports and sanctions are discussed with the CEO and boards. The FSS generally
              sends reports from inspections, and sanctions or requests for action, to the CEO.
              They do meet boards annually. They also meet as part of the onsite inspections with
              management and boards, internal audit. The board has to be informed of outcomes

                                                         19
              from inspections and sanctions according to the IBA Regulations.


              The FSS and FSC have decision making lines and delegations in place governing
              the levels of authority for taking actions in line with the powers under the law. Onsite
              inspection reports form the basis for these actions. Reports are reviewed internally to
              ensure the decisions are appropriate including by a “restriction review office” and
              then the “restriction review committee” (8 of the 9 members are independent of the
              FSS to add to the transparency). Where it is appropriate, a 2 week notice period is
              provided to the insurer. Fines also go through this process.


              Appeals of decisions for corrective action and preventative measures are permitted
              through administrative legal actions.

Assessment    Observed

Comments

ICP 11        Enforcement
              The supervisor enforces corrective action and, where needed, imposes sanctions
              based on clear and objective criteria that are publicly disclosed.

Description   As noted in the description for ICP 10, there is a progressive structure for
              intervention aimed at corrective action. Actions are taken using these formal
              processes as a matter of course. There is a wide range of corrective actions
              specified in regulations and include directions that could restrict expenses or the
              payment of dividends so as to maintain capital. Rectification plans are agreed by the
              FSC and followed up by progress reports and completion reports made to the FSS to
              verify that the plan is being implemented. Plans that prove to be insufficient to rectify
              the concerns can be amended at any time.
              FSS can fine or remove individuals for 2 or 5 years. The FSS can replace or
              suspend senior officers from their duties or replace them with a custodian to act in
              the position. Under the Structural Improvement of the Financial Industry Act, the FSC
              can appoint managers to take over the oversight of an insurer. The IBA provides for
              issuing an order for cessation of business, to freeze assets or payments, or to take
              another action under a general directions power in article 131-2.
              Articles 196, 197, 204, 209 of the IBA provide the legal basis for imposing penalties
              and fines. Article 209 states that an insurer may be punished by a fine not exceeding
              KRW 50 million where it fails to submit the financial statement by the deadline or
              submits a false statement.
              Fines are paid to the FSC.
              The cooperation of other authorities, particularly the prosecutors in this case, is
              supported by Article 65 and 67 of the FSC Act where this cooperation can be
              requested by the head of the FSC.
              The FSC is obligated to act with objectivity and fairness under the Framework Act on
              Administrative Regulations. This has been further enhanced by its own actions that
              set out the procedures in a transparent way including internal review and, ultimately,
              decisions made in a review committee's deliberation. Article 34 of the Regulations on
              Examination and Sanctions Against Financial Institutions makes transparent the
              existence of this process and the review committee.

Assessment    Observed

Comments

                                                  20
ICP 12        Winding-up and Exit from the Market
              The legislation defines a range of options for the exit of insurance legal entities from
              the market. It defines insolvency and establishes the criteria and procedure for
              dealing with insolvency of insurance legal entities. In the event of winding-up
              proceedings of insurance legal entities, the legal framework gives priority to the
              protection of policyholders and aims at minimizing disruption to provision of benefits
              to policyholders.

Description   The procedures for wind-up are set out in the act on the structural improvement of
              the financial industry and the IBA and associated regulations.
              Articles 7-17, 7-18 and 7-19 of the regulation defines when an insurer has to put in
              place corrective measures required by the FSC/FSS. An insurer with a solvency ratio
              less 100%, or a RAAC rating below 4 both provide sufficient triggers to suspend
              business. The FSS can instruct the insurer to wind-up by order when it breaches
              such a trigger.
              Involuntary wind-up is managed by appointing a manager of the wind-up process
              from the FSS.
              In practice, including in a material number of cases that followed the 97-98 financial
              crisis, the FSS has adopted the approach of ordering the transfer of policy
              obligations to other insurers to ensure continuity of provision of benefits to
              policyholders.
              Policyholder protection in the event of wind-up is supported by the insurance
              component of the KDIC. The KDIC covers insurance policyholders and beneficiaries
              with a limit up to KRW 50 million.

Assessment    Observed

Comments

ICP 13        Reinsurance and Other Forms of Risk Transfer
              The supervisor sets standards for the use of reinsurance and other forms of risk
              transfer, ensuring that insurers adequately control and transparently report their risk
              transfer programmes. The supervisor takes into account the nature of reinsurance
              business when supervising reinsurers based in its jurisdiction.

Description   The FSS has provided a document “Best Practices for the Reinsurance Management
              of Insurance Companies” that establishes requirements against which insurers are
              assessed. The document requires an insurance operating strategy and procedures
              to execute the strategy, and associated policy statements and internal procedures.
              The supervisor is informed of both the overall policies and specific transactions for
              review. Article 7-12 of the IBA Regulation requires insurers to submit details of
              reinsurance contracts and Article 4-1 of the “Detailed Regulations” defines required
              transaction reports.
              The supervisor takes into account the nature of supervision of reinsurers and other
              counterparties, including any supervisory recognition arrangements in place.
              The requirements include the need for the treatment of the reinsurance asset in the
              cedant accounts and that the reinsurance shall accumulate liability reserves for the
              portions reinsured, and identifies conditions for acceptance of these assets. If the
              insurer accepting reinsurance fails to satisfy the criteria for financial soundness,
              insurers must reduce the valuation of the assets (Article 63 of the IBA Enforcement
              Decree).
              The Best Practices for the Reinsurance Management of Insurance Companies,
              requires secure reinsurance contract documents before reinsurance contracts are

                                                  21
              fully confirmed for recognition purposes.
              Management of liquidity risk related to reinsurance is assessed by the FSS quite
              actively and it is embedded in the internal examination manual.
              Risk transfer to capital markets is not allowed at the time of the assessment as the
              law is silent and insurers have to gain approvals and it is not currently a listed activity
              that an insurer can conduct.
              Reinsurance requirements are included in the normal inspection and investigation
              processes and the FSS recommends changes if needed and takes into account a
              test of proportionality in doing so.



Assessment    Observed

Comments

ICP 14        Valuation
              The supervisor establishes requirements for the valuation of assets and liabilities for
              solvency purposes.

Description   Korea has adopted IFRS. This addresses recognition, derecognition and
              measurement of assets and liabilities. Articles 6-1 to 6-3, 6-11 and 6-12 of the IBA
              Regulation further addresses recognition and measurement of assets and liabilities
              for solvency purposes.
              The valuation of liabilities was historically based on an historic cost approach using
              policy parameters established at the point of sale. This approach has been used in a
              number of countries to generate consistent emergence of profit matching cost based
              asset valuations however, Korea no longer uses cost based assets having moved to
              IFRS. Historic cost elements remain relevant for surrender value coverage purposes
              so have been maintained as part of the system.
              However, the historic cost has been maintained for insurance liabilities,
              supplemented by a liability adequacy test. Given the fact that interest rates have
              fallen in particular, Korean insurers now also calculate a fair value assessment of the
              adequacy of the liability valuation (the “Liability Adequacy Test”) that requires the
                                                                             th
              use of the current estimate using realistic reserves and a 65 percentile and to adopt
              the greater result. In this way, they assess the adequacy of the liability valuation.
                              th
              Where the 65 percentile does produce an additional liability, it is shown separately
              as an addition to the historic cost.
              Discount rates are applied. Discount rates and the method to determine the
              percentile are determined under guidance in the Enforcement Decree IBA. The
              Liability Adequacy Test and the balance of the IFRS calculations take a risk adjusted
              and market consistent approach but without adjustment for the insurers own credit
              standing.
              The extent that assets and liabilities are “consistent” is a matter of interpretation
              given the calculation method includes an element of the historic cost approach but,
              with the discounted value overlay, is consistent for the purposes of solvency
              assessment. The valuations are, principally as a result of the IFRS conversion,
              decision useful, transparent and reliable.
              Technical reserves need to reflect options and guarantees, and the accumulation of
              guarantee reserves allow for guaranteed minimum benefits such as guaranteed
              minimum accumulation, death or withdrawal benefits.

Assessment    Largely Observed



                                                   22
Comments      The continued use of historic cost as a part of the valuation system will reduce in
              relevance over time but does, in the interim period, reduce the transparency and
              consistency of the approach somewhat.

ICP 15        Investment
              The supervisor establishes requirements for solvency purposes on the investment
              activities of insurers in order to address the risks faced by insurers.

Description   The IBA prescribes principles for investment, enumerates prohibited investments
              and sets investment limitations (Articles 104-106). Investment regulations are
              codified in Article 7-1 of the IBA Regulation, and are elaborated in informative
              documents such as the published FSS handbook. Regulated investment limits are
              hard limits – that is, it is not possible to hold assets in excess of the limits. These
              requirements include the usual issues covered regarding investments that are made
              by insurance legal entities that are relevant for the control of insurance group level
              investments.
              Investment policies have to address the appropriateness of assets in terms of
              security, stability, return and liquidity and this is reinforced by the statutory limits on
              assets of lower liquidity such as real estate and unlisted lending.
              To encourage investments that are appropriate to the nature of the liabilities, the
              RBC system also addresses mismatch and imposes additional capital requirements
              consistent with the extent of mismatch.
              The RAAS and on site inspection processes review the quality of investment
              management including the capacity of insurers to manage the risks associated with
              the assets that it selects. These guidelines in the inspection processes give
              particular attention to credit risk, risk management and modelling capacity, and the
              appropriateness of the insurers own internal limit systems.
              As a result, the FSS and FSC arrangements represent a blend of a fairly compliance
              oriented set of limits in the rules but the RAAS takes a more risk based approach to
              supervision given that it goes well beyond the legal limits to assessing the
              investment policy and the derived internal limits and controls. At the same time,
              insurers still evidence a maturing risk approach as their investment initiatives have
              been enhanced by the RBC requirements than a more generic risk assessment.
              Although, this is a positive development as the purchase of longer term bonds has
              reduced both the exposure to negative spreads and to duration mismatches.



Assessment    Observed

Comments      Recommendation, noting that larger insurers tend to have more advanced risk
              management processes and their limit setting approach tends to be more robust,
              reinforce shift to more risk based approach within the limit structure.

ICP 16        Enterprise Risk Management for Solvency Purposes
              The supervisor establishes enterprise risk management requirements for solvency
              purposes that require insurers to address all relevant and material risks.

Description   With the exception of ORSA related requirements, which are expected to be
              introduced in the near future, most risk management requirements are in place in
              regulation. Insurers demonstrate that they are developing but have not yet fully
              institutionalised ERM approaches into their business operations.
              Insurers are required to establish a risk management committee, risk management
              policies, tolerance limits (particularly on the asset side), and a risk management
              function responsible for the identification and management of risk (Article 7-6 of the

                                                    23
             IBA Regulation). More detailed requirements for ERM are planned to be included to
             help operationalize these requirements and the FSS FSC is (rightly) taking a
             progressive approach that will help insurers to properly incorporate risk management
             into their business methods more fully, in contrast to a less desirable compliance
             approach.
             Although the IBA Regulations (Article 7-7) sets requirements regarding the
             assessment and management of risk, there is no specific attention given to the
             necessary documentation of ERM at a detailed level at this stage.
             Article 7-6 of the regulation under the IBA requires a risk management committee
             and risk management operation within the insurers. Procedures and practices have
             to be documented (Article 7-7) although the specific content of the documentation is
             expressed in general terms and is planned to be elaborated in more detail (for
             example the which risks to cover, how to address certain situations in line with the
             capital regime requirements etc).
             The new RBC regime, along with requirements for Asset-Liability management
             policies, has brought a useful focus to investment and liability risks but product
             development and pricing is not yet fully integrated into the risk management process
             in all cases and there is no specific regulatory requirement for such inclusion.
             Insurers are working on the integration of their risk management systems, currently
             requiring risk tolerance in terms of limit development for example, to a broader risk
             tolerance capacity consistent with the nature, scale and complexity of the insurers.
             The same can be said for a more formal requirement to address the need for the
             ERM system to be responsive to changes in risk profiles or to incorporate the
             structured processes of feedback loops, data quality considerations or incorporation
             in management processes although many of these issues are addressed to an
             extent in the insurance sector by other means.
             In terms of having a risk tolerance and capital policy aligned to business strategies
             and plans, insurers are required to have such an approach in broad terms under
             article 7-7 of the regulation but their ability to make more explicit linkages is not
             uniform across the sector. The KIDI is also assisting the sector to develop its risk
             management capacity toward a more complete ERM approach.
             At present, there are no ORSA requirements in Korean insurance regulation, but
             FSC/FSS plans to introduce ORSA requirements during 2013.
             Through the RAAS, the FSC FSS evaluates the management capacity and functions
             of insurers and takes corrective actions as needed.



Assessment   Largely observed

Comments     The FSS and FSC are developing requirements to introduce an ORSA system for
             insurers based on some guidelines that are under discussion that should be
             implemented in 2013. It is also planning to have detailed requirements added to
             regulations for ERM. There is a good deal of potential detail that can be implemented
             as ERM capacity develops in Korean insurers and the approach of doing so of
             having a guideline would be good.
             The rating of LO is justified given the successful implementation of major reforms in
             a timely manner in the Korean market.

ICP 17       Capital Adequacy
             The supervisor establishes capital adequacy requirements for solvency purposes so
             that insurers can absorb significant unforeseen losses and to provide for degrees of
             supervisory intervention.



                                                 24
Description   A “North American” risk based capital regime was introduced in 2009 replacing the
              previous “Solvency I” type system. Unlike the US system, minimum requirements
              have to be observed at a minimum of a 100 percent coverage ratio below which
              compulsory intervention is envisaged in contrast to the US 50% level and insurers
              also have a widespread view, promoted by supervisory expectations, that a buffer
              level should be maintained more consistent with a coverage ratio of 150%.
              Degrees of intervention by the FSC are determined according to solvency levels as
              well as being informed by the RAAS system that includes RBC coverage triggers.
              Articles 7-17 to 7-19 of the IBA Regulation specifies control levels relating to the
              coverage ratios including the need for the strongest intervention below 100%,
              “requests for improvement” between 100% and 150% coverage ratios and
              “Recommendations” between 150% and 200%.
              Companies meet the requirements comfortably as a result of capital injections and
              retained earnings. Life insurers have a coverage ratio of 311%, non-life insurers
              have 299% coverage and reinsurers have 210% coverage.
              The parameters were originally established at the 95% VaR level and this has been
              adjusted to 99% with a phase in period.
              The current regime in Korea does not allow internal models to be used for capital
              purposes, although such a concept is being considered.
              The regime, based on IFRS consistent statements as discussed under ICP 14
              above, uses a total balance sheet approach and, to a considerable extent,
              recognizes the interdependence between assets, liabilities, regulatory capital
              requirements and capital resources and requires that risks are appropriately
              recognized however the treatment of some historic cost valuations means that this is
              less than fully transparent.
              The Regulation on the Supervision of Financial Holding Companies envisages
              requirements for capital adequacy of groups. A Task Force is drafting a group-wide
              solvency regime at the time of the assessment, expected to be finalized in 2013.
              The capital requirements are well documented in regulations and supported by a
              publicly available handbook that explains both the rule and the background to its
              development.

Assessment    Largely Observed

Comments      The absence of a group capital requirement should be addressed.

ICP 18        Intermediaries
              The supervisor sets and enforces requirements for the conduct of insurance
              intermediaries, to ensure that they conduct business in a professional and
              transparent manner.

Description   Insurance intermediaries are required to be licensed under articles 84, 87 and 89 of
              the IBA. Under article 136 of the IBA, intermediaries are subject to ongoing
              supervision including inspection and sanction powers. Given the numbers involved,
              the supervisory approach and techniques involve around 4000 agencies (that have
              the 477000 solicitors attached to them or solicitors can be attached directly to an
              insurance company), using inspections of larger agencies, a publicized call center
              that addresses complaints, and disclosure requirements.
              Requirements on the qualifications and experience of intermediaries and minimum
              training needs are in place. These include prohibitions on persons who have not
              completed proportionate training requirements in hours and content (examined with
              a defined pass level), as well as such issues as not having a criminal record. There
              is an experience based credit for the obligation to cover the training hours that can
              offset some of the training hours needed.

                                                 25
              The FSS has a separate team covering intermediary supervision staffed by 5
              supervisors, and two other inspection teams of a similar size. The associations also
              have inspection teams that look at particular topics in support of the supervisory
              approach. Annual planning includes consideration of specific areas for target and
              focus in the coming year.
              Funds provided to intermediaries are protected through, in the case of brokers, a
              bond placed by the broker with FSS (for KRW 100 million for individuals and KRW
              300 million for corporations, although the FSS can specify an increase in cases of
              larger entities) (Article 37 of the Enforcement decree). Insurers are responsible for
              the actions of their agents in similar cases under the IBA Article 102.

Assessment    Observed

Comments      Whilst the FSS and the legal requirements are sufficient, the FSS might consider
              some more proactive and anticipatory approaches to ensure its presence in the area
              is given a higher profile.

ICP 19        Conduct of Business
              The supervisor sets requirements for the conduct of the business of insurance to
              ensure customers are treated fairly, both before a contract is entered into and
              through to the point at which all obligations under a contract have been satisfied.

Description   In 2012, the FSS set up a Financial Consumer Protection Bureau to enhance its
              consumer protection function. It contains departments dedicated to consumer
              protection, dispute settlements, and financial education supplemented by an
              examination office.
              The FSS operates a “fair transaction process” to support consumer -orientated
              financial services provision. In addition to providing a public complaint service, the
              FSS oversees the roles and activities of other consumer protection organizations in
              the financial sector.
              Insurance intermediaries have obligations regarding “know your customer” (KYC),
              and a duty to explain the product that is being recommended and that such
              recommendations are suitable (they have a “best product” recommendation
              approach).
              In support of effective communication, the FSS FSC have published a “regulation on
              matters to be Observed in Solicitation Advertisements” that applies to both
              intermediaries and insurance companies. The requirements (under Article 7-45 of
              the Regulations) specify certain documents that have to be provided at certain points
              of the process such as when making the recommendation, signing the contract, and
              after the issue of the policy.
              Efforts to achieving the desired outcome for clients are enhanced by the prescribed
              disclosures and documents, as well as the obligations for ethical behavior and
              training. Additionally, regarding the risks arising from bancassurance, the FSS
              requires a distinction between bank and insurance products and applies a “25% rule”
              where banks cannot, with limited exceptions, make sales of insurance products for
              an individual insurer that exceeds 25% of total insurance sales for that bank.
              The FSS consumer complaint and mediation process includes access to a Financial
              Disputes Mediation Committee made up of over thirty experts from the FSS and the
              private sector.

Assessment    Observed

Comments



                                                  26
ICP 20        Public Disclosure
              The supervisor requires insurers to disclose relevant, comprehensive and adequate
              information on a timely basis in order to give policyholders and market participants a
              clear view of their business activities, performance and financial position. This is
              expected to enhance market discipline and understanding of the risks to which an
              insurer is exposed and the manner in which those risks are managed.

Description   Article 124 of the IBA, Article 67 of the Enforcement decree, and article 7-44 of the
              IBA Regulations provide obligations on public disclosure of information that is
              comprehensive, relevant, adequate and timely. These requirements are also
              supplemented by disclosure guidelines developed by the industry associations.
              Information includes financial performance and balance sheet statistics in
              considerable detail and is supplemented by information on business plans,
              organisational structures and changes, performance by business line, risk exposure
              measures, capital requirements and adequacy, details of risk management methods
              and approaches, reinsurance practices and counterparty quality, governance,
              investment policies and asset valuation information. Triangle information is reported
              in the case of non-life insurers.
              Annual financial information is audited.
              The adoption of IFRS has been comprehensive ensuring considerable consistency
              across the sector and facilitating comparative analysis (noting however the specific
              treatment of insurance liability valuations noted in ICP 14).
              Article 118 of the IBA requires insurers to submit their financial reports within three
              months from the end of each financial year. However, in practice, reports are
              generally filed within two months of the end of the reporting period. Insurance
              company websites and industry association homepages carry the information
              required.
              Information is used by industry stakeholders including ratings agencies who produce
              reports discussing industry performance and trends and outlook.

Assessment    Observed

Comments

ICP 21        Countering Fraud in Insurance
              The supervisor requires that insurers and intermediaries take effective measures to
              deter, prevent, detect, report and remedy fraud in insurance.

Description   Article 3-3 of the IBA Regulations requires insurers to specifically establish controls
              against insurance fraud. This includes sales fraud controls checking client
              backgrounds and the number of policies and coverage a potential client already has.
              The regulations are more focused on the underwriting than the claims side.
              Sanctions against fraud in general are prescribed by the Criminal Act (Article 347),
              while the IBA addresses prejudicing insurance fraud investigations, and provides
              sanctions (Article 209).
              The FSS FSC has introduced a database in 2003 (the “Insurance Fraud Analysis
              System” IFAS). This system records all insurance contracts and claims data received
              monthly electronically. Cases of potential fraud are also highlighted to the FSS FSC
              by insurers. This database is subject to regular review including using suspect fraud
              cases and the development of fraud indexes, identifying individuals with a high
              propensity to commit fraud etc. The system runs identifying algorithms and reports
              for follow up. Additionally, broader reports are prepared on trends and specific issues
              that are made available to insurers including identification of fraud cases by product,
              type of case (eg false or exaggerated reporting or deliberate cause of a claim event),
              demographic information etc. The database is managed by a team in the FSS
                                                   27
              (Investigation and analysis team – 5 members – various backgrounds – some IT,
              statistics, administrative, mathematics, and legal). The breadth of the database also
              facilitates the effective coverage of the insurance fraud oversight to insurance
              intermediaries and claims assessors and others in the insurance service delivery
              chain.
              Insurance fraud analysis is supplemented by insurer inspections and controls and
              feeds into the rating system of insurers.
              The database information, to the extent that it is individual records, has to be kept
              confidential within the FSS with the exception of prosecuting cases. Within the FSS,
              there are controls on the use of information limiting it to specific purposes and staff.
              Although the individual record data is not available outside the FSS, the aggregate
              trends are available but analysis of these records by industry and related
              stakeholders is not common.
              Fraud is investigated by the FSS that can report it to the police who then refer it to
              the prosecutor’s office or the police can initiate an investigation themselves.
              Insurance Investigation Committee has been established for cross agency
              coordination and development of policies to address fraud in insurance. It includes
              agencies such as the Ministry of Health and Welfare and others interested in the
              topic and is chaired by the FSC. The FSC is reviewing the possibility of adding the
              prosecutorial authorities and the consumer protection agencies as members of the
              investigation committee. Currently a different team function coordinates with police
              and prosecutors on the cases identified.
              There has been a case, as an example, where a fraud was suspected and the
              system was able to be used to identify and detect and prevent fraud involving the
              collaboration of multiple parties.

Assessment    Observed

Comments      Very impressive approach can be further leveraged to improve value to clients and
              efficiency in insurers.

ICP 22        Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism
              The supervisor requires insurers and intermediaries to take effective measures to
              combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism. In addition, and the
              supervisor takes effective measures to combat money laundering financing of
              terrorism.

Description   The Korean arrangements for AML CFT were subject to an assessment against the
              FATF requirements in October 2009, and is available on the FATF website. There is
              an FIU in the FSC that oversees AML and CFT. The Act on Reporting and Use of
              Certain Financial Transaction Information oversees AML and obliges reporting by
              insurers (and other entities) to the FIU. The Act on Prohibition of the Financing of
              Terrorism (APFT) establishes requirements oversee CFT. The requirements on
              insurers extend to cover all aspects of their business operations including functions
              conducted through intermediaries.
              Insurance companies do make suspicious transaction reports (STR) especially as
              reporting is of transactions – not just those in cash - albeit that insurer reports are not
              as voluminous as banks and securities companies.
              Regarding significant people (PEPs) the current regulations cover foreigners but not
              domestic PEPs but this regulation is being developed.
              The focus of the FIU has been substantially on banks but they are shifting to
              strengthen their focus on insurers. Korea has seen an insurance case that was
              subject to rejection by the insurer but reported and followed up to action an attempt
              to launder the proceeds of crime.

                                                   28
              The FIU has its own inspection process and activity and also makes use of FSS
              capacities. The FSS has been developing specific inspection expertise in AML CFT
              matters.

Assessment    Largely Observed

Comments      The shortcomings in the AML regime, most specifically to address domestic
              politically exposed persons, should be addressed to achieve full observance.

ICP 23        Group-wide Supervision
              The supervisor supervises insurers on a legal entity and group-wide basis.

Description   Group-wide Supervision is operated through indirect measures in the IBA covering
              such issues as related party transactions, capital treatment of certain assets,
              oversight and risk management requirements and inspections and this has been the
              historic approach. The Financial Holding Company Act, introduced in 2000, provides
              for some direct measures and an approval process for holding companies. All
              holding companies licensed under the FHCA are required to be non-operating. If a
              FHC has industrial capital (real sector activities linked) then it cannot own both an
              insurance company and a bank.
              The FHCA includes a flexible definition of groups so that this can be tailored to suit
              the range of possible cases that might need to be accommodated. Operating holding
              companies and intermediate holding companies, located in Korea are not legally
              permitted to be part of an FHC headed group.
              The consideration of risk elements remains largely indirect through limitations on
              certain activities and through individual entity supervision. These elements consider
              internal transactions between entities and cover upstream shareholders from
              licensed entities but not all potential risk concentrations and exposures are captured
              in the supervisory framework in place albeit that they are able to be monitored by the
              FSC FSS. The authorities have flexibility to determine regulatory and supervisory
              tools in the domestic context and elements of the Group Supervisory Framework are
              adjusted as the groups and risks develop.
              Application as a FHC is voluntary. When approved, this provides for group wide
              treatment of particular issues (including sharing customer information between
              entities which would present synergies), and governance such as the ability for
              directors to act in multiple entities in the group. Delegation of holding company
              activities to subsidiaries is facilitated. Simpler processes for some approvals are also
              available.
              There are 8 FHCs approved (one of which is predominantly an insurance group and
              the others are banking oriented groups with insurance entities within the group).
              These groups are very substantially domestic groups operating within Korea, with
              only very limited operations outside the country, but it can be expected that external
              business will grow making the groups more international in nature over time.
              The FSS can conduct oversight of and inspection of subsidiaries of insurance
              companies (subject to a 15% threshold to be considered a subsidiary).
              As a host supervisor for a number of insurers operating subsidiaries or branches in
              Korea, the FSS contributes to group supervision through cooperation and exchange
              of information on request and specifically seeks information when it is considering
              particular approvals that it has to provide. As home supervisor, the FSS can respond
              to requests from foreign supervisors when they get them but they tend not to receive
              many.
              For domestic groups, the FSS cooperates with the KDIC, (and the BoK for banks),
              and has cooperation with non-financial sector supervisory agencies as needed (eg
              ministry of health).


                                                  29
              There is some participation in supervisory colleges where the FSS and FSC have
              host supervisory roles. Usefully, the authorities also have annual collaboration
              meetings with the NAIC to discuss market and supervisory policy developments. The
              CIRC and the FSS (first governor) hold cooperative exchange meetings.

Assessment    Partly Observed

Comments      The authorities should advance supervisory college considerations with respect to
              larger groups that are internationalising. The FSS should also request participation in
              colleges for foreign insurers utilising their international network to minimise costs.
              Consideration to strengthening the voluntary nature of the FHC laws with either
              stronger indirect oversight or compulsion would have merit.

ICP 24        Macroprudential Surveillance and Insurance Supervision
              The supervisor identifies, monitors and analyses market and financial developments
              and other environmental factors that may impact insurers and insurance markets and
              uses this information in the supervision of individual insurers. Such tasks should,
              where appropriate, utilize information from, and insights gained by, other national
              authorities.

Description   As a consolidated supervisory agency, the FSC FSS obtains information on financial
              market developments across the sector. The MoU with the BoK allows access to
              information on macroeconomic factors. Beyond industry information, the
              macroprudential effort considers external linkages in the real economy, capital flows,
              foreign exchange activities, and other macroeconomic indicators. Macroprudential
              supervision for the overall financial sector including insurance, is performed by the
              Macroprudential Supervision Department at FSS.
              The supervisory functions empower the FSS to bring considerable information from
              the insurance sector and its affiliated activities to the macroprudential process, as
              well as the resulting assessments and the trends in these assessments from the
              RAAS. The RAAS brings an element of materiality to take account of nature scale
              and complexity by evaluating expectations of insurers in terms of their risk
              assessment grades, particularly as larger insurers have a greater importance to the
              system than smaller ones.
              Macroprudential intervention tools have been developed to address banking, credit
              cards, and other non-insurance sector interventions.
              Sources of input include a financial returns and risk assessments from the micro
              prudential oversight of insurers as well as input on broader economic conditions,
              supported by collaboration with the BoK. The KIDI also acts as a resource.
              Use of additional tools such as stress testing and forward looking scenarios of risk
              have been developed in partnership with the KIDI. The Macroprudential department
              of the FSS also does stress testing. Insurance companies are also required to
              conduct stress tests using scenarios defined in a stress testing guideline. The
              scenarios are selected and prioritised by senior FSS leadership. In the event of an
              external shock, a task force could be established to conduct specific tests in
              response to that event. The macro scenario top down approach is generally covered
              by the macroprudential supervision department and a bottom up approach is taken
              when the insurance supervision department does stress testing.
              The BoK issues a financial stability report and, through their collaboration with the
              FSS, there is consideration of insurance issues in that process although this has not
              elevated to the level of substantial coverage in the report itself to this point.

Assessment    Observed

Comments      The FSS should continue to develop its capacity to identify emerging risks relevant

                                                  30
              to the insurance sector and the treatment of these in integrated stress testing,
              particularly where insurers are part of financial groups, and could further diversify the
              range of sources that might suggest issues for further analysis such as consideration
              of legislative changes on insurance experience.

ICP 25        Supervisory Cooperation and Coordination
              The supervisor cooperates and coordinates with other relevant supervisors and
              authorities subject to confidentiality requirements.

Description   Domestic Arrangements
              Both the BoK and the KIDC can and do request the FSS to conduct inspections
              (alone or jointly). These organizations are also represented on the board of the FSC
              as is the MOSF. MoUs are in place with BoK and KDIC.
              International Cooperation
              The Korean authorities have taken an active role in all international level entities of
              relevance and have clearly benefited from this engagement.
              The FSC establishes MoUs to support international cooperation and has
              arrangements in place with 35 organizations, 14 of them being insurance supervisors
              including key entities that host operations of Korean insurers outside Korea. Regular
              meetings are held with counterparts where the business relationships are most
              significant.
              The authorities accept inspections from other supervisors visiting Korea and also go
              out to inspect operations elsewhere. In some cases they have even conducted joint
              inspections as a sign of the extent of the cooperation.


              Group-wide Supervision Arrangements
              Supervisory colleges are not currently in place for domestic insurers with foreign
              operations although there is a consideration to do so in the future at some time.
              Current cooperation arrangements facilitate exchange with the key jurisdictions
              where Korean insurers are doing business Mainland China, Chinese Taipei, Thailand
              some small operations for property insurers in the US.



Assessment    Largely Observed

Comments      The authorities should look to deepen engagement in cooperation activities relating
              to groups (FHC approved or not) by exploring exchange of understanding of
              supervisory issues at operational levels, contingency planning, and through
              supervisory colleges.

ICP 26        Cross-border Cooperation and Coordination on Crisis Management
              The supervisor cooperates and coordinates with other relevant supervisors and
              authorities such that a cross-border crisis involving a specific insurer can be
              managed effectively.

Description   Currently, the FSS does participate in some supervisory colleges as host supervisor
              although the content of discussions is somewhat preliminary. Discussions have
              centered on modalities such as the effective operation of confidentiality within the
              college and being informed of the overall business landscape of the entity.
              The authorities do meet regularly with key counterpart jurisdictions.
              The FSC is planning to join the IAIS MMoU. They are well advanced toward


                                                   31
              submitting their application to become a signatory.
              Bilateral MoUs provide the framework for crisis response but not at an explicit level
              of detail.
              The FSS maintains a network of overseas offices that also provide a useful
              cooperation platform for engagement and preparedness plans. These offices tend to
              have a monitoring brief.
              The FSS is able to exchange information for supervisory purposes (refer ICP 3).

Assessment    Largely Observed

Comments      The authorities should look to deepen engagement in cooperation activities relating
              to groups (FHC approved or not) by exploring exchange of understanding, and
              through supervisory colleges. Discussion on expectations in the event of insurer
              distress as part of preliminary planning with key counterpart jurisdictions to take the
              elaboration to a deeper level of operational detail.
              The authorities should continue the IAIS MMoU process.



References:

      IAIS (2011), Insurance Core Principles and Methodology, available at the IAIS web
      site www.iaisweb.org

      Thorburn, C., (2008) “Insurers: Too Many, Too Few, or “Just Right”? Initial
      Observations on a Cross-Country Dataset of Concentration and Competition
      Measures”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4578.




                                                 32
