              89514
	     	  
	  


	  
	     	  




	  
	  



Overview	  
	  
Over	  7	  million	  teachers	  file	  into	  classrooms	  across	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  each	  day.	  These	  
women	  and	  men	  represent	  4	  percent	  of	  the	  region’s	  overall	  labor	  force	  and	  over	  20	  percent	  of	  its	  
technical	  and	  professional	  workers.	  Their	  salaries	  absorb	  close	  to	  4	  percent	  of	  the	  region’s	  GDP.	  Their	  
working	  conditions	  vary	  widely—from	  mud-­‐walled,	  one-­‐room	  rural	  schools	  to	  world-­‐class	  facilities—but	  
Latin	  America’s	  teachers	  share	  one	  important	  commonality:	  they	  are	  increasingly	  recognized	  as	  the	  
critical	  actors	  in	  the	  region’s	  efforts	  to	  improve	  education	  quality	  and	  results.	  
While	  the	  importance	  of	  good	  teaching	  may	  be	  intuitively	  obvious,	  only	  over	  the	  past	  decade	  has	  
education	  research	  begun	  to	  quantify	  the	  high	  economic	  stakes	  around	  teacher	  quality.	  In	  a	  world	  
where	  the	  goals	  of	  national	  education	  systems	  are	  being	  transformed,	  from	  a	  focus	  on	  the	  transmission	  
of	  facts	  and	  memorization	  to	  a	  focus	  on	  student	  competencies—for	  critical	  thinking,	  problem	  solving	  
and	  lifelong	  learning—the	  demands	  on	  teachers	  are	  more	  complex	  than	  ever.	  Governments	  across	  the	  
world	  have	  put	  teacher	  quality	  and	  teacher	  performance	  under	  increasing	  scrutiny.	  The	  Latin	  America	  
and	  the	  Caribbean	  (LAC)	  region	  is	  no	  exception	  to	  these	  trends;	  indeed,	  in	  some	  key	  areas	  of	  teacher	  
policy,	  the	  region	  is	  at	  the	  vanguard	  of	  global	  reform	  experience.	  	  
In	  this	  context,	  this	  study	  aims	  to:	  
              •      Benchmark	  the	  current	  performance	  of	  LAC’s	  teachers	  and	  identify	  key	  issues	  
              •      Share	  emerging	  evidence	  on	  important	  reforms	  of	  teacher	  policy	  being	  implemented	  in	  LAC	  
                     countries	  
              •      Analyze	  the	  political	  “room	  for	  maneuver”	  for	  further	  reform	  in	  LAC	  	  
We	  focus	  on	  teachers	  in	  basic	  education	  (preschool,	  primary,	  and	  secondary	  education)	  because	  the	  
quantitative	  and	  qualitative	  challenges	  of	  producing	  effective	  teachers	  at	  these	  levels	  differ	  in	  key	  ways	  
from	  university-­‐level	  education,	  which	  has	  been	  addressed	  in	  other	  recent	  World	  Bank	  publications	  
(Rodriguez,	  Dahlman,	  and	  Salmi	  2008;	  Salmi	  2009).	  	  We	  also	  focus	  on	  public	  education	  systems.	  	  
Notwithstanding	  growing	  basic	  education	  enrollments	  in	  private	  schools	  in	  many	  countries	  in	  the	  region,	  
national	  and	  sub-­‐national	  governments	  deliver	  the	  bulk	  of	  basic	  education	  services	  and	  remain	  the	  
guardians	  of	  education	  quality	  and	  the	  architects	  of	  education	  policy.	  
Chapter	  1	  analyzes	  global	  and	  regional	  evidence	  on	  the	  importance	  of	  education	  results	  for	  economic	  
growth	  and	  competitiveness,	  and	  the	  importance	  of	  teacher	  quality	  for	  education	  results.	  It	  profiles	  
LAC’s	  teachers	  and	  how	  their	  characteristics	  have	  changed	  in	  recent	  decades.	  Chapter	  2	  provides	  a	  first-­‐
ever	  insight	  into	  how	  the	  region’s	  teachers	  perform	  inside	  the	  classroom,	  drawing	  on	  new	  research	  
conducted	  for	  this	  report	  in	  over	  15,000	  classrooms	  in	  7	  LAC	  countries.	  	  
Chapters	  3,	  4,	  and	  5	  focus	  on	  three	  leading	  areas	  of	  teacher	  policy	  reform	  in	  LAC	  today:	  chapter	  3	  
analyzes	  policies	  to	  recruit	  better	  teachers;	  chapter	  4	  looks	  at	  programs	  to	  groom	  teachers	  and	  improve	  
their	  skills	  once	  they	  are	  in	  service;	  and	  chapter	  5	  reviews	  strategies	  to	  motivate	  teachers	  to	  perform	  
their	  best	  throughout	  their	  career.	  	  
Chapter	  6	  analyzes	  the	  prominent	  role	  of	  teachers’	  unions	  in	  the	  region	  and	  recent	  country	  experience	  
with	  major	  education	  reforms.	  This	  chapter,	  like	  those	  that	  precede	  it,	  tries	  to	  distill	  the	  growing	  body	  of	  
evidence	  from	  within	  and	  outside	  the	  region	  that	  can	  guide	  the	  design	  of	  effective	  programs	  and	  
sustainable	  reforms.	  	  
	  



	  
	  


Six	  overarching	  messages	  emerge	  from	  this	  study:	  	  
       • The	  low	  average	  quality	  of	  LAC’s	  teachers	  is	  the	  binding	  constraint	  on	  the	  region’s	  education	  
         progress,	  	  and	  consequently	  on	  the	  contribution	  of	  national	  education	  spending	  to	  poverty	  
         reduction	  and	  shared	  prosperity	  
       • Teacher	  quality	  in	  the	  region	  is	  compromised	  by	  weak	  mastery	  of	  academic	  content	  as	  well	  as	  
         ineffective	  classroom	  practice:	  teachers	  in	  the	  countries	  studied	  spend	  65	  percent	  or	  less	  of	  class	  
         time	  on	  instruction	  (compared	  with	  the	  a	  good	  practice	  benchmark	  of	  85	  percent),	  which	  implies	  
         the	  loss	  of	  one	  full	  day	  of	  instruction	  per	  week;	  they	  make	  limited	  use	  of	  available	  learning	  
         materials,	  especially	  information	  and	  communications	  technology	  (ICT);	  and	  do	  a	  poor	  job	  of	  
         keeping	  students	  engaged	  
       • No	  teaching	  force	  in	  the	  region	  today	  (except	  possibly	  Cuba’s)	  can	  be	  considered	  of	  high	  quality	  
         against	  global	  comparators,	  but	  several	  countries	  have	  made	  progress	  over	  the	  past	  decade	  in	  
         raising	  teacher	  quality	  and	  student	  learning	  results,	  most	  notably	  Chile	  
       • There	  are	  three	  fundamental	  steps	  to	  a	  high-­‐quality	  teaching	  force—recruiting,	  grooming,	  and	  
         motivating	  better	  teachers—and	  substantial	  reform	  experience	  across	  and	  outside	  of	  LAC	  in	  all	  
         three	  areas	  can	  guide	  the	  design	  of	  better	  policies	  
       • Over	  the	  next	  decade,	  the	  declining	  size	  of	  the	  school-­‐aged	  population	  in	  about	  half	  of	  the	  
         countries	  in	  the	  region,	  notably	  the	  southern	  cone,	  could	  make	  it	  substantially	  easier	  to	  raise	  
         teacher	  quality;	  in	  the	  other	  half	  of	  the	  region,	  especially	  Central	  America,	  the	  need	  for	  more	  
         teachers	  will	  complicate	  the	  challenge	  
       • The	  deepest	  challenge	  in	  raising	  teacher	  quality	  is	  not	  fiscal	  or	  technical,	  but	  political,	  because	  
         teachers’	  unions	  in	  every	  country	  in	  Latin	  America	  are	  large	  and	  politically	  active	  stakeholders;	  
         however,	  a	  growing	  number	  of	  successful	  reform	  cases	  is	  yielding	  lessons	  that	  can	  aid	  other	  
         countries	  	  

Why	  teachers	  matter	  	  
LAC	  education	  performance	  is	  lagging.	  Over	  the	  last	  50	  years,	  Latin	  American	  and	  Caribbean	  countries	  
have	  achieved	  a	  mass	  expansion	  of	  education	  coverage	  that	  took	  a	  century	  or	  more	  to	  accomplish	  in	  
many	  OECD	  countries.	  From	  a	  starting	  point	  of	  less	  than	  10	  percent	  of	  all	  children	  completing	  secondary	  
school	  in	  1960,	  today	  most	  LAC	  countries	  have	  achieved	  universal	  primary	  school	  completion	  and	  high	  
rates	  of	  secondary	  schooling.	  Only	  Guatemala	  and	  Haiti	  stand	  in	  sharp	  contrast	  to	  the	  regional	  progress.	  
While	  the	  average	  LAC	  worker’s	  4	  years	  of	  schooling	  	  in	  1960	  was	  little	  more	  than	  half	  the	  level	  of	  
workers	  in	  OECD	  countries,	  today	  the	  LAC	  average	  is	  converging	  on	  the	  OECD’s	  average	  of	  12	  years.	  
There	  has	  been	  a	  significant	  and	  rapid	  accumulation	  of	  human	  capital	  in	  Latin	  America	  over	  the	  past	  
half-­‐century.	  	  
But	  recent	  research	  has	  deepened	  the	  understanding	  of	  how	  human	  capital	  contributes	  to	  economic	  
growth;	  it	  has	  established	  convincingly	  that	  what	  counts	  is	  not	  how	  many	  years	  of	  schooling	  students	  
complete,	  but	  what	  they	  actually	  learn.	  It	  may	  seem	  intuitively	  obvious	  that	  a	  year	  of	  schooling	  in	  Mali	  
will	  not	  equal	  one	  in	  Singapore,	  but	  only	  recently	  have	  researchers	  been	  able	  to	  quantify	  this.	  A	  country	  
whose	  average	  performance	  on	  international	  tests	  is	  one	  standard	  deviation	  higher	  than	  another’s	  
(roughly	  the	  100-­‐point	  difference	  between	  Mexico	  and	  Germany	  on	  the	  2012	  Program	  for	  International	  
Student	  Assessment	  [PISA]	  exam)	  will	  enjoy	  approximately	  2-­‐percentage	  point	  higher	  annual	  long-­‐term	  
GDP	  growth.	  This	  relationship	  holds	  across	  countries	  at	  all	  income	  levels,	  across	  regions,	  and	  across	  
countries	  within	  regions	  (Hanushek	  and	  Woessmann	  2012,	  figure	  O.1).	  Differences	  in	  countries’	  average	  


	  
	  


level	  of	  cognitive	  skills	  are	  consistently	  and	  fairly	  strongly	  correlated	  with	  long-­‐term	  rates	  of	  economic	  
growth.	  It	  is	  quality—in	  terms	  of	  increased	  student	  learning—that	  produces	  the	  economic	  benefits	  from	  
investing	  in	  education.	  The	  region’s	  increasing	  participation	  in	  international	  and	  regional	  tests	  provides	  
direct	  evidence	  of	  how	  well	  its	  students	  are	  learning,	  and	  four	  important	  conclusions	  emerge.	  	  
Figure	  O.1	  Cognitive	  skills	  and	  long-­‐term	  economic	  growth	  across	  regions	  




	                                                                                                                                                     	  
Source:	  Hanushek	  and	  Woessmann	  2012,	  p.2.	  
Notes:	  This	  graph	  compares	  the	  average	  annual	  rate	  of	  growth	  (in	  percent)	  of	  real	  GDP	  per	  capita	  in	  1960–2000	  (adjusted	  for	  the	  
initial	  level	  of	  real	  GDP	  per	  capita	  in	  1960)	  with	  average	  scores	  on	  international	  student	  achievement	  tests	  over	  this	  period.	  	  
Region	  codes:	  Asia	  (ASIA),	  Commonwealth	  OECD	  members	  (COMM),	  Europe	  (EURO),	  Latin	  America	  (LATAM),	  Middle	  East	  and	  
North	  Africa	  (MENA),	  Sub-­‐	  Saharan	  Africa	  (SSAFR).	  	  
	  
First,	  relative	  to	  its	  level	  of	  economic	  development,	  the	  LAC	  underperforms	  badly.	  As	  seen	  in	  figure	  O.1,	  
LAC	  countries’	  average	  learning	  performance	  on	  all	  international	  tests	  over	  the	  past	  40	  years	  is	  lower	  
than	  that	  of	  every	  other	  region	  except	  Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa.	  Of	  the	  65	  countries	  participating	  in	  the	  2012	  
PISA	  test,	  all	  eight	  participating	  LAC	  countries	  scored	  below	  the	  average	  for	  their	  level	  of	  per	  capita	  
income	  (figure	  O.2).	  The	  nearly	  100-­‐point	  difference	  between	  the	  Organisation	  for	  Economic	  Co-­‐
operation	  and	  Development	  (OECD)	  average	  math	  score	  (494)	  and	  the	  average	  for	  participating	  LAC	  
countries	  (397)	  represents	  a	  disparity	  in	  skills	  equivalent	  to	  over	  two	  full	  years	  of	  math	  education.	  The	  
gap	  with	  Shanghai,	  whose	  students	  averaged	  613,	  is	  more	  than	  five	  years’	  difference	  in	  math	  skills.	  
Given	  that	  a	  larger	  share	  of	  all	  15	  year	  olds	  have	  already	  dropped	  out	  of	  school	  in	  LAC	  countries	  than	  in	  
the	  OECD	  or	  East	  Asia,	  the	  true	  gap	  in	  skills	  is	  even	  worse.	  All	  available	  evidence	  is	  that	  the	  average	  
literacy	  and	  numeracy	  skills	  of	  youths	  in	  LAC	  badly	  trail	  those	  of	  other	  middle-­‐income	  countries.	  
Second,	  the	  range	  in	  performance	  within	  the	  region	  is	  substantial.	  Among	  the	  LAC	  countries	  
participating	  in	  PISA,	  the	  gap	  in	  skills	  between	  the	  top	  performer	  (Chile)	  and	  the	  lowest	  (Peru)	  is	  as	  large	  
as	  the	  gap	  between	  Chile	  and	  Sweden	  in	  math	  and	  Chile	  and	  the	  United	  States	  in	  reading.	  Regional	  tests	  
show	  that	  LAC	  countries	  that	  do	  not	  participate	  in	  PISA	  are	  even	  further	  behind:	  countries	  such	  as	  
Honduras,	  Venezuela,	  and	  Bolivia	  are	  very	  far	  off	  track	  in	  terms	  of	  the	  amount	  of	  globally	  relevant	  
learning	  a	  year	  of	  schooling	  produces.	  


	  
	  


Figure	  O.2	  PISA	  reading	  scores	  and	  income	  per	  capita	  for	  LAC	  countries,	  2012	  

   550



   500

                   Costa
                   RicaChile
   450
                           Mexico
                    Brazil
                           Uruguay
   400           Colombia
                             Argentina
                  Peru
   350
           0        10           20           30           40           50           60           70
                              GDP per capita, US$ thousands
                                                                                                            	  
Source:	  OECD/PISA	  2013	  and	  World	  Bank.	  
Note:	  GDP	  per	  capita	  is	  adjusted	  for	  purchasing	  power	  parity	  (PPP),	  in	  2005	  constant	  prices.	  	  	  	  	  

The	  third	  broad	  conclusion	  is	  encouraging:	  some	  LAC	  countries	  are	  making	  sustained	  progress	  in	  closing	  
the	  gap	  with	  the	  OECD.	  Between	  2000	  and	  2012,	  Chile,	  Brazil,	  and	  Peru	  registered	  some	  of	  the	  biggest	  
improvements	  in	  the	  entire	  PISA	  sample:	  more	  than	  twice	  the	  annual	  rate	  of	  improvement	  seen	  in	  the	  
United	  States	  or	  Korea	  (Hanushek,	  Peterson,	  and	  Woessmann	  2012).1	  While	  the	  LAC	  region	  as	  a	  whole	  
faces	  a	  large	  challenge,	  there	  is	  also	  the	  encouraging	  prospect	  of	  relevant	  lessons	  from	  within	  the	  
region.	  	  
Figure	  O.3	  Comparative	  PISA	  math	  improvement	  for	  LAC	  countries,	  2000–12	  


       500	                                                                                                                                    Brazil	  
                                                                                                                                                Argentina	  
       470	  
                                                                                                                                                Chile	  
       440	  
                                                                                                                                                Colombia	  
       410	  
                                                                                                                                                Peru	  
       380	  
                                                                                                                                                Uruguay	  
       350	  
                                                                                                                                                Mexico	  
       320	                                                                                                                                    Costa	  Rica	  
       290	                                                                                                                                    OECD	  Average	  
                    2000	                2003	                2006	               2009	                2012	  
                                                                                                                                                                      	  
Source:	  OECD	  PISA	  Secretariat	  2013.	  

But	  the	  final	  conclusion,	  reinforced	  by	  the	  2012	  PISA	  results,	  is	  that	  there	  is	  no	  room	  for	  complacency.	  
LAC’s	  top	  improvers	  as	  well	  as	  other	  countries	  in	  the	  region	  all	  made	  far	  less	  progress	  than	  in	  prior	  
rounds	  of	  PISA.	  This	  suggests	  that	  while	  other	  countries	  in	  the	  region	  may	  have	  something	  to	  learn	  from	  



	  
	  


the	  policies	  adopted	  in	  Chile,	  Brazil,	  and	  Peru	  over	  the	  past	  decade,	  those	  countries	  also	  need	  to	  do	  
more.	  	  
Teacher	  quality	  drives	  learning.	  If	  the	  economic	  benefits	  from	  education	  investments	  hinge	  on	  their	  
effectiveness	  in	  producing	  student	  learning,	  the	  critical	  question	  becomes,	  what	  drives	  learning?”	  
Students’	  family	  background	  (parent	  education,	  socioeconomic	  status,	  and	  conditions	  at	  home	  such	  as	  
access	  to	  books)	  remains	  the	  largest	  overall	  predictor	  of	  learning	  outcomes.	  A	  growing	  body	  of	  research	  
confirms	  the	  importance	  of	  policies	  to	  protect	  children’s	  nutrition,	  health,	  cognitive,	  and	  socioemotional	  
development	  in	  the	  earliest	  years	  of	  life.	  But	  research	  over	  the	  past	  decade	  has	  also	  built	  new	  evidence	  
that	  once	  children	  get	  to	  school,	  no	  single	  factor	  is	  as	  critical	  as	  the	  quality	  of	  teachers.	  	  
Increasingly	  abundant	  student	  test	  data,	  especially	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  allow	  researchers	  to	  measure	  
the	  “value	  added”	  of	  individual	  teachers	  over	  the	  course	  of	  a	  single	  school	  year,	  and	  has	  generated	  eye-­‐
opening	  evidence	  of	  widely	  varying	  teacher	  effectiveness,	  even	  within	  the	  same	  school	  and	  same	  grade.	  
Students	  with	  a	  weak	  teacher	  may	  master	  50	  percent	  or	  less	  of	  the	  curriculum	  for	  that	  grade;	  students	  
with	  a	  good	  teacher	  get	  an	  average	  gain	  of	  one	  year;	  and	  students	  with	  great	  teachers	  advance	  1.5	  
grade	  levels	  or	  more	  (Hanushek	  and	  Rivkin	  2010;	  Rockoff	  2004).	  The	  most	  recent	  research	  shows	  that	  
exposure	  to	  even	  a	  single	  highly	  effective	  teacher	  raises	  a	  student’s	  college	  participation	  rates	  and	  
subsequent	  income	  (Chetty	  et	  al.	  2014).	  A	  series	  of	  great	  or	  bad	  teachers	  over	  several	  years	  compounds	  
these	  effects	  and	  can	  lead	  to	  unbridgeable	  gaps	  in	  student	  learning	  levels.	  No	  other	  attribute	  of	  schools	  
comes	  close	  to	  this	  impact	  on	  student	  achievement.	  	  
This	  evidence	  has	  intensified	  the	  focus	  of	  policymakers	  and	  researchers	  on	  how	  to	  identify	  effective	  
teachers.	  No	  one	  disputes	  that	  a	  comprehensive	  definition	  of	  teacher	  quality	  must	  encompass	  many	  
different	  teacher	  characteristics	  and	  performance	  dimensions.	  But	  teachers’	  ability	  to	  ensure	  that	  their	  
students	  learn	  is	  the	  sine	  qua	  non	  for	  students	  and	  nations	  to	  reap	  education’s	  economic	  and	  social	  
benefits.	  
Who	  are	  LAC’s	  teachers?	  
What	  do	  we	  know	  about	  the	  characteristics	  and	  performance	  of	  teachers	  in	  Latin	  America?	  Available	  
data	  paint	  a	  distressing	  picture.	  
Mostly	  female,	  with	  relatively	  low	  socioeconomic	  status.	  About	  75	  percent	  of	  Latin	  America’s	  teachers	  
are	  female,	  but	  this	  ranges	  from	  a	  low	  62	  percent	  in	  Mexico	  to	  82	  percent	  in	  Uruguay,	  Brazil,	  and	  Chile.	  
Teachers	  are	  also	  poorer	  than	  the	  overall	  pool	  of	  university	  students.	  University	  entrance	  data	  show	  that	  
students	  majoring	  in	  education	  are	  of	  lower	  socioeconomic	  status	  and	  are	  more	  likely	  to	  be	  first-­‐
generation	  university	  students	  than	  entrants	  in	  other	  fields;	  the	  data	  point	  to	  a	  pool	  of	  students	  whose	  
lives	  may	  have	  afforded	  them	  limited	  experience	  with	  other	  professions	  and,	  consequently,	  more	  
limited	  academic	  aspirations.	  The	  teaching	  force	  in	  most	  of	  Latin	  America	  is	  also	  aging.	  In	  Peru,	  Panama,	  
and	  Uruguay,	  the	  average	  teacher	  is	  more	  than	  40	  years	  old;	  the	  youngest	  corps	  in	  the	  region,	  in	  
Honduras	  and	  Nicaragua,	  average	  35	  years	  of	  age.	  
High	  levels	  of	  formal	  education,	  but	  weak	  cognitive	  skills.	  Teachers’	  formal	  education	  has	  continued	  to	  
rise	  across	  the	  LAC	  region.	  In	  1995,	  only	  19	  percent	  of	  Brazilian	  primary	  teachers	  had	  university	  degrees;	  
in	  2010,	  62	  percent	  did.	  In	  all	  ten	  LAC	  countries	  for	  which	  comparable	  household	  survey	  data	  are	  
available,	  the	  formal	  educational	  level	  of	  teachers	  today	  is	  higher	  than	  for	  all	  other	  professional	  and	  
technical	  workers	  and	  considerably	  higher	  than	  for	  office	  workers.	  
The	  increase	  in	  formal	  education,	  however,	  is	  undercut	  by	  evidence	  that	  the	  individuals	  entering	  
teaching	  in	  Latin	  America	  are	  academically	  weaker	  than	  the	  overall	  pool	  of	  higher	  education	  students.	  
Fifteen-­‐year-­‐old	  students	  who	  identify	  themselves	  as	  interested	  in	  a	  teaching	  career	  have	  much	  lower	  


	  
	  


PISA	  math	  scores	  than	  students	  interested	  in	  engineering	  in	  every	  country	  in	  the	  region,	  and	  score	  
below	  the	  national	  average	  in	  every	  country	  except	  Uruguay	  (figure	  O.4).	  	  
Data	  from	  university	  entrance	  exams	  paint	  a	  similar	  picture.	  Students	  applying	  to	  teacher	  education	  
programs	  average	  505	  on	  the	  Chilean	  university	  entrance	  exam	  (PSU);	  the	  average	  for	  law	  is	  660;	  
engineering,	  700;	  and	  medicine,	  745.	  At	  the	  University	  of	  Sao	  Paulo,	  students	  applying	  for	  law	  and	  
engineering	  programs	  score	  36	  percent	  higher	  than	  teacher	  education	  applicants,	  and	  medical	  school	  
applicants	  score	  50	  percent	  higher.	  	  
Figure	  O.4	  Comparative	  PISA	  math	  performance	  of	  prospective	  teachers	  and	  prospective	  engineers	  


       580	  

       530	  

       480	  

       430	  

       380	  

       330	  

       280	  
                 bra*	  


                   chi	  

                  ury	  
                    isr	  
                    ita	  
                   grc	  
                   prt	  
                  hrv	  
                  usa	  
                  esp	  
                  nor	  
                   lux	  


                  gbr	  

                 swe	  


                  aut	  

                   est	  
                  aus	  




                  che	  
                   nzl	  



                  kor	  
                    lie	  
                   fra	  
                 mex	  
                  arg	  




                 deu	  
                  ind	  




                  cze	  




                  jpn	  
                  tha	  




                    isl	  




                 hkg	  
                    irl	  
                  pol	  




                  bel	  
                  rou	  




                  svn	  




                  can	  
                  kgz	  




                 twn	  
                 hun	  
                  svk	  




                 dnk	  
                     National	  Average	  Score	                                              Average	  Score	  Prospective	  Engineers	  
                     Average	  Score	  Prospective	  Teachers	                               National	  Average	  Score	  LAC	  Countries	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
Source:	  OECD,	  PISA,	  2000–06.	  Data	  are	  from	  PISA	  2006,	  except	  for	  Brazil	  (from	  PISA	  2000).	  

There	  are	  few	  direct	  studies	  of	  how	  much	  Latin	  American	  teachers	  know	  about	  the	  subjects	  they	  teach,	  
but	  those	  available	  show	  a	  disturbing	  disconnect	  between	  teachers’	  formal	  credentials	  and	  their	  
cognitive	  skills.	  Fully	  84	  percent	  of	  sixth-­‐grade	  teachers	  in	  Peru	  scored	  below	  level	  2	  on	  a	  2006	  test	  
where	  level	  3	  meant	  mastery	  of	  sixth-­‐grade	  math	  skills.	  On	  tests	  of	  teacher	  content	  mastery	  in	  
Colombia,	  Ecuador,	  and	  Chile,	  fewer	  than	  3	  percent	  of	  teachers	  have	  scored	  in	  the	  range	  considered	  
excellent.	  	  
On	  the	  one	  international	  study	  that	  directly	  compares	  teachers’	  mastery	  of	  math,	  Chile	  was	  the	  sole	  LAC	  
country	  to	  participate.	  The	  study	  tested	  the	  math	  skills	  of	  teacher	  education	  students.	  Chile’s	  future	  
secondary	  school	  math	  teachers	  scored	  the	  lowest	  of	  the	  participating	  countries,	  and	  its	  future	  primary	  
school	  teachers	  were	  second	  lowest	  (figure	  O.5).	  Most	  of	  the	  countries	  in	  the	  study	  were	  high-­‐income,	  
high-­‐achieving	  countries.	  Yet	  Chile’s	  future	  secondary	  school	  teachers	  had	  weaker	  math	  skills	  than	  
teachers	  from	  Botswana	  and	  the	  Philippines.	  Among	  future	  primary	  school	  teachers,	  only	  those	  from	  
Georgia	  performed	  worse.	  Given	  that	  Chile	  is	  the	  LAC	  region’s	  highest	  performer	  on	  international	  tests,	  
these	  data	  point	  to	  deep	  issues	  for	  other	  countries	  in	  the	  region	  in	  raising	  the	  expertise	  of	  their	  
teachers.	  
	  
	  
	  


	  
	  


Figure	  O.5	  Comparative	  math	  content	  knowledge	  of	  future	  math	  teachers,	  2008	  

a.	  Primary	  school	  teachers	                                                                 b.	  Secondary	  school	  teachers	  


       Taipei,	  Taiwan,	  China	                                              623	                     Singapore	                                               544	  
                      Singapore	                                               586	  
                                                                                                          Switzerland	                                           531	  
                    Switzerland	                                          548	  
          Russian	  Federalon	                                          536	  
                                                                                                                 Poland	                                         529	  
                 United	  States	                                      518	                               Germany	                                         483	  
                         Norway	                                        509	                          United	  States	                                    468	  
                       Germany	                                        501	  
                                                                                                               Norway	                                       461	  
                             Spain	                                    481	  
                           Poland	                                   456	  
                                                                                                           Philippines	                                    442	  
                       Botswana	                                     441	                                  Botswana	                                     436	  
                     Philippines	                                    440	                                         Chile	                         354	  
                              Chile	                             413	  
                                                                                                                                0	     200	     400	           600	  
                          Georgia	                           345	                                                                                                             	  
                                          0	     200	     400	       600	        800	  
                                                                                               	  
Source:	  TEDS-­‐M	  2008.	  	  

	  
Relatively	  low	  salaries.	  What	  explains	  relatively	  weak	  students	  pursuing	  high	  levels	  of	  formal	  education	  
to	  become	  teachers?	  What	  are	  the	  incentives	  to	  enter	  teaching	  today	  in	  LAC?	  Figure	  O.6	  compares	  
salaries	  for	  teachers	  to	  those	  of	  all	  other	  professional	  workers	  in	  all	  ten	  of	  the	  countries	  for	  which	  
comparable	  household	  survey	  data	  are	  available	  controlling	  for	  age,	  gender,	  urban/rural	  location,	  and	  
employment	  experience.	  On	  a	  monthly	  basis,	  teachers’	  salaries	  in	  2010	  were	  between	  10	  and	  50	  
percent	  lower	  than	  salaries	  for	  other	  “equivalent”	  professional	  workers,	  and	  have	  been	  throughout	  the	  
2000s.	  	  
Teachers,	  however,	  work	  significantly	  fewer	  hours,	  reporting	  30	  to	  40	  hours	  per	  week	  on	  average,	  
compared	  with	  40	  to	  50	  hours	  per	  week	  for	  other	  professional,	  technical,	  and	  office	  workers.	  Adjusted	  
for	  working	  hours,	  teachers’	  relative	  position	  is	  different.	  In	  three	  countries	  (Mexico,	  Honduras,	  and	  El	  
Salvador)	  teachers	  earn	  20	  to	  40	  percent	  more	  than	  comparable	  professional	  and	  technical	  workers;	  in	  
three	  others	  they	  are	  on	  par	  (Costa	  Rica,	  Uruguay,	  and	  Chile);	  and	  in	  four	  countries	  they	  earn	  10	  to	  30	  
percent	  less	  (Peru,	  Panama,	  Brazil,	  and	  Nicaragua).	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  


	  
	  


Figure	  O.6	  Average	  salaries	  for	  teachers	  and	  other	  professional	  workers,	  2000	  and	  2010	  
                      a. Monthly	  salaries	                                                               b. Salaries	  adjusted	  for	  working	  hours	  
                         percent	                                                                              percent	  

                                                                                                35%	  
          15%	  
             5%	                                                                               25%	  
          -­‐5%	                                                                               15%	  
       -­‐15%	                                                                                   5%	  
       -­‐25%	  
       -­‐35%	                                                                                  -­‐5%	  
       -­‐45%	                                                                                -­‐15%	  
       -­‐55%	                                                                                -­‐25%	  
       -­‐65%	  
                                                                                               -­‐35%	  


                            Late	  2000s	       Early	  2000s	  
                                                                                                                       Late	  2000s	            Early	  2000s	  
                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                            	  
Source:	  World	  Bank	  analysis	  of	  household	  survey	  and	  labor	  market	  data	  for	  10	  LAC	  countries.	  	  
Note:	  All	  values	  control	  for	  age,	  education,	  gender,	  and	  urban/rural	  location	  and	  are	  adjusted	  for	  inflation.	  Teacher	  income	  is	  
income	  from	  teaching	  only,	  but	  can	  reflect	  multiple	  teaching	  jobs.	  

Flat	  salary	  trajectory.	  Underlying	  these	  differences	  in	  average	  salaries,	  however,	  is	  a	  much	  flatter	  
lifetime	  career	  trajectory	  for	  teachers	  than	  for	  other	  professional,	  technical,	  and	  office	  workers.	  
Teachers’	  entering	  salaries	  in	  LAC	  are	  on	  par	  with	  other	  professional	  and	  technical	  workers	  in	  many	  
countries	  but	  diverge	  significantly	  thereafter.	  Teachers’	  salaries	  rise	  very	  slowly,	  while	  other	  workers	  
reap	  salary	  gains	  as	  their	  experience	  increases.	  There	  is	  also	  little	  wage	  differentiation	  in	  education	  
compared	  with	  other	  sectors:	  irrespective	  of	  individual	  skills,	  talent,	  and	  experience,	  landing	  a	  job	  in	  
teaching	  guarantees	  a	  salary	  within	  a	  relatively	  narrow	  band,	  with	  little	  risk	  of	  a	  very	  low	  or	  declining	  
wage	  but	  little	  chance	  of	  a	  high	  one.	  	  
Research	  by	  Hernani-­‐Limarino	  (2005)	  suggests	  that	  in	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  individuals	  who	  
tend	  to	  be	  less	  productive	  earn	  relatively	  more	  as	  teachers	  and	  those	  with	  attributes	  that	  make	  them	  
highly	  productive	  tend	  to	  earn	  relatively	  less.	  This	  echoes	  research	  by	  Hoxby	  and	  Leigh	  (2004)	  for	  the	  
United	  States	  which	  finds	  that	  talented	  women	  have	  been	  driven	  out	  of	  teaching	  over	  the	  past	  several	  
decades	  by	  the	  “push”	  of	  a	  highly	  compressed	  wage	  scale,	  which	  is	  unattractive	  to	  more	  ambitious	  
individuals.	  It	  is	  not	  only	  in	  the	  United	  States	  and	  Latin	  America	  that	  the	  average	  cognitive	  ability	  of	  
university	  students	  getting	  teaching	  degrees	  has	  declined	  and	  higher-­‐ability	  individuals	  have	  left	  the	  
profession	  at	  a	  higher	  rate.	  Researchers	  in	  Sweden	  have	  documented	  similar	  trends	  (Corcoran	  et	  al.	  
2004;	  Eide	  et	  al.	  2004;	  Hoxby	  2004;	  Fredriksson	  and	  Ockert	  2007).	  	  
Job	  stability.	  As	  Mizala	  and	  Nopo	  (2011)	  have	  observed,	  many	  nonpecuniary	  or	  “intrinsic”	  attributes	  of	  
the	  teaching	  profession	  compensate	  for	  its	  relatively	  weak	  salary	  incentives	  in	  the	  eyes	  of	  prospective	  
teachers.	  These	  include	  the	  mission	  of	  helping	  children	  and	  the	  satisfactions	  of	  professional	  mastery	  and	  
collegial	  interaction.	  Teaching	  also	  offers	  long	  vacations,	  relatively	  generous	  health	  and	  pension	  
benefits,	  and	  a	  “family-­‐friendly”	  short	  official	  working	  day.	  Perhaps	  the	  most	  	  powerful	  attraction	  is	  high	  
job	  security.	  Labor	  market	  data	  show	  that	  for	  women	  in	  particular,	  teaching	  offers	  stable	  employment;	  
women	  who	  have	  graduated	  from	  teacher	  education	  over	  the	  past	  40	  years	  are	  significantly	  more	  likely	  
to	  have	  been	  employed	  and	  stayed	  employed	  than	  women	  with	  other	  degrees.	  	  



	  
	  


Excess	  supply.	  Tertiary-­‐level	  teacher	  education	  programs	  have	  proliferated	  in	  LAC	  over	  the	  past	  15	  
years.	  The	  costs	  of	  establishing	  such	  programs	  are	  low,	  and	  have	  attracted	  a	  large	  number	  of	  private	  
providers	  into	  the	  field.	  From	  the	  demand	  side,	  the	  low	  or	  nonexistent	  academic	  standards	  for	  entry	  to	  
these	  programs	  make	  them	  attractive	  to	  a	  rapidly	  expanding	  pool	  of	  secondary	  school	  graduates.	  
Virtually	  all	  countries	  in	  the	  region	  report	  difficulty	  finding	  sufficient	  teachers	  for	  specialty	  subjects	  such	  
as	  secondary	  school	  math	  and	  science,	  or	  for	  bilingual	  schools	  in	  rural	  areas.	  But	  the	  broader	  picture	  
across	  the	  region	  today	  is	  substantial	  excess	  production	  of	  teacher	  graduates	  of	  generally	  low	  academic	  
quality.	  Recent	  data	  for	  Peru,	  Chile,	  Costa	  Rica,	  Panama,	  and	  Uruguay	  suggest	  that	  40	  to	  50	  percent	  of	  
graduates	  from	  teacher	  training	  schools	  will	  not	  find	  work	  as	  teachers.	  	  
Available	  evidence	  suggests	  that	  Latin	  America	  is	  not	  attracting	  the	  high-­‐caliber	  individuals	  it	  needs	  to	  
build	  world-­‐class	  education	  systems.	  Virtually	  all	  countries	  in	  the	  region	  appear	  trapped	  in	  a	  low-­‐level	  
equilibrium	  of	  low	  standards	  for	  entry	  into	  teaching,	  low-­‐quality	  candidates,	  relatively	  low	  and	  
undifferentiated	  salaries,	  low	  professionalism	  in	  the	  classroom,	  and	  poor	  education	  results.	  Moving	  to	  a	  
new	  equilibrium	  will	  be	  difficult.	  No	  Latin	  American	  school	  system	  today,	  except	  possibly	  Cuba’s,	  is	  very	  
close	  to	  high	  standards,	  high	  academic	  talent,	  high	  or	  at	  least	  adequate	  compensation,	  and	  high	  
professional	  autonomy	  that	  characterize	  the	  world’s	  most	  effective	  education	  systems	  (such	  as	  those	  
found	  in	  Finland;	  Singapore;	  Shanghai,	  China;	  Korea;	  Switzerland;	  the	  Netherlands;	  and	  Canada.	  	  

LAC’s	  teachers	  inside	  the	  classroom	  	  
The	  magic	  of	  education—the	  transformation	  of	  schooling	  inputs	  into	  learning	  outcomes—happens	  in	  
the	  classroom.	  Every	  element	  of	  an	  education	  system’s	  expenditure,	  from	  curriculum	  design	  through	  
school	  construction,	  book	  procurement,	  and	  teacher	  salaries,	  comes	  together	  at	  the	  moment	  when	  a	  
teacher	  interacts	  with	  students	  in	  the	  classroom.	  How	  intensively	  this	  instructional	  time	  is	  used	  is	  a	  core	  
determinant	  of	  the	  productivity	  of	  education	  spending.	  	  
Research	  conducted	  for	  this	  study	  provides	  a	  first-­‐ever	  look	  inside	  LAC’s	  classrooms	  to	  examine	  how	  
teachers	  use	  class	  time	  and	  other	  available	  resources	  to	  support	  their	  students’	  learning.	  Over	  15,000	  
classrooms	  in	  more	  than	  2,700	  schools	  in	  seven	  different	  countries	  were	  observed	  between	  2009	  and	  
2012:	  the	  largest-­‐scale	  international	  study	  of	  this	  kind	  ever	  mounted.	  Through	  unannounced	  visits	  to	  
national	  (or	  state-­‐level)	  representative	  samples	  of	  schools,	  trained	  observers	  used	  a	  standardized	  
research	  protocol	  called	  the	  “Stallings	  classroom	  snapshot”	  to	  generate	  internationally	  comparable	  data	  
on	  four	  variables:	  	  
       •    Teachers’	  use	  of	  instructional	  time	  
       •    Teachers’	  use	  of	  materials,	  including	  computers	  and	  other	  ICT	  
       •    Teachers’	  core	  pedagogical	  practices	  
       •    Teachers’	  ability	  to	  keep	  students	  engaged	  
The	  method	  was	  originally	  developed	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  so	  LAC	  results	  may	  be	  benchmarked	  against	  
data	  from	  US	  school	  systems	  collected	  over	  several	  decades	  by	  researchers	  Stallings	  and	  Knight	  (2003).	  
Evidence	  from	  the	  observations	  in	  LAC	  supports	  five	  main	  conclusions:	  	  
Low	  use	  of	  instructional	  time	  contributes	  to	  low	  student	  learning	  in	  LAC.	  No	  school	  system	  in	  LAC	  
studied,	  either	  at	  the	  national	  or	  state	  level,	  comes	  close	  to	  the	  Stallings	  good	  practice	  benchmark	  of	  85	  
percent	  of	  total	  class	  time	  used	  for	  instruction.	  The	  highest	  averages	  recorded—65	  percent	  for	  the	  
national	  sample	  in	  Colombia,	  and	  64	  percent	  for	  Brazil	  and	  Honduras—are	  a	  full	  20	  percentage	  points	  
below	  what	  Stallings’	  research	  suggested	  a	  well-­‐run	  classroom	  achieves	  (figure	  O.7).	  Since	  Stallings	  
measures	  are	  statistically	  representative	  of	  the	  functioning	  of	  the	  school	  system	  as	  a	  whole,	  this	  implies	  




	  
	  


that	  20	  percent	  of	  potential	  instructional	  time	  is	  being	  lost	  across	  Latin	  America	  compared	  with	  the	  good	  
practice	  goal.	  This	  is	  the	  equivalent	  of	  one	  less	  day	  of	  instruction	  per	  week.	  	  
Figure	  O.7	  Average	  time	  on	  instruction	  in	  LAC	  countries	  
	  

                                                     100%	                                                                                                                    85%	  
       Percent	  of	  Total	  Class	  Time	  




                                                      80%	                                                             64%	             64%	             65%	  
                                                                                      61%	               62%	  
                                                      60%	      52%	  
                                                                    39%	  
                                                      40%	                                28%	               25%	           24%	            27%	              25%	  
                                                                                                                 14%	           12%	                                                15%	  
                                                      20%	                  9%	               11%	                                                10%	            9%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         0%	  
                                                        0%	  
                                                                 Mexico	  D.F.	       Jamaica	            Peru	        Honduras	        Brazil	          Colombia	        Stallings	  
                                                                                                                                                                                   Good	  
                                                                                                                                                                                  Practice	  
                                                                                                                                                                                 Indicator	  

                                                                 Academic	  Activities	                   Classroom	  Management	                Teacher	  Off-­‐Task	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                  	  
Note:	  Results	  for	  the	  Dominican	  Republic	  are	  not	  included	  because	  the	  sample	  was	  a	  pilot.	  	  
Source:	  World	  Bank	  classroom	  observation	  database	  

Most	  of	  the	  time	  lost	  to	  instruction	  is	  used	  on	  classroom	  management	  activities,	  such	  as	  taking	  
attendance,	  cleaning	  the	  blackboard,	  grading	  homework,	  or	  distributing	  papers,	  which	  absorb	  between	  
24	  percent	  and	  39	  percent	  of	  total	  class	  time:	  well	  above	  the	  15	  percent	  benchmark.	  Teacher	  training	  
programs	  in	  many	  OECD	  countries	  impart	  techniques	  for	  managing	  classroom	  transitions	  and	  
administrative	  processes	  as	  efficiently	  as	  possible,	  with	  the	  mantra	  that	  “instructional	  time	  is	  a	  school’s	  
most	  expensive	  resource.”	  Classroom	  teachers	  in	  Latin	  America	  appear	  to	  operate	  with	  little	  of	  this	  
pressure.	  	  
Stallings	  benchmarks	  also	  assume	  that	  teachers	  spend	  the	  entire	  class	  session	  either	  teaching	  or	  
managing	  the	  classroom,	  but	  in	  every	  LAC	  country	  studied	  teachers	  spend	  at	  least	  9	  percent	  of	  time	  
engaged	  in	  neither	  of	  these,	  which	  is	  considered	  teacher	  time	  completely	  “off-­‐task”	  (figure	  O.8).	  The	  
highest	  shares	  are	  13	  percent	  in	  Peru,	  12	  percent	  in	  Honduras,	  and	  11	  percent	  in	  Jamaica.	  In	  some	  
systems,	  teachers	  are	  physically	  absent	  from	  the	  room	  as	  much	  as	  6	  to	  11	  percent	  of	  total	  class	  time.	  In	  
others,	  as	  much	  as	  6	  to	  8	  percent	  of	  the	  time	  teachers	  are	  engaged	  in	  social	  interaction	  with	  someone	  at	  
the	  classroom	  door	  or	  simply	  not	  interacting	  with	  the	  class.	  Ten	  percent	  of	  total	  instructional	  time	  off-­‐
task	  equals	  20	  lost	  days	  in	  a	  200-­‐day	  school	  year.	  In	  these	  countries,	  more	  than	  half	  of	  the	  lost	  days	  of	  
instruction	  are	  because	  teachers	  are	  physically	  absent	  from	  the	  classroom,	  arriving	  late	  to	  class,	  leaving	  
early,	  or	  conducting	  other	  school	  business	  during	  class	  time.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  



	  
	  


Figure	  O.8	  Breakdown	  of	  teacher	  time	  off-­‐task,	  by	  country	  

                                                     14%	  
       Percent	  of	  total	  class	  time	  



                                                     12%	  
                                                     10%	                                                                                                                   3.8%	  
                                                      8%	             4.1%	                                               5.0%	                 6.0%	                                       11.1%	  
                                                      6%	                                      5.8%	  

                                                      4%	                                                                                                                   7.5%	  
                                                                       4.0%	                                               3.0%	  
                                                                                                2.4%	                                             4.0%	  
                                                      2%	  
                                                                       1.4%	                   1.3%	                      2.0%	                                                                2.5%	  
                                                      0%	                                                                                         0.7%	                 0.6%	  
                                                                  Mexico	  D.F.	           Colombia	                    Brazil	              Jamaica	              Honduras	                Peru	  

                                                                      Teacher	  Social	  Interaction	  with	  Students	                 Teacher	  Social	  Interaction	  or	  Uninvolved	  	  
                                                                      Teacher	  out	  of	  the	  Room	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       	  
Source:	  World	  Bank	  classroom	  observation	  database.	  

In	  Brazil,	  Honduras,	  Mexico’s	  D.F.,	  and	  Colombia,	  student	  test	  data	  permit	  correlation	  of	  teachers’	  use	  of	  
time	  with	  learning	  results	  at	  the	  school	  level.	  Table	  O.1	  shows	  a	  characteristic	  result:	  a	  very	  different	  
pattern	  of	  time	  use	  between	  the	  highest-­‐	  and	  lowest-­‐performing	  schools	  in	  Rio	  de	  Janeiro	  (on	  a	  
combined	  index	  of	  student	  test	  scores	  and	  student	  pass	  rates	  called	  the	  Index	  of	  Basic	  Education	  
Development	  [IDEB]).	  Top	  schools	  averaged	  70	  percent	  of	  class	  time	  on	  instruction	  and	  27	  percent	  of	  
time	  on	  classroom	  management.	  Teachers	  were	  off-­‐task	  only	  3	  percent	  of	  the	  time	  and	  were	  never	  
absent	  from	  the	  classroom.	  In	  the	  lowest-­‐performing	  schools,	  only	  54	  percent	  of	  time	  was	  spent	  on	  
instruction,	  39	  percent	  was	  absorbed	  in	  classroom	  management,	  and	  teachers	  were	  off-­‐task	  7	  percent	  
and	  physically	  absent	  3	  percent	  of	  the	  time.	  These	  data	  mean	  that	  students	  in	  Rio’s	  high-­‐performing	  
schools	  receive	  an	  average	  of	  32	  more	  days	  of	  instruction	  over	  the	  200-­‐day	  school	  year	  than	  their	  
counterparts	  in	  low-­‐performing	  schools.	  Observation	  data	  cannot	  establish	  causality,	  but	  gaps	  of	  this	  
magnitude	  in	  opportunities	  to	  learn	  could	  clearly	  contribute	  to	  gaps	  in	  test	  scores	  and	  pass	  rates.	  	  
Table	  O.1	  Use	  of	  class	  time	  in	  Rio	  de	  Janeiro	  schools,	  2010	  

percent	  of	  total	  class	  time	  

                                                                                                 Use	  of	  class	  time	  	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                Teacher	  out	  of	  
                                                     Fifth	  grade	                            Time	  on	                  Classroom	  
                                                                                                                                                               Teacher	  off-­‐task	          classroom	  (within	  
                                                                                                 instruction	                 organization	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                off-­‐task)	  
                                                     Rio	  municipality	                       58%	                         37%	                           6%	                             1%	  
                                                     Top	  10%	  of	  schools	  on	  
                                                                                                 70%	                         27%	                           3%	                             0%	  
                                                     IDEB	  
                                                     Bottom	  10%	  of	  schools	  
                                                                                                 54%	                         39%	                           7%	                             3%	  
                                                     on	  IDEB	  	  
                                                     Difference	                                0.16	                        -­‐0.13	                       -­‐0.03	                        -­‐0.03	  
                                                     	  	                                      [0,09]*	                     [0,09]*	                       [0,02]	                         [0,01]**	  
                                                     Note:	  Robust	  standard	  errors	  in	  parentheses:	  *statistically	  significant	  at	  10	  percent	  level,	  **statistically	  significant	  at	  
                                                     5	  percent	  level.	  .	  
                                                     Source:	  	  World	  Bank	  classroom	  observation	  database.	  	  




	  
	  


Schools	  at	  the	  top	  and	  bottom	  ends	  of	  the	  performance	  distribution	  in	  terms	  of	  student	  learning	  almost	  
always	  show	  large,	  statistically	  significant	  differences	  in	  instructional	  time.	  In	  Honduras,	  the	  top	  10	  
percent	  of	  schools	  on	  the	  national	  assessment	  averaged	  68	  percent	  of	  time	  on	  instruction,	  while	  the	  
schools	  in	  the	  bottom	  10	  percent	  averaged	  46	  percent.	  In	  Mexico’s	  Federal	  District,	  the	  10	  percent	  of	  
schools	  with	  the	  highest	  test	  scores	  averaged	  62	  percent	  of	  time	  on	  instruction	  compared	  with	  51	  
percent	  of	  time	  on	  instruction	  in	  the	  10	  percent	  of	  schools	  with	  the	  lowest	  scores.	  Across	  the	  full	  
distribution,	  positive	  correlations	  hold	  in	  all	  four	  countries,	  across	  all	  tested	  grades	  and	  subjects,	  with	  
relatively	  few	  exceptions:	  students	  have	  higher	  learning	  outcomes	  in	  schools	  where	  teachers	  devote	  
more	  time	  to	  academic	  activities.	  	  

When	  test	  scores	  are	  correlated	  with	  teachers’	  ability	  to	  keep	  students	  engaged	  in	  what	  they	  are	  
teaching,	  the	  results	  can	  be	  even	  stronger.	  Teachers	  who	  successfully	  involve	  the	  entire	  class	  in	  the	  task	  
at	  hand	  have	  better	  control	  of	  the	  class,	  fewer	  problems	  with	  discipline,	  more	  time	  to	  impact	  student	  
learning,	  and	  afford	  a	  larger	  share	  of	  their	  students	  the	  opportunity	  to	  learn	  (figure	  O.9).	  
Figure	  O.9	  Time	  on	  instruction	  with	  high	  student	  engagement	  and	  student	  learning	  outcomes	  
a.	  Colombia	  fifth-­‐grade	  math	                                        b.	  Honduras	  third-­‐grade	  language	  




                                                                        	                                                                            	  
Source:	  World	  Bank	  classroom	  observation	  database.	              	  
Strongest	  of	  all	  was	  the	  negative	  correlation	  between	  teachers’	  time	  off-­‐task	  and	  student	  achievement.	  
As	  discussed	  earlier,	  approximately	  10	  percent	  of	  the	  time	  LAC	  teachers	  are	  neither	  teaching	  nor	  
managing	  the	  classroom.	  This	  pattern	  has	  clear	  consequences	  for	  student	  learning	  (figure	  O.10).	  

Although	  broad	  patterns	  are	  apparent,	  the	  correlations	  are	  statistically	  weaker	  than	  might	  be	  expected.	  
A	  major	  explanation	  is	  that	  student	  test	  score	  data	  are	  analyzed	  at	  the	  school	  level	  and	  represent	  the	  
average	  score	  for	  several	  different	  classrooms	  of	  students	  (for	  example,	  three	  or	  four	  different	  fourth-­‐
grade	  math	  classes)	  in	  a	  given	  school,	  while	  the	  observation	  data	  are	  for	  only	  one	  of	  those	  classrooms.	  
Given	  large	  variation	  in	  classroom	  dynamics	  from	  one	  teacher	  to	  another,	  even	  in	  the	  same	  school—as	  
discussed	  later	  in	  this	  section—comparing	  school-­‐level	  average	  learning	  outcomes	  with	  the	  dynamics	  of	  
a	  single	  classroom	  injected	  a	  large	  degree	  of	  random	  variation	  into	  the	  correlations.	  	  
	  

	  

	  

	  



	  
	  


Figure	  O.10	  Teacher	  time	  off-­‐task	  and	  student	  learning	  in	  LAC	  countries	  

a.	  Colombia	  fifth-­‐grade	  Spanish	  (SABER)	                                                     b.	  Honduras	  sixth-­‐grade	  language	  




                                                                 	                                                                                                                     	  
c.	  Mexico	  ninth-­‐grade	  math	  (ENLACE)	                                                         d.	  Rio	  fifth-­‐grade	  math	  (PROVARIO)	  	  
                                                                                                                                  Time Off Task and PROVARIO 5 Math Score




                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                               1
                                                                                     PROVARIO 5 Math -Std




                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                               -2




                                                                                                                    0        .1                   .2                 .3     .4

                                                          	                                                                                                                     	  
                                                                                                                                               Time Off Task




	  

Teachers	  rely	  heavily	  on	  the	  blackboard	  and	  make	  little	  use	  of	  ICT.	  A	  second	  finding	  of	  the	  research	  is	  
that	  many	  learning	  materials	  available	  in	  LAC	  classrooms	  are	  not	  used	  intensively	  by	  teachers.	  
Descriptive	  data	  collected	  by	  the	  observers	  shows	  that	  most	  schools	  in	  the	  region	  today	  offer	  students	  a	  
reasonably	  enriched	  learning	  environment.	  Students	  are	  widely	  equipped	  with	  workbooks,	  writing	  
materials,	  and	  textbooks.	  A	  fast-­‐growing	  share	  of	  schools	  has	  visible	  ICT	  in	  the	  classroom:	  from	  
televisions	  to	  digital	  whiteboards,	  LCD	  projectors,	  and	  laptops.	  In	  this	  sample,	  both	  Peru	  and	  Honduras	  
had	  introduced	  one	  laptop	  per	  child	  (OLPC).	  	  
But	  teacher	  practice	  continues	  to	  rely	  heavily	  on	  a	  single,	  very	  traditional,	  learning	  aid:	  the	  blackboard.	  
About	  one-­‐third	  of	  all	  time	  spent	  on	  teaching	  activities,	  teachers	  use	  the	  blackboard	  and	  nothing	  else.	  
Between	  14	  and	  24	  percent	  of	  the	  time,	  teachers	  use	  no	  learning	  materials.	  Teachers	  use	  available	  
classroom-­‐level	  ICT	  only	  2	  percent	  of	  the	  time.	  In	  Honduras	  and	  Peru—the	  countries	  with	  the	  largest	  
investments	  in	  one-­‐to-­‐one	  computing	  in	  this	  sample—the	  share	  of	  total	  class	  time	  spent	  using	  these	  
materials	  was	  in	  fact	  the	  lowest,	  1	  percent	  in	  Peru	  (in	  2011)	  and	  less	  than	  1	  percent	  in	  Honduras	  (in	  
2011).	  	  
Students	  are	  unengaged.	  LAC’s	  teachers	  have	  great	  difficulty	  keeping	  their	  students	  engaged	  in	  
learning.	  In	  no	  system	  studied	  do	  teachers	  on	  average	  keep	  the	  entire	  class	  engaged	  in	  learning	  more	  
than	  25	  percent	  of	  class	  time	  (figure	  O.11).	  More	  than	  half	  of	  all	  class	  time,	  in	  all	  countries,	  up	  to	  five	  
students	  are	  tuned	  out.	  Between	  one-­‐fifth	  and	  one-­‐quarter	  of	  total	  class	  time,	  in	  all	  countries,	  a	  large	  
group	  of	  students	  (six	  or	  more)	  is	  visibly	  not	  involved	  in	  the	  activity	  the	  teacher	  is	  leading.	  With	  an	  
average	  class	  size	  of	  25	  across	  our	  sample,	  six	  students	  represent	  a	  significant	  share,	  and	  can	  disrupt	  the	  




	  
	  


work	  of	  other	  students.	  Observers	  in	  every	  country	  saw	  classrooms	  that	  were	  badly	  out	  of	  control,	  even	  
with	  the	  teacher	  present	  and	  aware	  of	  being	  observed.	  	  
	  
Figure	  O.11	  Teacher	  time	  on	  instruction	  with	  the	  entire	  class	  engaged	  

                                                     70%	                                                                       64%	               64%	                65%	  
                                                                                      61%	                 62%	  
       Percent	  of	  Total	  Class	  TIme	  




                                                     60%	        52%	  
                                                     50%	  
                                                     40%	  
                                                     30%	                                                            25%	                                    23%	  
                                                                            21%	               21%	                                      19%	                                    19%	  
                                                     20%	  
                                                     10%	  
                                                      0%	  
                                                               Mexico	  D.F.	       Jamaica	               Peru	            Honduras	            Brazil	           Colombia	  

                                                                 Time	  on	  Instruclon	               Time	  on	  Instruclon	  with	  Enlre	  Class	  Engaged	  
                                                                                                                                                                                              	  
Source:	  	  World	  Bank	  classroom	  observation	  database.	  
	  

Given	  high	  repetition	  rates,	  LAC’s	  teachers	  often	  face	  classes	  that	  span	  different	  ages	  and	  learning	  
levels.	  Well-­‐trained	  teachers,	  however,	  learn	  to	  handle	  such	  classes	  and	  with	  well-­‐designed	  lesson	  plans	  
keep	  all	  students	  engaged	  much	  more	  than	  20	  percent	  of	  the	  time.	  One	  of	  the	  clearest	  findings	  of	  this	  
research	  is	  that	  poor	  student	  learning	  results	  can	  be	  directly	  linked	  to	  the	  failure	  of	  teachers	  to	  keep	  
students	  engaged	  in	  learning.	  Important	  challenges	  for	  both	  pre-­‐service	  and	  in-­‐service	  teacher	  training	  
programs	  in	  LAC	  are	  to	  ensure	  that	  teachers	  recognize	  the	  importance	  of	  drawing	  all	  students	  into	  the	  
learning	  process,	  are	  equipped	  with	  a	  range	  of	  teaching	  strategies	  to	  achieve	  this,	  and	  arrive	  at	  school	  
each	  day	  prepared	  to	  use	  these	  strategies,	  and	  every	  minute	  of	  class	  time,	  effectively.	  	  	  
Average	  classroom	  practice	  varies	  tremendously	  across	  schools.	  A	  fourth	  finding	  is	  the	  wide	  variation	  
in	  average	  classroom	  practice	  across	  schools.	  In	  every	  system,	  there	  are	  many	  schools	  where	  the	  
average	  share	  of	  class	  time	  used	  for	  instruction	  exceeds	  the	  Stallings	  85	  percent	  benchmark	  and	  others	  
where	  instructional	  time	  is	  disastrously	  low:	  below	  20	  percent	  of	  total	  class	  time.	  Imagine	  attending	  a	  
school	  where	  four	  days	  per	  week	  there	  is	  no	  instruction	  (figure	  O.12).	  
In	  some	  countries,	  there	  were	  distinct	  differences	  across	  regions;	  in	  Honduras,	  schools	  in	  the	  province	  of	  
Colon	  averaged	  33	  percent	  of	  time	  on	  instruction	  while	  those	  in	  Copan	  averaged	  83	  percent.	  In	  
Pernambuco,	  Brazil,	  schools	  observed	  in	  late	  2009	  that	  went	  on	  to	  achieve	  their	  performance	  targets	  for	  
the	  year	  and	  earn	  a	  school-­‐level	  bonus	  averaged	  63	  percent	  of	  time	  on	  instruction	  compared	  to	  54	  
percent	  in	  schools	  that	  failed	  to	  gain	  the	  bonus.	  	  
	  
	  
	  



	  
	  


Figure	  O.12	  Distribution	  of	  schools	  by	  average	  time	  spent	  on	  instruction	  
                 a. Colombia	  across	  school	  variation	                                      b.	  Peru	  across	  school	  variation	  

                                       Colombia Across School Variation                                                                              Peru AcrossSchool Variation
                 4




                                                                                                                        2
                 3




                                                                                                                        1.5
                                                                                                              Density
       Density
                 2




                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                        .5
                 1




                                                                                                                        0
                 0




                     0       .1        .2    .3     .4     .5      .6    .7   .8   .9   1                                         0                 .2            .4           .6          .8        1
                                                   Time on Instruction                                                                                          Time on Instruction

                                                                                              	                              kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0503

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  	  

                                       Honduras Across School Variation                                                                        Jamaica Across School Variation
                 4




                                                                                                                        4
                 3




                                                                                                                        3
       Density




                                                                                                              Density
                                                                                                                        2
                 2




                                                                                                                        1
                 1




                                                                                                                        0
                 0




                         0        .1    .2    .3     .4     .5      .6   .7   .8   .9   1                                     0       .1       .2        .3     .4     .5      .6     .7   .8   .9   1
                                                   Time on Instruction                                                                                         Time on Instruction
                                                                                              	                                                                                                           	  

                                        Mexico Across School Variation                                                                              Brazil Across School Variation
                 4




                                                                                                                        4
                 3




                                                                                                                        3
       Density




                                                                                                              Density
                 2




                                                                                                                        2
                 1




                                                                                                                        1
                 0




                                                                                                                        0




                     0       .1        .2    .3     .4     .5      .6    .7   .8   .9   1                                     0       .1      .2         .3    .4     .5      .6      .7   .8   .9   1
                                                   Time on Instruction                                                                                        Time on Instruction
                                                                                            	                                                                                                           	  

Source:	  World	  Bank	  classroom	  observation	  database	  	  

What	  is	  evident	  from	  this	  dispersion	  is	  that	  school	  systems	  are	  not	  focused	  on	  the	  issue	  of	  instructional	  
time.	  Within	  a	  given	  national	  or	  subnational	  education	  system,	  schools	  operate	  in	  the	  same	  institutional	  
and	  policy	  environment.	  They	  share	  the	  same	  policies	  for	  the	  selection	  of	  school	  directors,	  curriculum,	  
teacher	  standards,	  preparation,	  and	  student	  assignment	  rules.	  Yet	  this	  research	  shows	  that	  these	  
policies	  are	  playing	  out	  at	  the	  school	  level	  in	  widely	  different	  ways.	  And	  these	  difference	  have	  important	  



	  
	  


consequences	  for	  students.	  In	  Honduran	  schools,	  64	  percent	  of	  time	  is	  spent	  on	  instruction,	  on	  average,	  
across	  the	  system.	  But	  the	  top	  20	  percent	  of	  schools	  (in	  terms	  of	  instructional	  time	  use)	  average	  85	  
percent:	  they	  achieve	  the	  Stallings	  benchmark.	  Schools	  in	  the	  bottom	  quintile	  average	  37	  percent.	  This	  
48	  percentage-­‐point	  difference	  means	  that	  students	  in	  top	  quintile	  schools	  receive	  an	  average	  of	  96	  
more	  days	  of	  instruction	  than	  students	  in	  bottom	  schools	  each	  year.	  The	  consequences	  for	  students	  
spending	  several	  years	  in	  a	  school	  that	  consistently	  delivers	  much	  less	  instruction	  are	  cumulative	  and	  
highly	  unfair.	  	  
Average	  classroom	  practice	  varies	  tremendously	  within	  schools.	  The	  fifth	  and	  most	  surprising	  finding	  is	  
the	  degree	  of	  variation	  in	  teacher	  practice	  inside	  schools.	  The	  difference	  in	  instructional	  time	  use	  
between	  the	  best	  (highest	  time	  on	  teaching)	  and	  worst	  teacher	  in	  a	  single	  school	  is	  typically	  about	  two-­‐
thirds	  as	  large	  as	  the	  variation	  across	  the	  whole	  school	  system,	  a	  truly	  staggering	  range.	  	  
Figure	  O.13	  draws	  out	  these	  patterns.	  In	  Colombia,	  for	  example,	  the	  average	  time	  on	  instruction	  across	  
the	  national	  sample	  is	  65	  percent.	  Schools	  in	  the	  top	  quintile	  of	  the	  performance	  distribution	  (of	  time	  
use)	  average	  82	  percent,	  and	  schools	  in	  the	  bottom	  quintile	  average	  49	  percent:	  a	  33	  percentage-­‐point	  
difference.	  But	  an	  even	  greater	  range	  exists	  between	  the	  best-­‐	  and	  worst-­‐performing	  teachers	  inside	  
these	  schools.	  For	  a	  school	  in	  the	  lowest	  quintile,	  the	  best	  teacher	  will	  typically	  spend	  78	  percent	  of	  class	  
time	  on	  instruction—not	  far	  from	  the	  Stallings	  benchmark—while	  the	  worst	  teacher	  in	  that	  school	  will	  
use	  only	  18	  percent	  of	  time	  for	  instruction.	  This	  60	  percentage-­‐point	  average	  difference	  in	  time	  spent	  
teaching	  within	  these	  schools	  is	  larger	  than	  the	  range	  in	  the	  average	  across	  quintiles	  of	  schools.	  	  

Figure	  O.13	  Colombia	  and	  Honduras	  variation	  in	  instructional	  time	  within	  schools,	  2011	  
Percent	  of	  class	  time	  spent	  on	  instruction	  
a.	  Colombia	                                                                                  b.	  Honduras	  

       100%	                                                                                      100%	  

        80%	                                                                                       80%	  

        60%	                                                                                       60%	  

        40%	  
                                                                                                    40%	  
        20%	  
                                                                                                    20%	  
          0%	  
                   Quintile	   Quintile	   Quintile	   Quintile	   Quintile	                     0%	  
                      1	          2	          3	          4	          5	                                  Quintile	   Quintile	   Quintile	   Quintile	   Quintile	  
                                                                                                                  1	          2	          3	          4	          5	  
                     Lowest	  Classroom	  on	  Task	                                                             Lowest	  Classroom	  on	  Task	  
                     Average	  Time	  on	  Task	  in	  School	                                                 Average	  time	  on	  Task	  in	  School	  
                     Highest	  on	  Task	  Classroom	                                                            Highest	  on	  Task	  Classroom	  
                                                                                           	                                                                                     	  
Source:	  World	  Bank	  classroom	  observation	  database.	  	  	  
Note:	  Quintiles	  refer	  to	  the	  distribution	  of	  schools	  ranked	  from	  highest	  to	  lowest	  average	  time	  on	  instruction.	  




	  
	  


In	  the	  20	  percent	  of	  schools	  with	  the	  highest	  average	  use	  of	  time,	  the	  gaps	  in	  time	  use	  between	  the	  
best-­‐	  and	  worst-­‐performing	  teachers	  in	  each	  school	  is	  much	  smaller.	  Top	  teachers	  in	  these	  Colombian	  
schools	  spend	  an	  impressive	  97	  percent	  of	  total	  class	  time	  on	  instruction,	  but	  even	  the	  least	  efficient	  
teachers	  in	  these	  schools	  achieve	  63	  percent	  of	  time	  on	  instruction:	  a	  34	  percentage-­‐point	  difference	  
that	  is	  roughly	  half	  the	  size	  of	  the	  within-­‐school	  gap	  in	  the	  bottom	  quintile	  of	  schools.	  What	  truly	  
distinguishes	  top	  schools	  is	  consistency:	  good	  schools	  have	  less	  variation	  from	  classroom	  to	  classroom	  in	  
one	  very	  basic	  parameter	  of	  teacher	  performance:	  the	  share	  of	  class	  time	  used	  for	  instruction.	  Whether	  
the	  country	  has	  relatively	  high	  across-­‐school	  variation	  (such	  as	  Honduras,	  Jamaica,	  or	  Brazil)	  or	  low	  
(Mexico	  and	  Colombia)	  the	  top	  quintile	  of	  the	  distribution	  is	  characterized	  by	  more	  consistent	  teacher	  
performance	  across	  different	  classrooms.	  	  
The	  implications	  of	  these	  data	  are	  profound.	  First,	  school	  systems	  clearly	  are	  not	  focused	  on	  the	  issue	  of	  
instructional	  time.	  In	  some	  sense,	  this	  is	  understandable.	  No	  LAC	  school	  system	  today	  collects	  
standardized	  data	  on	  classroom	  dynamics;	  it	  is	  understandable	  that	  large	  differences	  can	  persist	  in	  the	  
absence	  of	  any	  detection	  system.	  	  
But	  variations	  in	  classroom	  practice	  within	  a	  school	  are	  another	  matter.	  Direct	  observation	  of	  all	  the	  
classrooms	  within	  a	  single	  school	  is	  not	  only	  technically	  feasible	  but	  is	  an	  implicit	  responsibility	  of	  school	  
directors.	  There	  is	  clearly	  large	  scope	  for	  directors	  to	  promote	  more	  exchange	  of	  practice	  within	  their	  
schools.	  The	  costs	  of	  identifying	  the	  most	  effective	  teachers	  within	  a	  school	  and	  ensuring	  that	  other	  
teachers	  observe	  and	  learn	  from	  these	  examples	  are	  tiny	  compared	  to	  the	  costs	  of	  traditional	  teacher	  
training	  programs,	  which	  require	  bringing	  large	  numbers	  of	  teachers	  off-­‐site	  and	  hiring	  trainers.	  	  
Raising	  the	  average	  quality	  teacher	  practice	  across	  schools	  is	  the	  responsibility	  of	  system	  managers.	  
Many	  different	  approaches	  can	  be	  imagined:	  feeding	  back	  comparative	  classroom	  observation	  data	  to	  
schools	  as	  an	  input	  to	  their	  development	  planning;	  initiating	  new	  forms	  of	  teacher	  training	  based	  on	  
videotaped	  examples	  of	  good	  and	  weak	  teacher	  practice;	  including	  assessments	  of	  teachers’	  classroom	  
practice—whether	  by	  video	  or	  trained	  observers—in	  teacher	  performance	  evaluations.	  Policymakers	  in	  
the	  seven	  countries	  involved	  in	  this	  program	  have	  taken	  the	  results	  as	  a	  stimulus	  to	  action	  along	  several	  
of	  these	  lines.	  Our	  research	  created	  a	  baseline	  picture	  of	  what	  LAC	  students	  encounter	  inside	  the	  
classroom	  today.	  It	  also	  provides	  a	  basis	  for	  tracking	  how	  ongoing	  and	  new	  reforms	  in	  these	  countries	  
succeed	  in	  reshaping	  that	  reality.	  	  

Recruiting	  better	  teachers	  
There	  are	  three	  core	  challenges	  in	  raising	  teacher	  quality:	  recruiting,	  grooming,	  and	  motivating	  better	  
teachers.	  Of	  these,	  recruiting—raising	  the	  caliber	  of	  teachers	  at	  the	  point	  of	  recruitment—is	  likely	  to	  be	  
the	  most	  complicated	  for	  LAC	  countries,	  because	  it	  depends	  on	  raising	  the	  selectivity	  of	  teaching	  as	  a	  
profession.	  Global	  research	  on	  high-­‐performing	  education	  systems	  consistently	  points	  to	  the	  ability	  to	  
attract	  top	  talent	  into	  teaching	  as	  a	  critical	  underlying	  factor	  that	  takes	  education	  systems	  from	  “good	  to	  
great”	  (Barber	  and	  Mourshed	  2007).	  But	  attracting	  highly	  talented	  individuals	  into	  teaching	  requires	  
aligning	  a	  complex	  and	  interrelated	  set	  of	  factors	  that	  can	  be	  difficult	  and	  slow	  to	  change,	  including	  
salaries	  and	  the	  salary	  structure,	  the	  prestige	  of	  the	  profession,	  the	  selectivity	  of	  entry	  into	  teacher	  
education,	  and	  the	  quality	  of	  that	  education.	  	  
Raising	  selectivity.	  Our	  analysis	  suggests	  that	  salary	  increases	  may	  be	  necessary	  in	  some	  countries	  to	  
make	  or	  keep	  teachers’	  average	  salaries—and	  the	  structure	  of	  teachers’	  salary	  incentives—competitive.	  
But	  salary	  increases	  will	  raise	  quality	  only	  if	  they	  are	  accompanied	  by	  policies	  to	  raise	  the	  selectivity	  of	  
teacher	  education	  programs.	  This	  is	  a	  crucial	  issue	  in	  the	  LAC	  region	  that	  gets	  far	  too	  little	  attention.	  In	  
Singapore	  and	  Finland,	  only	  20	  percent	  of	  secondary	  school	  students	  who	  apply	  to	  teacher	  education	  



	  
	  


programs	  are	  accepted,	  and	  all	  come	  from	  the	  top	  third	  of	  students.	  In	  LAC,	  there	  is	  virtually	  no	  
winnowing	  of	  teacher	  candidates	  at	  the	  point	  of	  entry	  into	  teacher	  education,	  and	  academic	  standards	  
are	  lower	  than	  in	  other	  professional	  fields.	  As	  a	  result,	  the	  share	  of	  tertiary	  education	  students	  in	  Latin	  
America	  enrolled	  in	  teacher	  training	  is	  much	  higher	  than	  in	  many	  OECD	  countries,	  and	  many	  LAC	  
countries	  are	  currently	  producing	  an	  excess	  of	  teacher	  graduates	  (figure	  O.14).	  In	  Peru,	  only	  50	  percent	  
of	  teacher	  graduates	  find	  jobs	  as	  classroom	  teachers;	  in	  Costa	  Rica,	  only	  54	  percent.	  Chile’s	  Ministry	  of	  
Education	  in	  2013	  estimated	  that	  as	  many	  as	  half	  of	  all	  students	  graduated	  from	  teacher	  education	  
programs	  in	  recent	  years	  are	  currently	  employed	  in	  retail.	  	  
Figure	  O.14	  Tertiary	  graduates	  who	  studied	  education	  
percent	  
       45%	  
       40%	  
       35%	  
       30%	  
       25%	  
       20%	  
       15%	  
       10%	  
        5%	  
        0%	  
                            Aruba	  



                                                   Bermuda	  




                                                                                             Costa	  


                                                                                          Salvador	  
                                                                                                         Guyana	  



                                                                                                                                 Mexico	  

                                                                                                                                              Panama	  
                                                                              Chile	  




                                                                                                                                                           Uruguay	  

                                                                                                                                                                         Finland	  
                                                                                                                                                                                       South	  
                                                                                                                                                                                       Korea	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Japan	  
                                                                 Brazil	  
                 Argenln



                                        Barbado




                                                                                                                      Hondura
                                                                                          Colombi


                                                                                              Rica	  
                                                                                             El	  
                                                                                              a	  
                    a	  



                                           s	  




                                                                                                                         s	  



                                                                                                                                                                                                               	  
Source:	  UNESCO	  2012.	  Data	  is	  for	  most	  recent	  available	  year	  between	  2009	  and	  2012.	  

Since	  teacher	  education	  is	  often	  subsidized	  by	  the	  public	  sector,	  producing	  an	  excess	  of	  teachers	  diverts	  
resources	  from	  other,	  more	  productive	  investments	  in	  student	  learning.	  In	  countries	  where	  students	  
finance	  teacher	  education	  with	  their	  own	  resources	  or	  loans,	  the	  overproduction	  of	  graduates	  from	  a	  
four-­‐	  or	  five-­‐year	  program	  of	  study	  that	  does	  not	  lead	  to	  relevant	  employment	  can	  be	  even	  more	  
problematic,	  and	  may	  generate	  social	  unrest.	  Most	  fundamentally,	  a	  lack	  of	  selectivity	  undermines	  the	  
prestige	  of	  the	  profession	  and	  makes	  teacher	  education	  less	  attractive	  for	  top	  students.	  	  
The	  selectivity	  and	  status	  of	  the	  teaching	  profession	  are	  not	  immutable	  qualities	  of	  an	  education	  system.	  
Finland	  made	  raising	  teacher	  selectivity	  a	  cornerstone	  of	  an	  education	  reform	  strategy	  adopted	  in	  the	  
1970s.	  Over	  several	  decades,	  it	  transformed	  its	  labor	  market	  for	  teachers	  from	  one	  where	  a	  large	  
number	  of	  teacher	  training	  institutions	  of	  variable	  quality	  produced	  an	  excessive	  number	  of	  teachers	  to	  
one	  where	  a	  much	  smaller	  number	  of	  high-­‐quality	  institutions	  produce	  just	  enough	  high-­‐talent	  teachers,	  
all	  of	  whom	  find	  teaching	  positions	  and	  enjoy	  high	  social	  prestige.	  	  
Global	  experience	  points	  to	  three	  key	  levers	  for	  making	  teacher	  recruitment	  more	  selective:	  	  
       •     Raising	  standards	  for	  entry	  into	  teacher	  education	  
       •     Raising	  the	  quality	  of	  teacher	  education	  schools	  
       •     Raising	  hiring	  standards	  for	  new	  teachers	  
Raising	  entry	  standards	  for	  teacher	  education.	  The	  principle	  of	  university	  autonomy	  in	  Latin	  America	  
legally	  prevents	  most	  ministries	  of	  education	  from	  directly	  controlling	  admissions	  standards	  for	  pre-­‐
service	  teacher	  training.	  A	  few	  prestigious	  universities	  are	  selective,	  but	  in	  most	  countries	  the	  majority	  
of	  new	  teachers	  are	  produced	  by	  low-­‐quality	  private	  providers	  and	  nonuniversity	  teacher	  training	  
institutes	  subject	  to	  weak	  quality	  assurance.	  	  




	  
	  


Four	  main	  strategies	  are	  being	  pursued	  by	  education	  ministries	  in	  the	  region	  to	  address	  these	  issues:	  (a)	  
closing	  low-­‐quality	  schools	  under	  direct	  control	  of	  the	  ministry	  (typically	  nonuniversity	  teacher	  
education	  institutions);	  (b)	  establishing	  a	  national	  teacher	  university	  directly	  controlled	  by	  the	  ministry,	  
such	  as	  Singapore’s	  National	  Institute	  for	  Education;	  (c)	  creating	  special	  scholarships	  for	  top	  students;	  
and	  (d)	  raising	  accreditation	  standards	  for	  autonomous	  tertiary	  institutions,	  forcing	  closure	  or	  
adaptation.	  	  
Peru	  tackled	  the	  oversupply	  of	  low-­‐quality	  teachers	  from	  nonuniversity	  teacher	  training	  schools	  
(Institutos	  Superiores	  Pedagogicos	  [ISP])	  in	  2006	  with	  the	  introduction	  of	  a	  national	  bar	  for	  admissions.	  
Requiring	  candidates	  to	  achieve	  a	  minimum	  competency	  score	  on	  cognitive	  tests,	  a	  writing	  test,	  and	  an	  
interview	  had	  a	  dramatic	  effect	  on	  ISP	  enrollments;	  they	  dropped	  from	  11,000	  to	  389	  in	  a	  single	  year	  
(figure	  O.15).	  A	  number	  of	  regional	  institutes	  were	  suddenly	  threatened	  with	  closure,	  raising	  concerns	  
about	  potential	  teacher	  shortages	  in	  bilingual	  and	  rural	  communities.	  In	  2012,	  the	  ministry	  returned	  
control	  over	  admissions	  to	  the	  institutions,	  but	  with	  annual	  enrollment	  caps	  set	  by	  the	  ministry.	  	  
Figure	  O.15	  Raising	  the	  bar	  for	  teacher	  education	  programs	  in	  Peru,	  2006–10	  
Thousands	  of	  new	  enrollments	  
                      16,000	  
                      14,000	  
                      12,000	  
       Students	  




                      10,000	  
                       8,000	  
                                                                                                       Non-­‐university	  
                       6,000	  
                       4,000	                                                                         University	  
                       2,000	  
                           0	  
                                   2006	     2007	     2008	       2009	        2010	  
                                                    Entrance	  year	  
                                                                                                                              	  
Source:	  World	  Bank	  construction	  from	  Peru	  Ministry	  of	  Education	  data.	  

Ecuador	  has	  been	  similarly	  aggressive	  in	  trying	  to	  raise	  the	  quality	  of	  teacher	  education.	  It	  closed	  14	  low-­‐
quality	  teacher	  preparation	  institutions	  in	  2012	  and	  is	  creating	  a	  high-­‐level	  pedagogic	  university	  
dependent	  on	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Education,	  the	  Universidad	  Nacional	  de	  Educación	  (UNAE).	  Researchers	  
have	  identified	  a	  “tight	  coupling”	  between	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Education	  and	  the	  institutions	  where	  teachers	  
are	  educated	  as	  a	  factor	  in	  the	  educational	  success	  of	  countries	  as	  different	  as	  Singapore	  and	  Cuba	  
(Carnoy	  2007).	  “Tight	  coupling”	  ensures	  the	  coordination	  of	  teacher	  education	  with	  national	  education	  
policy	  goals,	  such	  as	  higher	  selectivity	  at	  entry	  and	  stronger	  emphasis	  on	  math	  instruction,	  critical	  
thinking,	  and	  twenty-­‐first-­‐century	  information	  technology	  skills.	  The	  UNAE	  will	  prepare	  teachers	  for	  a	  
new	  national	  curriculum	  currently	  being	  designed	  in	  consultation	  with	  national	  and	  international	  
stakeholders	  and	  experts.	  Another	  central	  idea	  is	  that	  UNAE	  will	  become	  the	  link	  between	  national	  
policymakers	  and	  other	  teacher	  training	  institutions,	  seeding	  the	  latter	  over	  time	  with	  highly	  qualified	  
faculty	  trained	  at	  the	  UNAE.	  	  
A	  third	  strategy,	  which	  offers	  shorter-­‐term	  impact,	  is	  the	  use	  of	  targeted	  incentives	  to	  attract	  top	  
secondary	  school	  graduates	  into	  teaching.	  In	  Singapore,	  Finland,	  Hong	  Kong,	  and	  Scotland,	  teacher	  
training	  is	  open	  only	  to	  select	  candidates,	  but	  these	  students	  receive	  free	  tuition	  plus	  a	  salary	  or	  stipend	  
while	  they	  are	  in	  training	  (Garland	  2008).	  Colombia	  and	  Chile	  have	  recently	  launched	  similar	  programs.	  
Chile’s	  program,	  called	  the	  Beca	  Vocación	  de	  Profesor	  (BVP),	  in	  2010	  began	  offering	  full	  tuition	  for	  
students	  who	  score	  600	  or	  higher	  on	  the	  university	  entrance	  examination	  (PSU),	  and	  agree	  to	  study	  


	  
	  


education	  and	  work	  as	  a	  full-­‐time	  teacher	  for	  at	  least	  three	  years	  in	  public	  or	  subsidized	  schools	  after	  
graduating.	  About	  3,500	  students	  per	  year	  have	  qualified	  for	  the	  Beca	  since	  2010,	  a	  relatively	  small	  
share	  of	  the	  130,000	  students	  in	  teacher	  education	  in	  Chile.	  But	  researchers	  have	  confirmed	  the	  BVP’s	  
success	  in	  attracting	  students	  with	  a	  stronger	  academic	  profile.	  Feedback	  from	  top	  universities	  is	  that	  
the	  new	  students	  are	  stimulating	  higher	  academic	  performance	  from	  their	  classmates	  as	  well.	  	  
The	  fourth	  and	  most	  important	  tool	  is	  the	  accreditation	  and	  review	  process.	  Developing	  the	  institutional	  
capacity	  for	  a	  national	  higher	  education	  accreditation	  system	  is	  complex	  and	  takes	  time.	  Chile’s	  
experience,	  however,	  shows	  that	  accreditation	  information	  can	  exert	  important	  influence	  on	  student	  
enrollment	  choices	  (figure	  O.16).	  When	  mandatory	  accreditation	  reviews	  of	  teacher	  education	  programs	  
began	  in	  2006,	  80	  percent	  of	  the	  country’s	  940	  teaching	  programs	  received	  either	  no	  accreditation	  or	  
the	  lowest	  category.	  Even	  without	  direct	  action	  to	  close	  low-­‐quality	  institutions,	  in	  the	  space	  of	  a	  few	  
years,	  the	  teacher	  training	  market	  shifted	  massively	  from	  77	  percent	  of	  enrollments	  in	  nonaccredited	  
programs	  to	  70	  percent	  of	  enrollments	  in	  accredited	  programs.	  Proposed	  legislation	  goes	  further,	  
requiring	  that	  all	  teachers	  hired	  into	  public	  (or	  publicly	  subsidized)	  schools	  must	  have	  graduated	  from	  
accredited	  programs.	  	  
Figure	  O.16	  Impact	  of	  accreditation	  information	  on	  teacher	  education	  enrollments	  in	  Chile,	  2007–10	  	  
(full-­‐time	  students	  enrolled,	  thousands)	  
                   100000	  
                    80000	  
                    60000	  
                    40000	  
                    20000	  
                        0	  
                                     2007	                 2008	                 2009	                 2010	  

                                Accredited	  programs	                    Non-­‐accredited	  programs	  
                                                                                                                               	  
            Source:	  World	  Bank	  construction	  using	  Chile	  Ministry	  of	  Education	  enrollment	  data.	  
            	  

Raising	  the	  quality	  of	  teacher	  education.	  The	  academic	  quality	  of	  students	  entering	  teacher	  training	  is	  
weak,	  but	  the	  quality	  of	  those	  programs	  is	  also	  dismally	  low.	  Qualitative	  accounts	  of	  pre-­‐service	  training	  
in	  Latin	  America	  generally	  describe	  it	  as	  failing	  to	  provide	  sufficient	  content	  mastery	  and	  student-­‐
centered	  pedagogy;	  being	  isolated	  from	  the	  school	  system	  and	  education	  policy	  making;	  and	  including	  
practical	  exposure	  to	  work	  in	  schools	  only	  toward	  the	  end	  of	  the	  degree	  and	  sometimes	  not	  at	  all	  
(UNESCO	  2012).	  
While	  global	  research	  suggests	  that	  pre-­‐service	  training	  programs	  focused	  on	  the	  work	  teachers	  will	  
actually	  face	  in	  classrooms	  lead	  to	  more	  effective	  first-­‐year	  teachers	  and	  higher	  learning	  for	  their	  
students	  (Boyd	  et	  al.	  2009),	  most	  Latin	  American	  and	  Caribbean	  countries	  do	  not	  set	  a	  minimum	  
standard	  for	  practice	  teaching	  and	  leave	  it	  to	  institutions	  to	  define.	  As	  a	  result,	  while	  in	  high-­‐performing	  
Cuba	  72	  percent	  of	  a	  teacher	  education	  program	  is	  spent	  doing	  practice	  in	  schools	  (i.e.,	  more	  than	  7,100	  
hours	  over	  5	  years),	  national	  thresholds	  in	  other	  countries	  require	  far	  less.	  (figure	  O.17).	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  


	  
	  


	  
	  
Figure	  O.17	  Compulsory	  pre-­‐service	  teaching	  practice	  in	  LAC	  countries	  	  
(number	  of	  weeks)	  
       160	  
       140	  
       120	  
       100	  
         80	  
         60	  
         40	  
         20	  
           0	  
                         Cuba	               Mexico	        Argenlna	  U.	   Argenlna	                    Brazil	           Peru	  N.U.	  
                                                                                   N.U.	  
                                                                                                                                                           	  
              Source:	  Franco	  2012.	  	  
              Note:	  N.U.refers	  to	  non-­‐university	  programs.	  	  U.	  refers	  to	  university	  level	  programs.	  Figures	  assume	  40	  program	  hours	  
              per	  week	  and	  40	  weeks	  per	  year.	  

University	  autonomy	  prevents	  directly	  mandating	  changes	  in	  the	  content	  of	  teacher	  education,	  but	  
several	  ministries	  of	  education	  in	  the	  region	  are	  creatively	  using	  competitive	  funding	  programs	  to	  
stimulate	  such	  reforms.	  Chile	  in	  2013	  launched	  a	  new	  line	  of	  competitive	  funding	  to	  support	  a	  “rethink”	  
of	  teacher	  education.	  Its	  ministry	  is	  open	  to	  proposals	  for	  major	  change,	  including	  shortening	  the	  
number	  of	  years	  required,	  radically	  changing	  curriculum	  content,	  and	  increasing	  the	  time	  spent	  working	  
in	  classrooms.	  The	  only	  requirement	  is	  that	  proposals	  be	  grounded	  in	  global	  research	  evidence.	  Peru’s	  
competitive	  fund	  for	  tertiary	  education	  (Fondo	  de	  Estímulo	  de	  la	  Calidad)	  also	  has	  a	  specific	  line	  of	  
support	  to	  improve	  the	  quality	  of	  teacher	  training	  institutions.	  	  
Raising	  hiring	  standards.	  The	  low	  quality	  of	  teacher	  education	  programs	  makes	  it	  important	  that	  public	  
education	  systems	  screen	  effectively	  at	  the	  point	  of	  hiring.	  Three	  main	  policy	  instruments	  can	  ensure	  
this:	  (a)	  national	  teacher	  standards;	  (b)	  preemployment	  tests	  of	  teachers’	  skills	  and	  competencies;	  and	  
(c)	  alternative	  certification.	  
National	  teacher	  standards,	  articulating	  “what	  a	  teacher	  should	  know	  and	  be	  able	  to	  do,”	  are	  an	  
important	  step	  in	  the	  development	  of	  a	  more	  professional	  teaching	  corps.	  Over	  the	  past	  twenty	  years,	  
most	  OECD	  countries	  have	  put	  serious	  effort	  into	  developing	  standards	  for	  teachers.	  Relatively	  few	  LAC	  
countries	  have	  done	  so.	  	  
The	  exception	  is	  Chile,	  which	  adopted	  national	  teacher	  standards	  (Marco	  para	  la	  Buena	  Enseñanza)	  in	  
2003,	  after	  three	  years	  of	  joint	  work	  by	  a	  national	  commission	  and	  the	  teachers’	  union.	  Chile’s	  
framework	  remains	  a	  best-­‐practice	  example	  for	  the	  region	  (table	  O.3)	  It	  has	  guided	  the	  design	  of	  other	  
key	  policies,	  including	  Chile’s	  teacher	  evaluation	  system	  and	  teacher	  exit	  exam,	  the	  Prueba	  Inicia.	  
National	  teaching	  standards	  take	  time	  and	  effort	  to	  develop,	  but	  formally	  establishing	  high	  standards	  for	  
teachers	  lays	  the	  foundation	  for	  education	  quality.	  	  
	  
	  


	  
	  


	  
Figure	  O.3	  Chile’s	  Framework	  for	  Good	  Teaching	  

       Preparation	                                                                     Learning	  environment	  
       -­‐	  Knowledge	  of	  the	  content	  and	  curriculum	                   -­‐	  Creates	  an	  environment	  of	  acceptance,	  
       -­‐	  Knows	  the	  students	                                                 equity,	  con`idence,	  and	  respect	  
       -­‐	  Dominates	  the	  didactics	                                            -­‐	  Manifests	  high	  expectations	  about	  all	  
                                                                                         students'	  learning	  and	  development	  
       -­‐	  Organizes	  objectives	  and	  contents	                               possibilities.	  	  
       coherently	  
                                                                                         -­‐	  Classroom	  norms	  	  
       -­‐	  Coherent	  evaluation	  strategies	  
                                                                                         -­‐	  Organized	  work	  environment	  and	  physical	  
                                                                               	        setting	  

         Professional	  responsibilities	                                                   Instruction	  for	  all	  students	  
         -­‐	  Re`lects	  systematically	  on	  teaching	                                -­‐	  Communicates	  learning	  objectives	  
         -­‐	  Professional	  and	  team	  relationships	  with	                        -­‐	  Uses	  challenging,	  coherent,	  and	  signi`icant	  
         colleagues	                                                                         teaching	  strategies	  
         -­‐	  Takes	  on	  responsibility	  in	  orienting	                            -­‐	  Content	  of	  class	  is	  treated	  with	  conceptual	  
         students	                                                                           thoroughness	  and	  is	  comprehensible	  for	  all	  
         -­‐	  Favors	  collaboration	  with	  parents	  and	                           students	  
         guardians	                                                                          -­‐	  Optimizes	  use	  of	  time	  
         -­‐	  Knows	  updated	  information	  about	  the	                             -­‐	  Promotes	  thinking	  
         profession,	  the	  education	  system,	  and	  
         current	  policies	                                                                -­‐	  Evaluates	  and	  monitors	  student	  learning	  
                                                                                                                                                                         	  
            Source:	  Adapted	  from	  Chile	  Ministry	  of	  Education	  2008.	  

A	  second	  tool	  is	  certification	  exams	  or	  competency	  tests	  to	  screen	  teacher	  candidates.	  No	  country	  in	  
Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  today	  has	  a	  compulsory	  certification	  process	  for	  the	  teaching	  
profession	  as	  stringent	  as	  those	  used	  in	  medicine,	  law,	  or	  accounting—i.e.,	  a	  rigorous	  examination	  that	  
prohibits	  those	  who	  do	  not	  meet	  its	  standards	  from	  being	  hired	  anywhere	  into	  the	  profession	  (public	  or	  
private	  sector).	  But	  Colombia	  and	  El	  Salvador	  have	  introduced	  mandatory	  exit	  exams	  which	  teacher	  
graduates	  must	  pass	  in	  order	  to	  be	  hired	  by	  the	  public	  sector.	  	  In	  El	  Salvador	  there	  has	  been	  clear	  
progress	  in	  raising	  the	  share	  of	  teacher	  graduates	  who	  pass	  the	  exam	  (Evaluación	  de	  las	  Competencias	  
Académicas	  y	  Pedagógicas	  [ECAP])	  since	  it	  was	  introduced	  in	  2001	  (figure	  O.18).	  An	  important	  further	  
step	  will	  be	  research	  on	  how	  the	  flow	  of	  better-­‐prepared	  teachers	  into	  the	  school	  system	  affects	  student	  
learning	  results.	  	  
In	  Colombia,	  the	  exam	  for	  graduating	  teachers	  established	  under	  the	  2002	  reform	  law	  also	  set	  a	  higher	  
bar.	  	  But	  the	  share	  of	  teachers	  hired	  under	  the	  new	  system	  remains	  relatively	  small,	  and	  there	  is	  
unfortunately	  little	  evidence	  on	  their	  effectiveness.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  



	  
	  


Figure	  O.18	  Teacher	  exit	  exam	  pass	  rate	  in	  El	  Salvador,	  2001–12	  
percent	  of	  new	  teacher	  graduates	  with	  passing	  score	  

               100%	  
                90%	  
                80%	  
                70%	  
                60%	  
                50%	  
                40%	  
                30%	  
                20%	  
                10%	  
                 0%	  
                            2001	   2002	   2003	   2004	   2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  
                                                                                                                                                         	  
            Source:	  Picardo	  Joao	  2012.	  
Introducing	  mandatory	  certification	  exams	  that	  set	  a	  higher	  bar	  for	  teacher	  quality	  typically	  requires	  a	  
transitional	  period.	  When	  New	  York	  State	  established	  a	  more	  stringent	  teacher	  certification	  exam	  in	  
1998,	  a	  high	  share	  of	  new	  teacher	  graduates	  could	  not	  pass	  it.	  The	  state	  permitted	  a	  five-­‐year	  window	  
for	  school	  districts	  to	  hire	  “temporary	  license”	  teachers	  who	  had	  not	  passed	  the	  exam.	  The	  new	  
standards	  hit	  hardest	  in	  high-­‐poverty	  urban	  school	  districts	  such	  as	  New	  York	  City,	  where	  temporary	  
license	  teachers	  accounted	  for	  63	  percent	  of	  new	  hires	  in	  the	  poorest	  quartile	  of	  schools.	  To	  meet	  the	  
2003	  deadline	  for	  eliminating	  such	  hiring,	  the	  city	  was	  forced	  to	  pursue	  aggressive	  strategies	  to	  attract	  
higher	  quality	  teachers.	  But	  by	  2005,	  it	  succeeded	  in	  eliminated	  the	  hiring	  of	  uncertified	  teachers,	  
sharply	  narrowed	  the	  gap	  in	  teacher	  qualifications	  between	  high-­‐	  and	  low-­‐poverty	  schools,	  and	  saw	  
large	  improvements	  in	  student	  performance	  in	  high-­‐poverty	  schools	  (Boyd	  et	  al.	  2008).	  
While	  mandatory	  certification	  exams	  are	  the	  most	  powerful	  instrument	  for	  raising	  teacher	  standards,	  
nonbinding	  “exit	  exams”	  upon	  completion	  of	  teacher	  education	  programs	  can	  also	  support	  better	  hiring	  
choices,	  monitor	  the	  quality	  of	  graduates	  over	  time,	  and	  expose	  quality	  differences	  across	  teacher	  
training	  schools.	  Chile’s	  2008	  “Inicia”	  test	  and	  the	  national	  teaching	  exam	  being	  developed	  in	  Brazil	  
(Prova	  Nacional	  de	  Concurso	  para	  o	  Ingresso	  na	  Carreira	  Docente)	  are	  examples.	  Making	  such	  
examinations	  voluntary	  has	  a	  downside,	  however;	  in	  Chile,	  only	  40	  percent	  of	  graduates,	  on	  average,	  
opt	  to	  take	  the	  Inicia	  test,	  and	  of	  these,	  70	  percent	  fail	  to	  achieve	  the	  threshold	  score.	  Ministry	  concerns	  
that	  the	  60	  percent	  of	  teacher	  graduates	  who	  refuse	  to	  take	  the	  exam	  are	  even	  less	  prepared	  to	  meet	  
national	  teacher	  standards	  sparked	  a	  legislative	  proposal	  to	  make	  the	  exam	  mandatory.	  	  
A	  third	  strategy	  for	  raising	  the	  quality	  of	  new	  teachers	  is	  to	  bypass	  low-­‐quality	  education	  schools	  entirely	  
and	  recruit	  teachers	  trained	  in	  other	  disciplines,	  a	  practice	  known	  as	  alternative	  certification.	  This	  was	  
key	  to	  New	  York	  City’s	  rapid	  progress	  in	  raising	  teacher	  quality	  and	  is	  widely	  used	  in	  other	  U.S.	  urban	  
school	  districts	  that	  have	  difficulty	  attracting	  teachers	  to	  work	  with	  disadvantaged	  populations.	  	  
Rigorous	  U.S.	  studies	  have	  generally	  concluded	  that	  students	  of	  teachers	  with	  alternative	  certification,	  
most	  notably	  those	  from	  the	  Teach	  For	  America	  program,	  do	  as	  well	  or	  better	  than	  students	  of	  regularly	  
recruited	  teachers.	  	  
Most	  countries	  in	  LAC	  have	  not	  pursued	  alternative	  certification	  on	  any	  scale,	  although	  it	  is	  permitted	  in	  
Colombia,	  and	  proposed	  in	  Chile	  and	  Mexico.	  Since	  2007,	  however,	  several	  LAC	  countries	  have	  launched	  



	  
	  


national	  branches	  of	  Teach	  For	  All,	  modeled	  on	  Teach	  for	  America.	  In	  Chile,	  Peru,	  Mexico,	  Colombia,	  
Argentina,	  and	  Brazil,	  Teach	  For	  All	  programs	  have	  recruited	  top	  university	  graduates	  from	  other	  
disciplines	  willing	  to	  commit	  to	  two	  years	  of	  teaching	  in	  highly	  disadvantaged	  schools.	  	  
A	  randomized	  evaluation	  of	  the	  program	  in	  Chile,	  Enseña	  Chile,	  is	  currently	  underway,	  with	  first	  results	  
expected	  in	  2016.	  A	  2010	  study	  documented	  that	  the	  programs	  in	  Argentina,	  Peru,	  and	  Chile	  have	  
succeeded	  in	  attracting	  high-­‐talent	  university	  graduates,	  and	  that	  students	  of	  Enseña	  Chile	  teachers	  had	  
higher	  learning	  outcomes	  than	  those	  of	  comparable	  traditional	  teachers.	  Students	  of	  Enseña	  teachers	  
also	  had	  better	  socioemotional	  competencies,	  including	  higher	  self-­‐esteem	  and	  self-­‐efficacy.	  The	  Enseña	  
teachers	  had	  more	  positive	  attitudes	  about	  their	  students’	  ability	  to	  learn	  and	  higher	  expectations	  for	  
them	  (Alfonso,	  Santiago,	  and	  Bassi	  2010).	  Although	  the	  LAC	  programs	  currently	  operate	  on	  a	  small	  scale,	  
they	  appear	  to	  be	  a	  useful	  tool,	  especially	  for	  raising	  teacher	  quality	  in	  disadvantaged	  urban	  or	  rural	  
schools	  and	  for	  hard-­‐to-­‐fill	  disciplines,	  such	  as	  secondary	  school	  math	  and	  science.	  	  
Raising	  teacher	  selectivity	  over	  the	  next	  decade.	  All	  LAC	  countries	  face	  the	  challenge	  of	  recruiting	  
better	  teachers,	  but	  it	  will	  play	  out	  in	  different	  countries	  against	  very	  different	  demographic	  backdrops.	  
Over	  half	  of	  the	  region—including	  all	  of	  its	  largest	  countries—will	  see	  student	  population	  fall	  by	  as	  much	  
as	  31	  percent,	  while	  other	  countries,	  especially	  in	  Central	  America	  and	  the	  Dominican	  Republic,	  will	  face	  
continued	  growth	  in	  student	  numbers.	  UNESCO	  (the	  United	  Nations	  Educational,	  Scientific,	  and	  Cultural	  
Organization)	  projects	  that	  with	  no	  change	  from	  2010	  in	  enrollment	  ratios	  or	  pupil-­‐teacher	  ratios,	  the	  
region	  would	  need	  8	  percent	  fewer	  teachers	  by	  2025.	  	  
Since	  not	  all	  countries	  in	  the	  region	  have	  achieved	  universal	  schooling	  coverage,	  especially	  at	  the	  
secondary	  level	  and	  preschool,	  the	  demand	  for	  teachers	  also	  depends	  on	  assumptions	  about	  how	  
quickly	  these	  countries	  expand	  coverage.	  To	  project	  a	  scenario	  of	  maximum	  potential	  demand	  for	  new	  
teachers,	  we	  assumed	  that	  all	  countries	  in	  the	  region	  reach	  100	  percent	  primary	  education	  enrollment,	  
90	  percent	  secondary	  enrollment,	  and	  90	  percent	  preschool	  enrollment	  of	  children	  ages	  four	  to	  six	  by	  
the	  year	  2025,	  even	  if	  this	  implies	  rates	  of	  schooling	  expansion	  far	  above	  countries’	  past	  trends.	  	  
Under	  this	  highly	  ambitious	  scenario	  of	  schooling	  expansion,	  the	  region	  would	  still	  need	  a	  smaller	  overall	  
stock	  of	  preschool,	  primary,	  and	  secondary	  teachers	  in	  2025,	  assuming	  that	  current	  pupil-­‐teacher	  ratios	  
(PTR)	  in	  every	  country	  remain	  stable.	  The	  total	  stock	  of	  teachers	  would	  fall	  from	  7.35	  million	  in	  2010	  to	  
about	  6.61	  million	  in	  2025.	  While	  some	  countries	  would	  need	  to	  increase	  teacher	  numbers	  to	  support	  
the	  expansion	  of	  coverage,	  others	  would	  see	  only	  modest	  changes	  or	  large	  declines.	  A	  net	  decline	  in	  
teacher	  numbers	  implies	  an	  opportunity	  for	  countries	  to	  pay	  a	  smaller	  stock	  of	  teachers	  higher	  average	  
salaries,	  which	  could	  help	  raise	  the	  attractiveness	  of	  the	  profession.	  But	  the	  salary	  increment	  would	  be	  
relatively	  small,	  and	  even	  this	  potential	  “fiscal	  space”	  would	  materialize	  only	  if	  current	  pupil-­‐teacher	  
ratios	  did	  not	  decrease.	  	  
However,	  the	  tendency	  for	  school	  systems	  with	  a	  declining	  student	  population	  is	  to	  let	  the	  pupil-­‐teacher	  
ratio	  decline.	  It	  requires	  active	  management	  to	  reduce	  the	  teaching	  force	  pari	  passu	  with	  demographic	  
decline,	  thus	  maintaining	  a	  stable	  PTR.	  Both	  teachers’	  unions	  (which	  wish	  to	  protect	  job	  stability)	  and	  
parents	  (who	  believe	  that	  a	  smaller	  class	  size	  is	  better	  for	  their	  children)	  resist	  this.	  The	  falling	  pupil-­‐
teacher	  ratios	  already	  observed	  in	  LAC	  countries	  with	  declining	  student	  populations	  indicate	  that	  this	  
pattern	  has	  already	  taken	  hold.	  	  
The	  contrast	  with	  East	  Asian	  countries	  is	  sharp.	  Singapore,	  Korea,	  China,	  and	  Japan	  consciously	  maintain	  
relatively	  high	  pupil-­‐teacher	  ratios	  to	  free	  up	  resources	  for	  higher	  teacher	  salaries,	  a	  longer	  school	  day,	  
and	  cost-­‐effective	  nonsalary	  investments.	  Teacher	  salaries	  in	  these	  countries	  are	  relatively	  high	  on	  
average	  and	  are	  differentiated	  by	  competency	  and	  performance,	  which	  attracts	  more	  talented	  
individuals.	  



	  
	  


To	  explore	  the	  implications	  of	  a	  similar	  trade-­‐off	  in	  LAC,	  we	  projected	  the	  same	  ambitious	  trends	  in	  
enrollment,	  but	  with	  active	  management	  of	  pupil-­‐teacher	  ratios,	  to	  reach	  target	  levels	  of	  18	  to	  1	  in	  
preschool	  education	  and	  20	  to	  1	  for	  primary	  and	  secondary	  education	  by	  2025.	  While	  some	  countries	  
would	  need	  to	  hire	  more	  teachers	  to	  meet	  the	  projected	  goals	  of	  close	  to	  universal	  coverage	  and	  lower	  
pupil-­‐teacher	  ratios	  than	  they	  currently	  enjoy,	  the	  overall	  size	  of	  the	  teaching	  force	  in	  LAC	  would	  decline	  
by	  11	  percent	  (figure	  O.19).	  	  

Figure	  O.19	  Change	  in	  stock	  of	  teachers	  needed,	  assuming	  expanded	  coverage	  and	  efficient	  pupil-­‐
teacher	  ratios,	  2010–25	  
percent	  

          70%	  
          60%	  
          50%	  
          40%	  
          30%	  
          20%	  
          10%	  
           0%	  
       -­‐10%	  
       -­‐20%	  
       -­‐30%	  
       -­‐40%	  
       -­‐50%	  
       -­‐60%	  
       -­‐70%	  
                       Cuba	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nicaragua	  
                                  Ecuador	  




                                                                                                               LAC	  



                                                                                                                                    Chile	  




                                                                                                                                                                          El	  Salvador	  



                                                                                                                                                                                                              Honduras	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dominican	  Republic	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Guatemala	  
                                                                                                                                                Mexico	  




                                                                                                                                                                                               Paraguay	  
                                                                              Brazil	  
                                                Uruguay	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Colombia	  
                                                              Argentina	  




                                                                                                                         Peru	  




                                                                                                                                                             Panama	  
                                                                                           Costa	  Rica	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	  
                    Source:	  World	  Bank	  projections,	  using	  data	  from	  UNESCO	  2009	  and	  UNESCO	  2011.	  
                    Note:	  Projections	  assume	  that	  all	  countries	  reach	  target	  GERs	  (gross	  enrollment	  ratios)	  of	  100	  percent	  for	  primary	  and	  
                    90	  percent	  for	  preschool	  and	  secondary	  education	  by	  2025,	  and	  pupil-­‐teacher	  ratios	  of	  18	  to	  1	  for	  preschool	  
                    education	  and	  20	  to	  1	  for	  primary	  and	  secondary	  education	  by	  2025.	  

For	  several	  of	  the	  larger	  countries	  in	  the	  region,	  policies	  to	  manage	  the	  pupil-­‐teacher	  ratio	  combined	  
with	  demographic	  trends	  would	  permit	  significant	  increases	  in	  teacher	  salaries.	  In	  Brazil,	  for	  example,	  
this	  scenario	  results	  in	  a	  27	  percent	  decline	  in	  the	  number	  of	  teachers,	  from	  2.9	  million	  to	  2.1	  million,	  by	  
2025.	  But	  it	  would	  allow	  for	  a	  36	  percent	  real	  increase	  in	  average	  teacher	  salaries	  and	  move	  teachers’	  
relative	  salaries	  from	  the	  76th	  percentile	  of	  the	  wage	  distribution	  to	  the	  85th	  percentile,	  compared	  to	  
the	  90th	  percentile	  for	  other	  professional	  workers.	  	  
In	  the	  coming	  decade,	  several	  countries	  will	  have	  a	  unique	  opportunity	  to	  raise	  teacher	  quality	  through	  
higher	  salaries,	  stronger	  incentives,	  and	  higher	  nonsalary	  spending.	  There	  would	  be	  no	  increase	  needed	  
in	  overall	  education	  budgets	  if	  school	  systems	  carefully	  manage	  teacher	  numbers	  in	  favor	  of	  teacher	  
quality.	  Since	  these	  assumptions	  are	  based	  on	  constant	  real	  spending	  per	  student,	  countries	  that	  have	  
declining	  student	  populations	  and	  raise	  education	  spending	  as	  a	  share	  of	  GDP	  would	  have	  even	  more	  
resources	  per	  teacher	  to	  finance	  a	  move	  to	  higher	  quality.	  
This	  heterogeneity	  will	  create	  diverse	  challenges	  for	  teacher	  policy.	  Projected	  declines	  in	  the	  student	  
population	  in	  half	  of	  the	  region—including	  its	  largest	  countries—will	  make	  it	  easier	  for	  school	  systems	  to	  



	  
	  


finance	  higher	  teacher	  quality,	  but	  will	  pose	  the	  political	  challenge	  of	  pruning	  low	  performers	  out	  of	  the	  
force	  to	  make	  room	  for	  higher	  quality	  new	  recruits.	  With	  declines	  in	  some	  cases	  of	  20	  percent	  or	  more	  
in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  teaching	  force	  by	  2025,	  managing	  both	  teacher	  exits	  and	  selective	  recruitment	  with	  a	  
strategic	  focus	  on	  quality	  is	  critical.	  In	  countries	  where	  increased	  need	  for	  teachers	  is	  projected	  over	  the	  
next	  decade,	  the	  major	  challenge	  is	  the	  financial	  burden	  of	  raising	  education	  spending	  to	  support	  the	  
recruitment	  of	  new	  teachers	  at	  higher	  standards.	  For	  these	  countries,	  efficient	  class	  size	  is	  a	  critical	  
policy	  choice.	  

Grooming	  Great	  Teachers	  
Once	  teachers	  have	  been	  hired,	  it	  is	  the	  task	  of	  a	  school	  system	  to	  make	  them	  as	  effective	  as	  possible.	  
This	  involves	  assessing,	  managing,	  and	  supporting	  individual	  teachers’	  development	  of	  their	  craft	  and	  
building	  a	  professional	  community	  of	  teachers,	  both	  within	  schools	  and	  across	  the	  school	  system.	  Four	  
essential	  tasks	  are:	  
       •   Induction:	  support	  for	  teachers’	  development	  during	  their	  critical	  first	  five	  years	  of	  teaching	  	  
       •   Evaluation:	  systems	  for	  regular	  assessment	  of	  individual	  teachers’	  strengths	  and	  weaknesses	  
       •   Professional	  development:	  effective	  training	  to	  remedy	  teachers’	  identified	  weaknesses	  and	  
           leverage	  the	  skills	  of	  top	  performers	  	  
       •   Management:	  matching	  teacher	  assignments	  to	  schools’	  and	  students’	  needs,	  and	  building	  
           effective	  schools	  through	  shared	  practice	  and	  professional	  interaction	  	  
Teacher	  induction.	  A	  consistent	  finding	  of	  education	  research	  is	  that	  new	  teachers	  face	  a	  steep	  learning	  
curve	  in	  their	  first	  three	  to	  five	  years	  on	  the	  job	  (Boyd	  et	  al.	  2009;	  Chingos	  and	  Peterson	  2010;	  Hanushek	  
and	  Rivkin	  2010).	  During	  this	  window,	  school	  systems	  have	  an	  important	  opportunity	  to	  support	  and	  
maximize	  the	  development	  of	  new	  teachers	  and	  to	  identify	  those	  who	  should	  be	  counseled	  out	  of	  the	  
profession.	  Because	  teachers	  are	  typically	  hired	  into	  civil	  service	  positions,	  which	  make	  dismissal	  on	  
performance	  grounds	  difficult	  once	  they	  are	  confirmed,	  there	  is	  a	  high	  payoff	  to	  avoiding	  recruitment	  
mistakes.	  Both	  of	  these	  goals	  are	  served	  by	  a	  well-­‐organized	  induction	  program	  and	  the	  effective	  use	  of	  
probationary	  periods.	  
In	  the	  LAC	  region,	  very	  few	  countries	  outside	  of	  the	  English-­‐speaking	  Caribbean	  countries	  have	  formal	  
induction	  programs	  for	  entering	  teachers.	  Belize’s	  program,	  which	  over	  the	  course	  of	  a	  teacher’s	  first	  
year	  includes	  tutoring,	  observation	  in	  the	  classroom,	  mentoring	  support,	  action-­‐research	  projects,	  and	  
assessments,	  has	  a	  particularly	  impressive	  design.	  
Effective	  induction	  goes	  hand	  in	  hand	  with	  consequential	  probationary	  periods.	  Most	  OECD	  countries	  
use	  probationary	  periods.	  Some	  school	  systems	  in	  the	  United	  States	  have	  extended	  these	  to	  three	  years	  
or	  more	  to	  allow	  more	  time	  to	  assess	  teachers’	  performance	  and	  growth	  potential	  before	  making	  a	  final	  
contract	  decision.	  But	  in	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  probationary	  periods	  with	  consequences	  are	  
rare.	  Only	  two	  of	  seven	  countries	  reviewed	  recently	  (Colombia	  and	  the	  Dominican	  Republic)	  have	  
consequential	  probationary	  periods	  that	  include	  a	  comprehensive	  assessment	  of	  new	  teachers	  (Vaillant	  
and	  Rossel	  2006).	  A	  2013	  program	  introduced	  in	  Rio	  de	  Janeiro	  municipality	  presents	  a	  promising	  model:	  
new	  teacher	  candidates	  are	  given	  an	  intensive	  training	  course	  in	  effective	  classroom	  dynamics—which	  
draws	  on	  the	  municipality’s	  Stallings	  results—and	  are	  subsequently	  observed	  teaching	  and	  evaluated	  
before	  their	  recruitment	  is	  confirmed.	  	  	  
Teacher	  evaluation.	  Top	  education	  systems	  invest	  heavily	  in	  the	  evaluation	  of	  teacher	  performance.	  
Teacher	  evaluation	  plays	  two	  critical	  roles:	  improving	  teachers’	  quality	  and	  holding	  them	  accountable.	  
Singapore,	  Japan,	  Korea,	  and	  China’s	  Shanghai	  all	  have	  effective	  systems	  for	  assessing	  their	  teachers’	  
performance	  and	  progress.	  	  The	  experience	  in	  Latin	  America	  to	  date	  is	  much	  more	  limited.	  While	  Mexico	  


	  
	  


(in	  the	  1990s)	  and	  Colombia	  in	  2002	  introduced	  the	  region’s	  first	  teacher	  evaluation	  systems	  
implementation	  issues	  have	  undermined	  their	  impact	  and	  Mexico’s	  system	  is	  currently	  being	  
redesigned.	  (Vegas	  et	  al.	  2005,	  Ome	  2012)	  Chile’s	  2003	  system	  remains	  the	  region’s	  best	  practice	  
example	  to	  date.	  Ecuador	  began	  implementing	  teacher	  performance	  evaluations	  in	  2007,	  and	  Peru	  is	  
currently	  designing	  a	  comprehensive	  system	  similar	  to	  Chile’s.	  Elsewhere	  in	  the	  region,	  countries	  have	  
some	  elements	  in	  place,	  but	  they	  are	  less	  comprehensive	  and	  systematic.	  
Putting	  in	  place	  a	  sound	  system	  of	  teacher	  evaluation	  is	  expensive	  and	  institutionally	  challenging,	  but	  it	  
can	  make	  other	  important	  education	  system	  functions	  more	  efficient.	  Teacher	  performance	  information	  
can	  make	  in-­‐service	  training	  investments	  more	  relevant,	  help	  target	  them	  better,	  and	  even	  reduce	  
overall	  training	  costs.	  It	  creates	  the	  information	  base	  needed	  for	  individual	  performance	  incentives	  and	  
accountability	  measures.	  It	  provides	  teachers	  with	  individualized	  feedback	  that	  might	  not	  be	  as	  
forthcoming	  or	  insightful	  from	  their	  direct	  supervisors	  and	  peers,	  and	  increases	  teachers’	  motivation	  to	  
pursue	  training	  or	  professional	  improvement.	  If	  these	  benefits	  are	  captured,	  the	  net	  costs	  of	  a	  good	  
teacher	  evaluation	  system	  may	  be	  small.	  	  
Growing	  global	  experience	  with	  teacher	  evaluation	  points	  to	  four	  key	  features	  of	  successful	  systems.	  
First,	  they	  are	  grounded	  in	  teacher	  standards:	  a	  clear	  articulation	  of	  the	  competencies	  and	  behaviors	  
that	  good	  teachers	  are	  expected	  to	  have	  and	  demonstrate.	  Second,	  they	  measure	  performance	  
comprehensively.	  A	  three-­‐year	  research	  program	  in	  the	  United	  States	  concluded	  that	  a	  reliable	  
judgment	  about	  an	  individual	  teacher’s	  performance	  requires	  multiple	  measures,	  including	  classroom	  
observation	  (ideally	  multiple	  times)	  and	  student	  and	  peer	  feedback.	  In	  combination,	  these	  measures	  can	  
produce	  assessments	  of	  teachers’	  effectiveness	  that	  are	  well-­‐correlated	  with	  their	  students’	  value-­‐
added	  learning	  gains	  (Kane	  et	  al.	  2012).	  Chile’s	  teacher	  evaluation	  system	  is	  a	  good	  example	  of	  
comprehensive	  evaluation.	  It	  combines	  an	  observation	  of	  teachers’	  classroom	  practice	  (through	  a	  
videotaped	  class),	  a	  sample	  lesson	  plan,	  a	  self-­‐assessment,	  a	  peer	  interview,	  and	  an	  assessment	  by	  the	  
school	  director	  and	  pedagogical	  supervisor.	  	  
Third,	  good	  evaluation	  systems	  use	  instruments	  that	  have	  technical	  validity	  and	  protect	  the	  integrity	  of	  
evaluation	  processes.	  The	  implementation	  of	  Chile’s	  system	  is	  contracted	  through	  competitive	  bidding	  
to	  an	  independent	  education	  research	  group	  that	  conducts	  ongoing	  research	  to	  improve	  the	  robustness	  
of	  the	  system.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  is	  responsible	  for	  assuring	  the	  quality	  and	  consistency	  of	  
implementation.	  For	  example,	  it	  provides	  extensive	  training	  to	  the	  supervisors	  who	  evaluate	  the	  videos	  
of	  teachers’	  classroom	  practice	  and	  the	  teachers	  who	  conduct	  peer	  interviews.	  	  
Fourth,	  good	  systems	  ensure	  that	  evaluation	  results	  have	  consequences	  for	  teachers:	  both	  positive	  and	  
negative.	  Most	  OECD	  countries	  use	  their	  evaluation	  systems	  as	  a	  platform	  for	  performance	  incentives:	  
identifying	  and	  rewarding	  top	  performers.	  In	  Chile	  and	  Ecuador,	  	  teachers	  who	  receive	  outstanding	  
evaluations	  are	  eligible	  for	  bonus	  pay.	  Evaluation	  systems	  also	  provide	  the	  soundest	  basis	  for	  long-­‐term	  
grooming	  of	  individual	  teachers’	  potential	  and	  the	  fairest	  basis	  for	  promotions.	  Rather	  than	  promoting	  
teachers	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  seniority	  alone—as	  most	  LAC	  countries	  currently	  do—teachers	  can	  be	  
promoted	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  recognized	  competence.	  A	  salary	  structure	  aligned	  with	  evaluated	  
performance	  creates	  the	  right	  incentives	  for	  current	  teachers	  and	  makes	  the	  profession	  more	  attractive	  
to	  talented	  candidates	  in	  the	  future.	  	  	  
Effective	  teacher	  evaluation	  systems	  strengthen	  accountability.	  They	  allow	  school	  system	  managers	  to	  
identify	  teachers	  in	  need	  of	  improvement	  and	  create	  strong	  incentives	  for	  these	  teachers	  to	  pursue	  the	  
training	  offered	  and	  apply	  it	  to	  their	  work.	  In	  Chile,	  Ecuador	  and	  Colombia,	  and	  under	  new	  proposals	  in	  
Peru	  and	  Mexico,	  teachers	  who	  receive	  poor	  evaluations	  are	  offered	  training	  and	  required	  to	  be	  
reevaluated.	  	  



	  
	  


Finally,	  teacher	  evaluation	  gives	  school	  systems	  data	  to	  deal	  with	  consistent	  poor	  performers	  
forthrightly	  and	  transparently.	  In	  Chile,	  Ecuador	  and	  Colombia,	  and	  under	  new	  proposals	  in	  Peru	  and	  
Mexico,	  teachers	  who	  receive	  successive	  evaluations	  in	  the	  lowest	  performance	  categories	  are	  
dismissed	  from	  service.	  An	  education	  system’s	  capacity	  to	  identify	  its	  least-­‐effective	  teachers	  is	  a	  
powerful	  tool	  for	  raising	  schooling	  quality.	  Research	  suggests	  that	  systematically	  targeting	  the	  lowest	  5	  
percent	  of	  teachers	  annually	  for	  “de-­‐selection”	  can	  produce	  large	  gains	  in	  student	  learning	  over	  time	  
(Hanushek	  2011,	  Chetty	  et	  al.	  2014).	  	  
A	  rigorous	  evaluation	  of	  the	  impacts	  of	  the	  Washington,	  DC,	  teacher	  evaluation	  system,	  which	  is	  
considered	  a	  best-­‐practice	  model	  in	  the	  United	  States,	  concluded	  that	  the	  system	  has	  produced	  an	  
impressive	  improvement	  in	  overall	  teacher	  quality	  in	  just	  the	  first	  three	  years	  of	  implementation.	  
Researchers	  documented	  four	  main	  mechanisms:	  voluntary	  attrition	  of	  teachers	  with	  low	  performance	  
ratings	  increased	  by	  over	  50	  percent;	  low-­‐rated	  teachers	  who	  decided	  to	  stay	  in	  the	  system	  achieved	  big	  
improvements	  in	  performance;	  a	  higher	  share	  of	  top	  teachers	  stayed	  in	  the	  system	  (rather	  than	  
transferring	  to	  other	  school	  districts);	  and	  teachers	  at	  the	  threshold	  for	  bonuses	  made	  big	  
improvements	  (Dee	  and	  Wyckoff	  2013).	  Since	  the	  teacher	  evaluation	  system	  was	  introduced,	  not	  only	  
teacher	  quality	  has	  improved;	  student	  learning	  gains	  have	  been	  the	  largest	  of	  any	  urban	  district	  in	  the	  
United	  States.	  
Teacher	  professional	  development.	  When	  the	  costs	  of	  teacher	  time	  are	  included,	  in-­‐service	  training	  is	  a	  
major	  element	  of	  education	  spending	  in	  LAC.	  In	  Brazil	  and	  Mexico,	  many	  teachers	  participate	  in	  more	  
than	  one	  month	  of	  training	  annually.	  Yet	  evidence	  on	  the	  cost-­‐effectiveness	  of	  training	  is	  almost	  
nonexistent.	  The	  global	  evidence	  base	  is	  also	  limited.	  The	  most	  common	  conclusion	  of	  metastudies	  is	  
that	  the	  relevance	  of	  training	  content,	  the	  intensity	  and	  duration	  of	  the	  course,	  and	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  
delivery	  are	  key:	  observations	  that	  abstract	  from	  the	  central	  question	  of	  how	  to	  design	  relevant	  program	  
content.	  	  
A	  review	  of	  the	  academic	  literature	  and	  different	  training	  approaches	  that	  figure	  prominently	  in	  the	  
“improving”	  education	  systems	  identified	  by	  Mourshed,	  Chijoke,	  and	  Barber	  (2010)	  suggests	  that	  four	  
broad	  strategies	  for	  teacher	  training	  are	  most	  relevant	  for	  LAC	  countries:	  	  
       •   Scripted	  approaches:	  training	  to	  prepare	  teachers	  in	  low-­‐capacity	  environments	  to	  use	  specific	  
           teaching	  strategies	  and	  accompanying	  materials	  in	  the	  delivery	  of	  a	  well-­‐defined	  daily	  curriculum	  
       •   Content	  mastery:	  training	  focused	  on	  filling	  gaps	  or	  deepening	  teachers’	  expertise	  in	  the	  subjects	  
           they	  teach	  and	  how	  to	  teach	  them	  effectively	  
       •   Classroom	  management:	  training	  focused	  on	  improving	  teachers’	  classroom	  effectiveness	  through	  
           lesson	  planning,	  efficient	  use	  of	  class	  time,	  strategies	  for	  keeping	  students	  engaged,	  and	  more	  
           effective	  teaching	  techniques	  
       •   Peer	  collaboration:	  school-­‐based	  or	  cross-­‐school	  opportunities	  for	  small	  groups	  of	  teachers	  to	  
           observe	  and	  learn	  from	  each	  other’s	  practice	  and	  collaborate	  on	  curriculum	  development,	  student	  
           assessment	  strategies,	  research,	  and	  other	  activities	  that	  contribute	  to	  system	  quality	  and	  
           teachers’	  professional	  development	  
Scripted	  training	  programs	  are	  relevant	  for	  many	  LAC	  countries,	  and	  perhaps	  especially	  for	  early	  grade	  
literacy	  instruction	  and	  math	  skills.	  Honduras’	  SAT	  (Sistema	  de	  Aprendizaje	  Tutorial)	  scripted	  training	  
program	  for	  middle	  school	  teachers	  in	  rural	  areas	  has	  produced	  higher	  learning	  results	  at	  lower	  per-­‐
student	  costs	  (McEwan	  forthcoming).	  Scripted	  approaches	  have	  also	  been	  used	  successfully	  in	  
Colombia’s	  Escuela	  Nueva	  to	  support	  teachers	  in	  multigrade	  schools,	  and	  in	  the	  Brazilian	  states	  of	  Ceara	  
and	  Minas	  Gerais	  to	  train	  early	  grade	  reading	  teachers.	  By	  providing	  teachers	  with	  comprehensive	  
support	  in	  the	  use	  of	  teacher	  guides,	  lesson	  plans,	  classroom	  reading	  books,	  and	  reading	  assessments	  to	  



	  
	  


be	  applied	  at	  regular	  intervals,	  Ceara	  	  has	  seen	  significant	  improvements	  in	  both	  	  reading	  and	  math	  
results	  (Costa	  and	  Carnoy	  2014).	  The	  federal	  Ministry	  of	  Education	  is	  now	  supporting	  national	  scale-­‐up	  
of	  this	  approach.	  	  
Given	  the	  weak	  content	  mastery	  of	  many	  teachers	  in	  LAC,	  training	  in	  this	  area	  is	  also	  clearly	  relevant.	  
Unfortunately,	  there	  is	  no	  rigorous	  evaluation	  evidence	  of	  successful	  LAC	  programs..	  Useful	  training	  in	  
the	  US	  context,	  however,	  has	  focused	  on	  the	  specific	  math	  content	  knowledge	  required	  for	  effective	  
teaching	  at	  different	  levels.	  (Thames	  and	  Ball	  2010)	  
Improving	  teachers’	  classroom	  practice	  emerged	  as	  a	  clear	  issue	  from	  the	  classroom	  observations	  
conducted	  for	  this	  report,	  including	  teachers’	  ability	  to	  use	  class	  time	  and	  materials	  effectively	  and	  to	  
keep	  students	  engaged.	  It	  is	  encouraging	  that	  a	  number	  of	  LAC	  school	  systems	  are	  developing	  courses	  
focused	  on	  classroom	  management	  techniques	  that	  can	  improve	  student	  engagement	  and	  learning	  
performance.	  In	  several	  cases,	  governments	  are	  planning	  rigorous	  evaluations,	  with	  random	  assignment	  
of	  teachers	  to	  different	  training	  options	  and	  careful	  measurement	  of	  both	  subsequent	  classroom	  
practice	  (through	  classroom	  observations)	  and	  impacts	  on	  student	  learning.	  These	  experiences	  could	  
contribute	  enormously	  to	  the	  evidence	  base	  to	  guide	  effective	  training	  investments	  not	  only	  in	  LAC	  but	  
also	  globally.	  	  
Peer	  collaboration—as	  practiced	  in	  Finland,	  Ontario	  (Canada),	  and	  under	  Japan’s	  “Lesson	  Study”	  method	  	  
—is	  integral	  to	  the	  development	  of	  greater	  professionalism	  among	  LAC’s	  teachers	  and	  to	  the	  informal	  
exchange	  of	  practice	  at	  the	  school	  level	  that	  is	  the	  most	  cost-­‐effective	  strategy	  for	  improving	  school	  
results.	  There	  is	  an	  incipient	  trend	  in	  this	  direction	  in	  several	  LAC	  countries.	  For	  example,	  in	  Ecuador	  
training	  needs	  are	  identified	  at	  the	  school	  level,	  and	  colleagues	  receive	  training	  together	  (Ministerio	  de	  
Educacion	  del	  Ecuador	  2012).	  Under	  Peru’s	  teacher	  mentoring	  program,	  external	  coaches	  work	  with	  all	  
of	  the	  teachers	  in	  a	  school	  as	  a	  team,	  providing	  real-­‐time	  feedback	  and	  advice	  grounded	  in	  the	  coaches’	  
observation	  and	  understanding	  of	  the	  school’s	  context	  and	  specific	  challenges.	  Under	  Rio	  municipality’s	  
new	  Gente	  and	  Ginasio	  carioca	  experimental	  programs,	  the	  school	  day	  has	  been	  extended	  to	  free	  up	  
time	  for	  teacher	  collaboration	  and	  team	  teaching.	  All	  of	  these	  represent	  very	  new	  approaches	  for	  the	  
LAC	  region	  and	  have	  yet	  to	  be	  evaluated.	  But	  the	  emphasis	  placed	  on	  looking	  inside	  schools	  and	  
classrooms	  to	  identify	  the	  issues	  where	  teachers	  most	  need	  support	  is	  promising.	  
Designing	  and	  delivering	  capacity-­‐building	  programs	  of	  the	  caliber	  and	  scale	  required	  in	  most	  countries	  
will	  not	  be	  easy.	  As	  Carnoy	  (2007)	  has	  observed,	  “weak	  coupling”	  between	  education	  ministries	  and	  
university	  education	  departments	  makes	  the	  latter	  ill-­‐prepared	  to	  respond	  to	  ministries’	  needs.	  
Increasingly,	  ministries	  (and	  secretariats	  in	  Brazil)	  are	  creating	  their	  own	  in-­‐service	  teacher	  training	  
institutes	  to	  take	  direct	  control	  of	  the	  content	  and	  delivery	  of	  teacher	  professional	  development.	  	  While	  
it	  is	  too	  early	  to	  evaluate	  these	  institutes’	  effectiveness,	  there	  is	  a	  visible	  shift	  toward	  professional	  
development	  programs	  that	  directly	  address	  identified	  issues.	  Using	  teacher	  evaluation	  data	  to	  
determine	  training	  priorities;	  exploiting	  partnerships	  with	  NGOs,	  think	  tanks,	  and	  other	  providers	  
operating	  outside	  of	  university	  education	  departments;	  and	  investing	  in	  rigorous	  evaluation	  of	  at	  least	  
the	  most	  important	  training	  initiatives	  will	  help	  make	  investments	  in	  this	  area	  more	  cost-­‐effective,	  
which	  is	  essential	  for	  faster	  progress	  in	  raising	  the	  caliber	  of	  the	  current	  stock	  of	  teachers.	  	  
Teacher	  deployment	  and	  management.	  Grooming	  teachers	  so	  they	  develop	  their	  full	  potential	  and	  
contribute	  to	  the	  professional	  growth	  of	  their	  colleagues	  is	  a	  direct	  responsibility	  of	  school	  leaders.	  
Global	  research	  shows	  that	  school	  directors	  have	  a	  large	  impact	  on	  teacher	  quality,	  both	  by	  screening	  
and	  selecting	  high-­‐talent	  teachers	  for	  their	  schools	  and	  by	  engendering	  a	  school	  climate	  of	  peer	  
collaboration,	  supportive	  feedback,	  and	  collaboration	  that	  makes	  those	  teachers	  even	  better	  (Loeb,	  
Kalogrides	  and	  Beteille	  2012).	  High-­‐performing	  education	  systems	  such	  as	  Singapore	  and	  Ontario	  
(Canada)	  pay	  close	  attention	  to	  how	  school	  directors	  are	  selected,	  trained,	  and	  developed,	  placing	  


	  
	  


special	  emphasis	  on	  their	  ability	  to	  gauge	  and	  develop	  the	  quality	  of	  their	  teachers	  (Schwartz	  and	  Mehta	  
2014,	  Tucker	  2011,Barber	  and	  Mourshed	  2007).	  
Despite	  increasing	  awareness	  of	  the	  pivotal	  role	  of	  principals,	  empirical	  evidence	  on	  how	  to	  build	  their	  
skills	  and	  effectiveness	  is	  sparse.	  Most	  LAC	  countries	  are	  just	  beginning	  to	  develop	  systems	  for	  the	  
selection,	  training,	  and	  coaching	  of	  school	  leaders.	  	  
Chile	  provides	  a	  good	  example	  of	  an	  incremental	  strategy	  for	  raising	  the	  quality	  of	  school	  leaders.	  Just	  as	  
with	  teacher	  policy,	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Education	  started	  by	  defining	  standards.	  The	  “Framework	  for	  Good	  
School	  Leadership”	  (Marco	  para	  la	  Buena	  Dirección),	  developed	  in	  2004,	  established	  criteria	  for	  the	  
training	  and	  assessment	  of	  principals	  in	  the	  areas	  of	  leadership,	  curriculum	  management,	  resource	  
management,	  and	  organizational	  environment	  management	  and	  established	  a	  competitive	  process	  for	  
principal	  selection	  (Ministerio	  de	  Educación,	  Chile	  2005;	  Concha	  2007).	  A	  2011	  law	  strengthened	  the	  
selection	  process	  and	  increased	  principals’	  autonomy	  and	  accountability.	  Principals	  may	  dismiss	  up	  to	  5	  
percent	  of	  their	  schools’	  teachers	  each	  year	  on	  performance	  grounds	  and	  must	  sign	  performance	  
agreements	  with	  the	  local	  governments	  that	  hire	  them.	  The	  government	  also	  introduced	  the	  Program	  
for	  the	  Training	  of	  Excellent	  Principals	  (Programa	  de	  Formación	  de	  Directores	  de	  Excelencia)	  in	  2011,	  
which	  has	  provided	  leadership	  training	  to	  more	  than	  1,600	  of	  the	  country’s	  7,000	  principals.	  The	  
program	  subsidizes	  fees	  and	  subsistence	  costs	  for	  graduate	  programs	  (master’s	  degrees,	  diplomas,	  
courses)	  and	  externships	  focused	  on	  school	  leadership.	  Programs	  are	  selected	  through	  a	  public	  call	  for	  
proposals:	  in	  2013	  applicants	  could	  choose	  among	  29	  programs	  from	  15	  institutions,	  mostly	  in	  Chile	  but	  
also	  in	  Canada	  and	  England.	  	  
While	  Chile’s	  approach	  allows	  for	  diversity	  in	  the	  training	  offered	  to	  principals,	  several	  OECD	  countries	  
have	  chosen	  to	  develop	  in-­‐house	  principal	  training.	  Australia’s	  2010	  Institute	  for	  Teaching	  and	  School	  
Leadership	  develops	  standards,	  accreditation,	  and	  training	  for	  teachers	  and	  school	  leaders	  (OECD	  2012).	  
Principals	  are	  also	  trained	  in-­‐house	  in	  Singapore,	  where	  young	  teachers	  are	  evaluated	  for	  leadership	  
potential	  early	  in	  their	  careers	  and	  follow	  a	  specialized	  leadership	  track.	  This	  approach	  was	  adopted	  
recently	  by	  Jamaica,	  whose	  National	  Center	  for	  Educational	  Leadership	  is	  charged	  with	  training	  and	  
certifying	  aspiring	  and	  existing	  principals.	  
Once	  principals	  are	  selected	  and	  trained,	  ongoing	  support	  during	  the	  early	  years	  is	  important.	  A	  study	  of	  
New	  York	  City	  schools	  found	  that	  effective	  support	  for	  principals	  on	  the	  job,	  particularly	  in	  the	  first	  few	  
years,	  has	  a	  significant	  positive	  effect	  on	  school	  performance	  as	  measured	  by	  student	  exam	  scores	  and	  
student	  absenteeism.	  (Clark	  et	  al.	  2009)	  Leading	  countries	  such	  as	  Singapore	  ensure	  that	  experienced	  
principals	  mentor	  new	  ones	  in	  a	  systematic	  manner.	  	  

Motivating	  Teachers	  to	  Perform	  
Major	  progress	  in	  raising	  the	  quality	  of	  teachers	  in	  Latin	  America	  will	  require	  attracting	  high-­‐caliber	  
candidates,	  continuously	  and	  systematically	  weeding	  out	  the	  lowest	  performers,	  and	  motivating	  
individuals	  to	  keep	  refining	  their	  skills	  and	  working	  their	  hardest	  over	  a	  long	  career.	  These	  three	  
processes	  characterize	  the	  labor	  market	  for	  high	  status	  professions	  in	  all	  countries.	  In	  countries	  with	  
high-­‐performing	  education	  systems,	  they	  operate	  in	  teaching	  as	  well.	  	  
Research	  confirms	  that	  individuals	  are	  attracted	  to	  the	  teaching	  profession	  and	  inspired	  to	  high	  
performance	  for	  a	  variety	  of	  reasons.	  Vegas	  and	  Umansky	  (2005)	  set	  out	  a	  comprehensive	  framework	  of	  
incentives	  that	  may	  be	  collapsed	  into	  three	  broad	  categories:	  (a)	  professional	  rewards,	  including	  intrinsic	  
satisfaction,	  recognition	  and	  prestige,	  professional	  growth,	  intellectual	  mastery,	  and	  pleasant	  working	  
conditions;	  (b)	  accountability	  pressure;	  and	  (c)	  financial	  incentives	  (figure	  O.20).	  
	  


	  
	  


Figure	  O.20	  Three	  broad	  classes	  of	  incentives	  motivate	  teachers	  




                                                                                                                                                   	  
                 Source:	  Adapted	  from	  Vegas	  and	  Umansky	  2005.	  


While	  it	  seems	  intuitively	  obvious	  that	  all	  three	  types	  of	  incentives	  are	  important,	  there	  is	  a	  deep	  
asymmetry	  in	  the	  research	  base.	  Very	  little	  research	  exists	  on	  specific	  policies	  or	  programs	  to	  raise	  the	  
professional	  rewards	  for	  teachers,	  and	  none	  in	  Latin	  America.	  There	  is	  more	  research	  on	  reforms	  to	  
strengthen	  accountability	  pressures	  on	  teachers—especially	  through	  school-­‐based	  management—but	  
little	  evidence	  on	  key	  questions	  such	  as	  the	  impact	  of	  policies	  that	  reduce	  teachers’	  job	  stability	  or	  
improve	  school	  directors’	  capacity	  to	  evaluate	  and	  manage	  teacher	  performance.	  The	  greatest	  research	  
attention	  by	  far	  has	  been	  focused	  on	  financial	  incentives,	  especially	  bonus	  pay.	  But	  this	  research	  bias	  
should	  not	  be	  taken	  to	  mean	  that	  financial	  incentives	  are	  the	  most	  important.	  If	  anything,	  cross-­‐country	  
studies	  suggest	  that	  professional	  incentives	  are	  a	  very	  powerful	  element	  in	  high-­‐performing	  education	  
systems.	  In	  Finland	  and	  Canada,	  for	  example,	  the	  professional	  rewards	  for	  teachers	  are	  very	  strong	  and	  
accountability	  pressures	  and	  financial	  rewards	  are	  relatively	  weak.	  	  
It	  is	  also	  likely	  that	  these	  three	  types	  of	  incentives	  are	  complementary:	  they	  have	  extra	  impact	  if	  well-­‐
aligned	  and	  undercut	  each	  other	  if	  not.	  Case	  studies	  of	  the	  world’s	  highest-­‐performing	  school	  systems	  
show	  positive	  incentives	  in	  all	  three	  areas,	  although	  their	  relative	  strength	  can	  vary.	  	  
Professional	  rewards.	  There	  is	  virtually	  no	  experimental	  evidence	  on	  the	  impact	  of	  alternative	  strategies	  
for	  raising	  the	  professional	  rewards	  to	  teaching,	  but	  cross-­‐country	  studies	  show	  that	  high-­‐performing	  
school	  systems	  offer	  their	  teachers	  abundant	  opportunities	  for	  continued	  mastery	  and	  professional	  
growth	  and	  that	  outstanding	  teachers	  receive	  substantial	  recognition	  and	  prestige.	  Compared	  with	  most	  
of	  Latin	  America,	  countries	  with	  high-­‐performing	  education	  systems	  invest	  more	  resources	  in	  teacher	  
professional	  development	  –	  Singapore’s	  100	  hours	  annually	  of	  paid	  professional	  development	  for	  every	  



	  
	  


teacher	  is	  a	  leading	  example	  –	  but	  most	  important	  is	  the	  quality	  of	  those	  investments.	  Courses	  are	  
developed	  by	  university	  practitioners	  in	  close	  collaboration	  with	  Ministries	  of	  Education,	  grounded	  in	  
research	  evidence,	  and	  focus	  on	  specific	  issues	  in	  effective	  delivery	  of	  the	  curriculum,	  the	  classroom	  
practice	  of	  highly	  effective	  teachers,	  and	  lessons	  from	  education	  systems	  elsewhere	  in	  the	  world.	  High-­‐
performing	  systems	  also	  support	  teachers’	  professional	  growth	  by	  promoting	  constant	  interaction	  and	  
peer	  collaboration	  among	  teachers.	  Finland’s	  teachers	  spend	  only	  60	  percent	  as	  much	  time	  as	  the	  OECD	  
average	  in	  the	  classroom	  teaching;	  the	  rest	  of	  their	  time	  they	  work	  jointly	  on	  new	  curriculum	  content,	  
learning	  materials	  and	  ways	  of	  assessing	  students’	  progress.	  Peru’s	  teacher	  mentoring	  program	  and	  Rio	  
de	  Janeiro	  municipality’s	  ginasio	  carioca	  experimental	  are	  promising	  new	  examples	  in	  the	  LAC	  region	  of	  
efforts	  to	  promote	  teachers’	  professional	  mastery	  through	  peer	  collaboration.	  	  
High-­‐performing	  education	  systems	  also	  give	  substantial	  recognition	  and	  prestige	  to	  excellent	  teachers.	  
They	  have	  systems	  to	  evaluate	  individual	  teachers’	  potential	  and	  performance	  and	  grant	  the	  best	  
teachers	  special	  status	  as	  master	  teachers	  or	  leaders	  in	  specific	  curriculum	  areas,	  such	  as	  math.	  In	  
contrast,	  teachers	  in	  Latin	  America	  are	  rarely	  observed	  or	  evaluated	  closely.	  Whether	  their	  performance	  
is	  outstanding	  or	  deeply	  deficient,	  teachers	  in	  most	  systems	  advance	  equally	  through	  the	  ranks	  on	  the	  
basis	  of	  seniority.	  	  
Accountability	  pressure.	  High	  teacher	  absence	  rates	  across	  the	  LAC	  region	  and	  classroom	  observations	  
showing	  that	  teachers	  are	  often	  poorly	  prepared	  to	  use	  class	  time	  effectively	  are	  evidence	  that	  the	  
pressures	  teachers	  feel	  to	  perform	  accountably	  are	  generally	  weak.	  Strategies	  for	  strengthening	  
accountability	  include	  actions	  to	  reduce	  or	  eliminate	  teachers’	  job	  stability,	  increase	  managerial	  
oversight,	  and	  empower	  clients	  (parents	  and	  students)	  to	  monitor	  or	  evaluate	  teachers.	  There	  is	  little	  
research	  evidence	  to	  date	  on	  any	  of	  these	  strategies	  except	  client	  empowerment:	  “strong”	  forms	  of	  
school-­‐based	  management,	  in	  which	  parents	  and	  community	  members	  had	  a	  voice	  in	  the	  hiring	  and	  
firing	  of	  school	  personnel	  and	  were	  given	  training	  and	  encouragement	  to	  exercise	  that	  power,	  has	  been	  
shown	  in	  some	  contexts	  to	  reduce	  teacher	  absence	  and	  raise	  student	  learning	  results	  (Bruns	  et	  al.	  2011).	  	  
In	  terms	  of	  job	  stability,	  legislation	  in	  Chile,	  Peru,	  Ecuador,	  Colombia,	  and	  Mexico	  has	  created	  a	  path	  out	  
of	  the	  profession	  for	  teachers	  with	  persistently	  unsatisfactory	  performance.	  While	  potentially	  very	  
important,	  the	  number	  of	  teachers	  dismissed	  to	  date	  in	  these	  countries	  has	  been	  tiny.	  This	  contrasts	  
with	  the	  practice	  in	  Singapore,	  where	  all	  teachers	  are	  evaluated	  regularly	  and	  the	  lowest	  5	  percent	  of	  
performers	  are	  counseled	  out	  of	  the	  profession	  annually,	  and	  in	  Washington,	  DC,	  in	  which	  33	  percent	  of	  
the	  teaching	  force	  was	  either	  dismissed	  or	  left	  voluntarily	  in	  the	  first	  four	  years	  after	  its	  teacher	  
evaluation	  system	  was	  introduced.	  	  Radical	  upgrading	  of	  the	  teaching	  profession	  in	  Latin	  America	  will	  
require	  much	  more	  aggressive	  action	  to	  weed	  out	  the	  lowest-­‐performing	  teachers	  on	  a	  continuous	  
basis.	  	  
In	  terms	  of	  managerial	  oversight,	  the	  role	  of	  school	  directors	  in	  managing	  teacher	  performance	  in	  LAC	  
has	  generally	  been	  weak.	  Research	  in	  the	  United	  States	  has	  documented	  what	  many	  LAC	  education	  
leaders	  observe:	  high-­‐performing	  schools	  achieve	  success	  through	  skilled	  management	  of	  the	  teaching	  
force.	  These	  schools’	  principals	  attract	  good	  teachers,	  weed	  out	  ineffective	  teachers,	  and	  deploy	  and	  
develop	  new	  teachers	  more	  effectively	  than	  principals	  at	  other	  schools.	  Effective	  principals	  have	  the	  
capacity	  to	  observe	  teachers	  in	  the	  classroom,	  give	  them	  formative	  feedback,	  and	  manage	  their	  “exit”	  
from	  the	  school	  if	  necessary.	  Effective	  principals	  support	  teachers’	  development	  and	  hold	  them	  
accountable	  for	  performance	  (Branch	  et	  al.	  2013,	  Boyd	  et	  al.	  2008,	  Loeb	  et	  al.	  2012).	  	  
Recent	  efforts	  in	  Chile,	  Jamaica,	  Brazil,	  Peru,	  and	  Ecuador	  to	  raise	  the	  standards	  for	  school	  directors	  and	  
train	  and	  empower	  these	  to	  be	  accountable	  for	  instructional	  quality	  and	  teacher	  development	  are	  
important	  initiatives.	  But	  Colombia’s	  experience—where	  directors	  found	  it	  difficult	  to	  give	  teachers	  
critical	  feedback—suggests	  that	  relying	  only	  on	  school	  directors	  for	  teacher	  performance	  evaluation	  can	  


	  
	  


be	  problematic.	  Instead,	  teacher	  evaluation	  needs	  to	  be	  a	  systemwide	  function	  supported	  by	  expert	  
external	  observers	  and	  guided	  by	  common	  standards,	  evaluation	  processes,	  and	  rubrics,	  both	  for	  
fairness	  and	  for	  systemwide	  learning.	  The	  goals	  are	  to	  generate	  actionable,	  formative	  feedback	  to	  
teachers	  across	  the	  system	  and	  to	  weed	  out	  the	  lowest	  performers	  on	  a	  continuous	  basis	  so	  the	  average	  
quality	  of	  the	  teaching	  force	  keeps	  rising	  over	  time.	  	  
Financial	  incentives.	  Cross-­‐country	  research	  suggests	  that	  the	  financial	  rewards	  for	  teaching	  must	  meet	  
a	  threshold	  level	  of	  parity	  with	  other	  professions	  to	  attract	  high	  talent.	  As	  chapter	  1	  shows,	  average	  
salaries	  and	  the	  pay	  trajectory	  for	  teachers	  in	  some	  LAC	  countries	  are	  currently	  below	  this	  threshold.	  	  
Across-­‐the-­‐board	  salary	  increases—which	  are	  politically	  popular	  and	  easy	  to	  implement—have	  the	  
potential	  to	  shift	  the	  overall	  teacher	  supply	  curve	  outward.	  But	  these	  are	  inefficient.	  For	  the	  same	  fiscal	  
expenditure,	  school	  systems	  can	  achieve	  higher	  quality	  by	  raising	  average	  salaries	  through	  a	  pay	  scale	  
differentiated	  by	  performance.	  This	  avoids	  overcompensating	  weak	  performers,	  can	  keep	  overall	  
pension	  liabilities	  lower,	  and	  creates	  stronger	  incentives	  for	  the	  most	  talented	  individuals.	  	  
The	  two	  main	  strategies	  for	  differentiated	  financial	  rewards	  are	  career	  path	  reforms	  and	  bonus	  pay.	  
Career	  path	  reforms	  typically	  make	  permanent	  promotions	  contingent	  on	  teachers’	  skills	  and	  
performance	  rather	  than	  on	  seniority,	  and	  expand	  salary	  differentials	  across	  different	  grades.	  The	  
number	  of	  LAC	  countries	  that	  have	  implemented	  career	  path	  reforms	  is	  small	  but	  growing.	  Although	  it	  is	  
difficult	  to	  evaluate	  such	  reforms	  rigorously,	  as	  they	  are	  almost	  always	  implemented	  systemwide,	  	  by	  
analogy	  with	  other	  occupations	  it	  is	  likely	  that	  career	  path	  reforms	  have	  more	  powerful	  selection	  effects	  
than	  bonus	  pay	  on	  who	  goes	  into	  teaching.	  Career	  path	  reforms	  signal	  a	  permanent	  and	  cumulative	  
structure	  of	  rewards	  for	  high	  performance,	  have	  attractive	  pension	  implications,	  and	  are	  reaped	  by	  
individual	  teachers.	  	  
Key	  lessons	  that	  can	  be	  drawn	  from	  the	  experience	  with	  career	  path	  reforms	  in	  LAC	  to	  date	  are:	  	  
       •    Choosing	  valid	  measures	  of	  teacher	  quality	  and	  calibrating	  them	  appropriately	  are	  crucial	  steps.	  
            Global	  research	  suggests	  that	  comprehensive	  teacher	  evaluations	  are	  the	  soundest	  basis	  for	  
            promotion	  decisions.	  An	  example	  consistent	  with	  global	  best	  practice	  is	  Peru’s	  2012	  teacher	  
            career	  law,	  which	  establishes	  teacher	  knowledge	  and	  skills,	  rather	  than	  seniority,	  as	  the	  basis	  for	  
            promotions.	  Ministry	  proposals	  for	  implementing	  the	  law	  call	  for	  comprehensive	  evaluations	  of	  
            teacher	  quality,	  including	  expert	  observations	  of	  teachers’	  practice	  in	  the	  classroom;	  and	  “360-­‐
            degree”	  feedback	  from	  peers,	  students,	  parents,	  and	  school	  directors	  –	  all	  consistent	  with	  the	  
            best	  global	  evidence.	  	  
            For	  school	  systems	  introducing	  competency-­‐based	  promotion	  and	  pay	  for	  the	  first	  time,	  relying	  
            on	  a	  well-­‐designed	  test	  of	  subject	  matter	  mastery	  and	  pedagogical	  knowledge	  alone,	  as	  in	  
            Ecuador,	  may	  be	  a	  practical	  first	  step.	  To	  be	  legitimate,	  tests	  should	  measure	  what	  teachers	  
            know	  in	  terms	  of	  content,	  what	  they	  understand	  about	  child	  development	  and	  learning	  styles,	  
            and	  what	  they	  are	  able	  to	  do	  to	  tailor	  pedagogical	  strategies	  for	  the	  delivery	  of	  content	  at	  
            different	  grade	  levels.	  Tests	  must	  also	  be	  benchmarked	  appropriately;	  if	  promotions	  are	  gained	  
            too	  easily,	  as	  in	  the	  early	  years	  of	  Mexico’s	  Carrera	  Magisterial,	  or	  are	  too	  inaccessible,	  incentive	  
            strength	  erodes.	  Finally,	  the	  most	  recent	  career	  path	  reforms	  in	  LAC	  do	  not	  base	  teacher	  
            promotions	  on	  student	  test	  scores.	  This	  appears	  sensible,	  given	  the	  technical	  complexity	  of	  
            value-­‐added	  learning	  measures	  and	  the	  risks	  of	  perverse	  incentives.	  	  
       •    Who	  evaluates	  is	  important.	  Although	  ministries	  of	  education	  should	  closely	  control	  the	  design	  
            and	  implementation	  of	  teacher	  promotion	  policies,	  contracting	  external	  agencies	  to	  design	  and	  
            administer	  teacher	  evaluations	  increases	  their	  legitimacy.	  For	  classroom	  observations,	  using	  



	  
	  


            well-­‐trained	  external	  experts,	  developing	  clear	  and	  consistent	  evaluation	  standards	  and	  
            instruments,	  and	  providing	  teachers	  with	  detailed	  individualized	  feedback	  are	  important.	  	  
       •    The	  steepness	  of	  the	  salary	  trajectory	  affects	  incentive	  strength,	  but	  there	  is	  little	  evidence	  as	  
            yet	  to	  guide	  reform	  design.	  Recent	  reforms	  expand	  the	  number	  of	  promotion	  levels	  and	  
            decompress	  the	  band	  between	  top	  and	  initial	  salaries.	  But	  across	  the	  new	  programs,	  these	  
            dimensions	  vary:	  three	  different	  promotion	  levels	  are	  proposed	  in	  some	  systems	  and	  eight	  
            levels	  in	  others.	  Top-­‐level	  salaries	  are	  100	  percent	  higher	  than	  starting	  level	  in	  some	  systems,	  
            and	  almost	  300	  percent	  higher	  in	  others.	  As	  most	  of	  these	  reforms	  are	  quite	  new,	  there	  is	  an	  
            important	  opportunity	  to	  research	  their	  differential	  impacts	  on	  the	  recruitment	  of	  new	  teachers	  
            over	  time.	  	  
       •    Strategies	  for	  managing	  the	  long-­‐term	  fiscal	  implications	  of	  career	  path	  reforms	  are	  important.	  
            Although	  the	  permanence	  of	  promotions	  and	  base	  pay	  increases	  is	  central	  to	  its	  strength	  as	  an	  
            incentive,	  it	  runs	  the	  risk	  of	  locking	  in	  high	  compensation	  for	  teachers	  who	  are	  promoted	  but	  
            subsequently	  fail	  to	  keep	  up	  their	  skills.	  Ecuador’s	  reform	  guards	  against	  this	  by	  requiring	  that	  
            teachers	  achieve	  either	  further	  promotion	  or	  recertification	  at	  the	  same	  level	  every	  four	  years,	  
            or	  face	  a	  downgrade	  of	  level	  and	  salary.	  This	  is	  the	  first	  case	  in	  the	  region	  of	  an	  “up	  or	  out”	  
            strategy	  built	  into	  a	  career	  path	  reform.	  It	  is	  an	  interesting	  design	  that	  deserves	  evaluation.	  	  
       •    Careful	  implementation	  planning	  of	  reforms	  as	  complex	  as	  these	  is	  important.	  The	  credibility	  of	  
            several	  programs—Mexico’s	  original	  Carrera	  Magisterial,	  Peru’s	  2008	  Carrera	  Publica	  
            Magisterial	  reform,	  and	  programs	  in	  Colombia	  and	  Sao	  Paulo—has	  been	  undermined	  by	  
            problems	  that	  might	  have	  been	  foreseen	  and	  managed	  differently.	  	  
       •    Incentive	  power	  hangs	  on	  belief	  that	  the	  program	  will	  be	  sustained	  under	  consistent	  rules	  of	  the	  
            game.	  Whenever	  teachers	  perceive	  that	  the	  criteria	  for	  entry	  into	  a	  new	  career	  track	  are	  likely	  
            to	  change,	  soften,	  or	  be	  disbanded,	  the	  incentives	  to	  acquire	  new	  knowledge	  and	  apply	  it	  to	  
            their	  work	  erode.	  Career	  path	  reforms	  that	  truly	  signal	  substantially	  higher	  long-­‐term	  financial	  
            rewards	  for	  talented	  teachers	  probably	  offer	  the	  clearest	  path	  to	  the	  recruitment	  of	  higher-­‐
            caliber	  teacher	  candidates	  and	  more	  effective	  teaching.	  Policymakers	  across	  the	  region	  would	  
            gain	  from	  careful	  research	  on	  the	  new	  wave	  of	  career	  path	  reforms	  in	  LAC.	  
Bonus	  pay.	  Bonus	  pay	  is	  the	  other	  major	  instrument	  for	  raising	  the	  financial	  rewards	  for	  teaching.	  Bonus	  
pay	  programs	  are	  proliferating	  in	  LAC,	  especially	  in	  Brazil.	  They	  are	  politically	  and	  technically	  easier	  to	  
implement	  than	  career	  path	  reforms	  and	  do	  not	  have	  long-­‐term	  fiscal	  or	  pension	  implications.	  Bonus	  
programs	  typically	  offer	  a	  one-­‐time	  reward	  for	  teachers	  (or	  schools)	  for	  specific	  results	  achieved	  during	  
the	  prior	  school	  year.	  There	  is	  no	  evidence	  yet	  on	  the	  impact	  of	  bonus	  pay	  programs	  on	  the	  critical	  long-­‐
term	  question	  of	  teacher	  selection:	  are	  bonus	  pay	  programs	  a	  sufficiently	  strong	  financial	  incentive	  to	  
attract	  higher-­‐caliber	  candidates	  into	  teaching?	  But	  the	  experience	  to	  date	  provides	  some	  evidence	  of	  
short-­‐term	  impacts	  on	  teacher	  and	  school	  performance	  and	  lessons	  for	  program	  design:	  
       •    Bonus	  pay	  programs	  can	  work	  in	  developing	  country	  contexts.	  Although	  the	  number	  of	  cases	  
            remains	  small,	  bonus	  pay	  programs	  in	  developing	  country	  settings	  have	  produced	  more	  
            consistently	  positive	  results	  than	  in	  developed	  countries	  (especially	  the	  United	  States)	  to	  date.	  
            The	  only	  two	  rigorously	  evaluated	  cases	  of	  bonus	  pay	  programs	  operating	  at	  scale	  (Chile’s	  SNED	  	  
            and	  the	  school	  bonus	  in	  Pernambuco,	  Brazil)	  are	  both	  from	  Latin	  America,	  and	  both	  have	  
            demonstrated	  positive	  results	  on	  student	  learning	  and	  grade	  attainment.	  Measured	  impacts	  
            across	  all	  developing	  country	  programs	  to	  date	  are	  generally	  in	  the	  range	  of	  0.10	  to	  0.3	  SD	  
            improvements	  in	  test	  scores,	  which	  are	  significant-­‐sized	  effects	  for	  education	  interventions.	  A	  
            reasonable	  hypothesis	  is	  that	  bonus	  pay	  incentives—which	  focus	  schools	  on	  student	  learning	  


	  
	  


           results—can	  be	  productive	  in	  systems	  where	  other	  accountability	  pressures	  and	  teacher	  
           professionalism	  are	  weak.	  	  
       •   Matching	  incentive	  design	  to	  context	  is	  crucial.	  Much	  of	  the	  experimental	  evidence	  to	  date	  is	  
           from	  studies	  that	  tested	  alternative	  bonus	  designs—group	  versus	  individual	  incentives;	  teacher	  
           versus	  student	  incentives;	  “gain”	  versus	  “loss”	  bonus	  awards—and	  it	  is	  striking	  how	  much	  the	  
           impact	  of	  alternative	  bonus	  designs	  can	  vary	  within	  a	  single	  context.	  The	  optimal	  bonus	  size	  is	  
           another	  design	  issue	  on	  which	  there	  is	  as	  yet	  little	  practical	  guidance	  from	  research;	  some	  of	  the	  
           largest	  reported	  impacts	  in	  the	  literature	  are	  from	  bonuses	  that	  represented	  a	  very	  small	  
           increment	  of	  teachers’	  monthly	  pay,	  but	  significantly	  larger	  bonuses	  -­‐-­‐	  averaging	  1-­‐2	  months’	  
           salary	  -­‐-­‐	  are	  becoming	  common	  in	  Brazil.	  The	  research	  base	  today	  is	  far	  short	  of	  providing	  a	  
           guide	  to	  the	  most	  productive	  bonus	  pay	  designs	  for	  a	  given	  context.	  But	  it	  suggests	  that	  if	  a	  
           given	  program’s	  impact	  appears	  to	  be	  weak,	  there	  probably	  exists	  a	  productive	  alternative	  
           design.	  	  	  
       •   Designing	  the	  performance	  measure(s)	  to	  be	  rewarded	  is	  a	  key	  challenge.	  Basing	  bonus	  pay	  on	  
           student	  test	  scores	  alone	  has	  been	  problematic	  in	  several	  US	  settings	  because	  of	  documented	  
           cheating	  and	  broader	  concerns	  that	  it	  focuses	  teachers	  too	  narrowly	  on	  test	  preparation	  and	  
           specific	  subjects,	  and	  makes	  them	  unwilling	  to	  teach	  at-­‐risk	  students.	  No	  LAC	  country	  to	  date	  
           has	  introduced	  bonus	  pay	  based	  on	  test	  scores	  alone,	  and	  this	  strategy	  appears	  wise.	  The	  
           composite	  indicator	  used	  in	  Brazil,	  which	  is	  a	  product	  of	  test	  scores	  and	  pass	  rates,	  is	  an	  
           interesting	  model	  for	  countries	  to	  consider.	  It	  discourages	  automatic	  promotion	  of	  children	  who	  
           are	  not	  learning	  and	  the	  reverse	  strategy	  of	  holding	  children	  back	  or	  encouraging	  dropout	  to	  
           boost	  test	  scores.	  	  
       •   Programs	  may	  have	  heterogeneous	  impacts	  on	  different	  types	  of	  schools.	  In	  both	  of	  the	  bonus	  
           programs	  operating	  at	  scale,	  significant	  heterogeneity	  has	  been	  observed.	  In	  Chile’s	  SNED	  
           program,	  about	  one-­‐third	  of	  schools	  appear	  consistently	  “out	  of	  the	  money”	  in	  the	  bonuses	  
           granted	  every	  two	  years,	  despite	  the	  serious	  efforts	  made	  to	  ensure	  that	  schools	  compete	  only	  
           against	  similar	  schools	  (Contreras	  and	  Rau	  2012).	  In	  the	  case	  of	  Pernambuco,	  Brazil,	  the	  bonus	  
           has	  produced	  stronger	  improvements	  in	  small	  schools,	  where	  teachers	  can	  collaborate	  and	  
           monitor	  each	  other	  more	  easily	  than	  in	  larger	  schools.	  Improvements	  have	  also	  been	  larger	  for	  
           academically	  weak	  and	  low-­‐income	  students,	  suggesting	  that	  the	  bonus	  has	  stimulated	  schools	  
           and	  teachers	  to	  focus	  more	  effort	  on	  these	  students	  (Ferraz	  and	  Bruns	  2014).	  Research	  evidence	  
           of	  this	  type	  can	  provide	  useful	  guidance	  for	  program	  design.	  	  	  
       •   Students	  are	  a	  key	  partner	  in	  the	  production	  of	  learning	  results.	  The	  innovative	  design	  of	  the	  ALI	  
           (Aligning	  Learning	  Incentives)	  experiment	  in	  Mexico	  generated	  powerful	  evidence	  that	  school	  
           systems	  can	  gain	  by	  finding	  ways	  to	  make	  students	  feel	  more	  invested	  in	  their	  learning	  progress	  
           (Behrman	  et	  al.	  2014).	  This	  is	  consistent	  with	  evidence	  that	  student	  learning	  performance	  on	  
           international	  tests	  is	  higher	  for	  countries	  with	  high-­‐stakes	  examinations	  for	  students	  at	  the	  end	  
           of	  secondary	  school,	  which	  create	  strong	  incentives	  for	  student	  effort	  (Woessmann	  2012).	  
       •   Our	  understanding	  of	  the	  mechanisms	  through	  which	  bonus	  pay	  improves	  student	  outcomes	  is	  
           still	  weak.	  The	  logic	  of	  incentive	  pay	  is	  to	  stimulate	  teacher	  behaviors	  that	  help	  raise	  student	  
           learning:	  either	  increased	  teacher	  effort	  or	  more	  effective	  effort.	  However,	  relatively	  few	  
           evaluations	  have	  documented	  changes	  in	  teachers’	  classroom	  practice	  that	  plausibly	  explain	  
           observed	  increases	  in	  student	  learning.	  Research	  on	  teachers’	  classroom	  practice	  is	  becoming	  
           more	  feasible,	  with	  the	  declining	  costs	  of	  installing	  video	  cameras	  in	  samples	  of	  classrooms	  and	  
           increasing	  use	  of	  standardized	  methods	  for	  coding	  and	  analyzing	  teacher-­‐student	  interaction.	  



	  
	  


            Systematic	  inclusion	  of	  such	  analysis	  in	  impact	  evaluations	  of	  pay	  for	  performance	  programs	  will	  
            not	  only	  illuminate	  how	  such	  programs	  work	  but	  also	  generate	  evidence	  and	  examples	  of	  
            effective	  teaching	  that	  can	  more	  broadly	  benefit	  these	  school	  systems.	  	  
Ultimately,	  cross-­‐country	  studies	  suggest	  that	  no	  education	  system	  achieves	  high	  teacher	  quality	  
without	  aligning	  all	  three	  types	  of	  incentives:	  professional	  rewards,	  accountability	  pressures,	  and	  
financial	  rewards.	  But	  these	  studies	  also	  suggest	  that	  the	  particular	  combinations	  that	  are	  most	  efficient	  
are	  highly	  context-­‐specific.	  Finland,	  Singapore,	  and	  Ontario,	  Canada,	  for	  example,	  have	  all	  built	  strong	  
professional	  rewards	  for	  teaching,	  but	  accountability	  pressures	  are	  much	  stronger	  in	  Singapore	  than	  in	  
Finland	  or	  Canada.	  And	  none	  follows	  a	  textbook	  approach	  on	  financial	  incentives:	  Finland	  has	  achieved	  a	  
sharp	  upgrading	  of	  teacher	  quality	  over	  the	  past	  20	  years	  with	  little	  increase	  in	  teachers’	  relative	  
salaries.	  Singapore	  keeps	  entering	  salaries	  for	  teachers	  on	  par	  with	  other	  professions	  and	  offers	  bonuses	  
for	  high	  performance,	  but	  has	  an	  overall	  career	  ladder	  that	  is	  much	  flatter	  than	  in	  other	  professions.	  
Ontario	  pays	  competitive	  salaries,	  but	  the	  core	  of	  its	  strategy	  is	  team-­‐based	  professional	  development	  
at	  the	  school	  level	  supported	  by	  outside	  experts	  but	  not	  otherwise	  incentivized.	  These	  examples	  suggest	  
that	  there	  are	  multiple	  roads	  to	  the	  goal:	  a	  balanced	  set	  of	  incentives	  sufficient	  to	  attract	  talented	  
teacher	  candidates,	  establish	  accountability	  for	  results,	  and	  motivate	  continued	  professional	  growth	  and	  
pursuit	  of	  excellence.	  	  

Managing	  the	  Politics	  of	  Teacher	  Reform	  	  
Teachers	  are	  not	  only	  key	  actors	  in	  the	  production	  of	  education	  results	  but	  also	  the	  most	  powerful	  
stakeholders	  in	  the	  process	  of	  education	  reform.	  No	  other	  education	  actor	  is	  as	  highly	  organized,	  visible,	  
and	  politically	  influential	  (Grindle	  2004).	  Because	  of	  their	  unique	  autonomy	  behind	  the	  closed	  door	  of	  
the	  classroom,	  teachers	  also	  have	  profound	  power	  over	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  new	  policies	  can	  be	  
implemented	  successfully.	  By	  global	  standards,	  teachers’	  unions	  in	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  
have	  been	  considered	  especially	  powerful.	  They	  have	  a	  history	  of	  effective	  use	  of	  direct	  electoral	  
influence	  and	  disruptive	  actions	  in	  the	  streets	  to	  block	  reforms	  perceived	  as	  a	  threat	  to	  their	  interests.	  	  
Like	  all	  organized	  workers,	  teachers’	  unions	  exist	  to	  defend	  the	  rights	  they	  legitimately	  earn	  through	  
negotiations	  and	  to	  oppose	  policy	  changes	  that	  threaten	  those	  rights.	  Teachers	  and	  their	  
representatives	  are	  entirely	  justified	  in	  pursuing	  these	  goals,	  and	  teachers’	  unions	  throughout	  history	  
have	  been	  a	  progressive	  force	  in	  achieving	  equal	  pay	  and	  fair	  treatment	  for	  women	  and	  minority	  
members.	  But	  it	  is	  also	  true	  that	  the	  goals	  of	  teachers’	  organizations	  are	  not	  congruent	  with	  the	  goals	  of	  
education	  policy	  makers	  or	  the	  interests	  of	  education	  beneficiaries—including	  students,	  parents,	  and	  
employers	  who	  need	  skilled	  workers.	  	  	  
Viewed	  through	  the	  lens	  of	  teachers’	  legitimate	  interests,	  a	  number	  of	  education	  policies	  that	  
goverments	  adopt	  in	  pursuit	  of	  education	  quality	  pose	  threats:	  	  to	  teachers’	  benefits	  (elimination	  of	  job	  
stability	  and	  reduction	  or	  loss	  of	  other	  benefits);	  to	  teachers’	  working	  conditions	  (curriculum	  reforms,	  
student	  testing,	  teacher	  evaluation	  systems);	  or	  to	  union	  structure	  and	  power	  (decentralization,	  school	  
choice,	  higher	  standards	  for	  teachers	  at	  entry,	  alternative	  certification,	  and	  pay	  linked	  to	  individual	  skills	  
or	  performance).	  	  Relatively	  few	  education	  policies—higher	  spending	  on	  education,	  bonus	  pay	  at	  the	  
school	  level,	  and	  lower	  pupil-­‐teacher	  ratios—are	  positively	  aligned	  with	  unions’	  interests.	  Unions’	  ability	  
to	  challenge	  policies	  depends	  on	  their	  structure	  (i.e.,	  share	  of	  teachers	  unionized),	  their	  capacity	  for	  
collective	  action,	  and	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  their	  political	  strategies.	  The	  latter	  include	  strikes	  and	  
protests,	  government	  capture,	  legal	  strategies,	  and	  union-­‐sponsored	  research	  and	  policy	  analysis	  to	  
influence	  education	  debate.	  All	  of	  these	  strategies	  have	  been	  deployed	  effectively	  by	  unions	  in	  Latin	  
America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  in	  national	  debates	  over	  education	  reform	  during	  the	  past	  several	  decades.	  	  




	  
	  


But	  recent	  reform	  experiences	  in	  Mexico,	  Peru,	  and	  Ecuador	  suggest	  that	  the	  balance	  of	  power	  between	  
governments	  and	  teachers’	  unions	  in	  the	  region	  may	  be	  shifting.	  In	  an	  age	  where	  mass	  media	  afford	  
political	  leaders	  a	  direct	  channel	  of	  communication	  with	  even	  the	  most	  remote	  and	  rural	  of	  their	  
citizens,	  one	  of	  the	  long-­‐time	  sources	  of	  union	  power—the	  ability	  to	  mobilize	  their	  members	  for	  large-­‐
scale	  grassroots	  political	  campaigning—may	  be	  of	  diminishing	  utility.	  In	  a	  region	  where	  democracy	  has	  
taken	  hold	  in	  most	  countries,	  mass	  media	  have	  become	  increasingly	  vociferous	  in	  exposing	  government	  
failure	  and	  political	  corruption.	  This	  feeds	  public	  demand	  for	  more	  accountable	  and	  effective	  
government	  and	  resonates	  particularly	  strongly	  in	  education,	  which	  touches	  every	  family’s	  hopes	  and	  
aspirations	  for	  its	  children.	  Increasingly,	  political	  leaders	  in	  LAC	  appear	  to	  be	  calculating	  that	  popular	  
support	  for	  education	  reform	  is	  a	  stronger	  bet	  for	  their	  political	  future	  than	  the	  traditional	  quid	  pro	  quo	  
of	  electoral	  support	  from	  teachers’	  unions	  in	  exchange	  for	  education	  policies	  that	  do	  not	  threaten	  their	  
interests.	  
While	  there	  is	  substantial	  heterogeneity	  across	  the	  region	  in	  union	  power,	  government	  reform	  priorities,	  
and	  the	  dynamics	  of	  the	  reform	  process,	  the	  most	  recent	  reform	  experiences	  support	  several	  cautious	  
observations:	  
       •    Political	  leaders	  can	  build	  effective	  proreform	  alliances	  of	  business	  leaders	  and	  civil	  society	  
            through	  communications	  campaigns	  that	  paint	  a	  compelling	  picture	  of	  the	  current	  failures	  of	  the	  
            education	  system	  and	  the	  importance	  of	  better	  education	  for	  economic	  competitiveness.	  
            Successfully	  uniting	  two	  sides	  of	  the	  stakeholder	  triangle	  (civil	  society	  and	  government)	  in	  
            dialogue	  with	  the	  third	  (organized	  teachers)	  can	  create	  political	  space	  for	  the	  adoption	  of	  
            reforms,	  including	  three	  that	  challenge	  union	  interests	  (individual	  teacher	  performance	  
            evaluation,	  pay	  differentiated	  by	  performance,	  and	  loss	  of	  job	  stability).	  	  
       •    Reform	  momentum	  is	  greatest	  if	  launched	  at	  the	  start	  of	  an	  administration.	  In	  most	  cases,	  the	  
            process	  is	  contentious	  and	  unions	  have	  a	  strong	  interest	  in	  dragging	  it	  out.	  If	  leaders	  move	  
            quickly,	  they	  capitalize	  on	  their	  point	  of	  maximum	  political	  leverage	  and	  establish	  education	  as	  a	  
            top	  priority.	  As	  they	  begin	  to	  govern,	  administrations	  are	  inevitably	  forced	  to	  spend	  time	  on	  a	  
            wide	  range	  of	  other	  issues	  and	  suffer	  some	  political	  reversals;	  this	  diffuses	  messages	  and	  erodes	  
            leverage.	  	  	  
       •    Hard	  data	  on	  education	  system	  results	  are	  a	  crucial	  political	  tool.	  Especially	  powerful	  are	  data	  on	  
            student	  learning	  outcomes,	  results	  that	  are	  internationally	  benchmarked	  (such	  as	  PISA,	  TIMMS,	  
            SERCE,	  and	  LLERCE	  and	  data	  on	  teachers’	  performance	  on	  competency	  tests.	  Political	  leaders’	  
            use	  of	  these	  to	  build	  the	  case	  for	  reform	  has	  been	  a	  factor	  in	  all	  successful	  strategies	  to	  date.	  Of	  
            all	  international	  tests,	  the	  OECD’s	  PISA	  seems	  to	  resonate	  most	  strongly	  with	  the	  business	  
            community	  and	  civil	  society	  groups.	  This	  is	  likely	  because	  the	  comparator	  countries	  are	  those	  
            that	  LAC	  countries	  aspire	  to	  join,	  and	  because	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  interpret	  the	  results,	  for	  15-­‐year-­‐old	  
            youths,	  as	  a	  barometer	  of	  labor	  force	  quality	  and	  economic	  competitiveness.	  	  	  
       •    Reform	  strategies	  based	  on	  confrontation	  with	  unions	  may	  succeed	  in	  securing	  the	  legislative	  
            adoption	  of	  major	  reforms,	  but	  not	  necessarily	  their	  implementation.	  In	  many	  countries,	  the	  
            political	  space	  for	  negotiating	  major	  reforms	  with	  teachers’	  unions	  does	  not	  exist.	  In	  three	  
            recent	  cases	  (Mexico,	  Peru,	  and	  Ecuador)	  confrontation	  politics	  has	  produced	  the	  
            legislative/constitutional	  adoption	  of	  teacher	  policy	  reforms	  that	  global	  evidence	  suggests	  are	  
            needed	  for	  education	  quality:	  student	  testing,	  teacher	  performance	  evaluation,	  teacher	  hiring	  
            and	  promotions	  linked	  to	  skills	  and	  performance	  rather	  than	  seniority,	  and	  dismissal	  of	  teachers	  
            with	  consistently	  poor	  performance.	  There	  may	  be	  no	  political	  alternative	  to	  confrontation	  
            strategies	  in	  many	  contexts;	  in	  Mexico’s	  case,	  a	  high-­‐profile	  government	  effort	  to	  design	  



	  
	  


            reforms	  in	  collaboration	  with	  the	  union	  foundered	  when	  the	  union	  could	  not	  deliver	  members’	  
            adherence	  with	  the	  agreements..	  But	  confrontation	  strategies	  imply	  a	  major	  trade-­‐off:	  they	  
            make	  it	  impossible	  to	  gain	  input	  from	  teachers	  that	  could	  genuinely	  improve	  a	  reform’s	  design	  
            and	  smooth	  its	  implementation.	  	  
       •    Sequencing	  reforms	  can	  ease	  adoption	  and	  improve	  implementation.	  The	  region’s	  experience	  
            suggests	  a	  political	  logic	  to	  a	  certain	  sequence	  of	  education	  reforms.	  The	  first	  step	  is	  student	  
            testing,	  with	  transparent	  dissemination	  of	  results,	  both	  nationally	  and	  to	  individual	  schools;	  this	  
            is	  the	  anchor	  that	  makes	  it	  possible	  to	  introduce	  other	  performance-­‐based	  reforms.	  A	  second	  
            step	  is	  the	  adoption	  of	  school-­‐based	  bonus	  pay,	  which	  establishes	  the	  concept	  of	  pay	  for	  
            performance	  and	  focuses	  schools	  on	  student	  learning	  progress,	  but	  has	  typically	  faced	  less	  
            union	  resistance	  than	  individual	  bonus	  pay.	  A	  third	  step	  is	  individual	  teacher	  evaluation	  on	  a	  
            voluntary	  basis,	  with	  the	  carrot	  of	  attractive	  financial	  rewards	  for	  teachers	  who	  take	  the	  risk	  of	  
            being	  evaluated	  and	  perform	  well.	  Unions	  have	  typically	  opposed	  this,	  but	  making	  programs	  
            voluntary	  can	  avoid	  confrontation.	  This	  sequence	  of	  reforms	  was	  implemented	  in	  Chile	  between	  
            1995	  and	  2004,	  more	  recently	  by	  Sao	  Paulo	  state,,	  and	  (proposed)	  in	  Rio	  de	  Janeiro	  state.	  
All	  of	  the	  available	  evidence	  suggests	  that	  the	  quality	  of	  teachers	  in	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  is	  
the	  binding	  constraint	  on	  the	  region’s	  progress	  toward	  world-­‐class	  education	  systems.	  Low	  standards	  for	  
entry	  into	  teaching;	  low-­‐quality	  candidates;	  salaries,	  promotions,	  and	  job	  tenure	  delinked	  from	  
performance;	  and	  weak	  school	  leadership	  have	  produced	  low	  professionalism	  in	  the	  classroom	  and	  poor	  
education	  results.	  Moving	  to	  a	  new	  equilibrium	  will	  be	  difficult,	  and	  will	  require	  recruiting,	  grooming,	  
and	  motivating	  a	  new	  breed	  of	  teacher.	  	  
Raising	  the	  stakes	  further	  are	  the	  sweeping	  transformations	  occurring	  in	  global	  education.	  The	  
traditional	  goals	  of	  national	  education	  systems	  and	  the	  traditional	  paradigm	  of	  teacher-­‐student	  
interaction	  made	  teachers	  the	  linchpin	  in	  the	  transmission	  of	  discrete	  bodies	  of	  knowledge	  to	  students	  
in	  the	  classroom.	  The	  new	  paradigm	  is	  that	  teachers	  are	  not	  the	  only	  or	  even	  the	  major	  source	  of	  
information	  and	  knowledge	  available	  to	  students.	  A	  core	  role	  of	  teachers	  today	  is	  to	  equip	  students	  to	  
seek,	  analyze,	  and	  effectively	  use	  vast	  amounts	  of	  information	  that	  are	  readily	  available	  elsewhere.	  
Teachers	  must	  also	  develop	  students’	  competencies	  in	  the	  broad	  range	  of	  areas	  valued	  in	  an	  integrated	  
global	  economy:	  critical	  thinking;	  problem-­‐solving;	  working	  collaboratively	  in	  diverse	  environments;	  
adapting	  to	  change;	  and	  the	  capacity	  to	  master	  new	  knowledge,	  skills,	  and	  changing	  employment	  
demands	  across	  their	  lifetimes.	  No	  teacher	  preparation	  programs	  in	  LAC—or	  indeed	  in	  most	  OECD	  
countries—are	  fully	  prepared	  to	  produce	  this	  profile	  of	  teacher	  today,	  let	  alone	  the	  profiles	  that	  may	  be	  
needed	  over	  the	  next	  decade.	  But	  virtually	  all	  OECD	  countries	  are	  responding	  to	  these	  challenges	  by	  
raising	  their	  expectations,	  and	  standards,	  for	  teachers.	  
Countries	  across	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	  are	  also	  responding.	  Virtually	  all	  aspects	  of	  teacher	  
policy	  are	  under	  review	  and	  reform	  in	  different	  LAC	  countries,	  and	  in	  some	  areas	  the	  region	  is	  in	  the	  
vanguard	  of	  global	  policy	  experience.	  By	  drawing	  together	  in	  one	  volume	  the	  key	  teacher	  policy	  reforms	  
being	  undertaken	  in	  the	  region	  today	  and	  the	  best	  available	  evidence	  on	  their	  impact,	  this	  book	  hopes	  
to	  stimulate	  and	  support	  the	  faster	  progress	  that	  is	  needed.	  

Note	  
1.	  Because	  Peru	  did	  not	  participate	  in	  the	  2003	  and	  2006	  rounds	  of	  PISA,	  researchers	  excluded	  it	  from	  
the	  analysis	  of	  countries	  registering	  the	  most	  significant	  sustained	  progress	  between	  1990	  and	  2006.	  	  
	  

	  



	  
	  


References	  

Alfonso,	  M.,	  A.	  Santiago,	  and	  M.	  Bassi.	  2010.	  Estimating	  the	  Impact	  of	  Placing	  Top	  University	  

         Graduates	  in	  Vulnerable	  Schools	  in	  Chile.	  Technical	  Note	  IDB-­‐TN-­‐230.	  Inter-­‐American	  

         Development	  Bank,	  Washington,	  DC.	  

Barber,	  M.,	  and	  M.	  Mourshed.	  2007.	  How	  the	  World’s	  Best-­‐Performing	  School	  Systems	  Come	  Out	  on	  

         Top.	  London:	  McKinsey.	  

         http://mckinseyonsociety.com/downloads/reports/Education/Worlds_School_Systems_Final

         .pdf.	  

Behrman,	  J.,	  S.	  Parker,	  P.	  Todd,	  and	  K.	  Wolpin.	  2014.	  “Aligning	  Learning	  Incentives	  of	  Students	  and	  

         Teachers:	  Results	  from	  a	  Social	  Experiment	  in	  Mexican	  High	  Schools.”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  

         Economy,	  forthcoming.	  	  

Boyd,	  D.,	  P.	  Grossman,	  H.	  Lankford,	  S.	  Loeb,	  and	  J.	  Wyckoff.	  2008.	  “Who	  Leaves?	  Teacher	  Attrition	  

         and	  Student	  Achievement.”	  Working	  Paper	  14022,	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research	  

Boyd,	  D.,	  P.	  Grossman,	  S.	  Lankford,	  S.	  Loeb,	  and	  J.	  Wyckoff.	  2009.	  “Teacher	  Preparation	  and	  Student	  

         Achievement.”	  Educational	  Evaluation	  and	  Policy	  Analysis	  31	  (4):	  416–40.	  

Branch,	  G.,	  E.	  Hanushek,	  and	  S.	  Rivkin.	  2013.	  “School	  Leaders	  Matter.”	  Education	  Next	  13	  (2):62–69.	  	  

Bruns,	  B.,	  D.	  Filmer,	  and	  H.	  A.	  Patrinos.	  2011.	  Making	  Schools	  Work:	  New	  Evidence	  on	  Accountability	  

         Reforms.	  Washington,	  DC:	  World	  Bank.	  

Carnoy,	  M.	  (2007).	  Cuba’s	  Academic	  Advantage:	  Why	  Students	  in	  Cuba	  Do	  Better	  in	  School.	  Stanford	  

         University	  Press.	  

Chetty,	  R.,	  J.	  N.	  Friedman,	  and	  J.	  E.	  Rockoff.	  	  2014.	  “Measuring	  the	  Impacts	  of	  Teachers	  II:	  Teacher	  

         Value-­‐Added	  and	  Student	  Outcomes	  in	  Adulthood.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  (forthcoming).	  




	  
	  


Chingos,	  M.,	  and	  P.	  E.	  Peterson.	  2010.	  “Do	  Schools	  Districts	  Get	  What	  They	  Pay	  For?	  Predicting	  

        Teacher	  Effectiveness	  by	  College	  Selectivity,	  Experience,	  Etc.”	  Harvard	  University	  Program	  on	  

        Education	  Policy	  and	  Governance	  Working	  Paper	  10-­‐08,	  Harvard	  University,	  Cambridge,	  MA.	  

Clark,	  D.,	  P.	  Martorell,	  and	  J.	  Rockoff.	  2009.	  “School	  Principals	  and	  School	  Performance.”	  CALDER	  

        Working	  Paper	  38,	  National	  Center	  for	  Analysis	  of	  Longitudinal	  Data	  in	  Education	  Research,	  

        Urban	  Institute,	  Washington,	  DC.	  

Concha	  Albornoz,	  C.	  2007.	  “Claves	  para	  la	  formación	  de	  directivos	  de	  instituciones	  escolares.”	  

        Revista	  Electrónica	  Iberoamericana	  sobre	  Calidad,	  Eficacia	  y	  Cambio	  en	  Educación	  5,	  (5)	  133-­‐

        138.	  	  

Contreras,	  D.,	  and	  T.	  Rau.	  2012.	  “Tournament	  Incentives	  for	  Teachers:	  Evidence	  from	  a	  Scaled-­‐up	  

        Intervention	  in	  Chile.”	  Economic	  Development	  and	  Cultural	  Change	  91	  (1):	  219–46.	  

Corcoran,	  S.	  P.,	  W.	  N.	  Evans,	  and	  R.	  M.	  Schwab.	  2004.	  “Women,	  the	  Labor	  Market,	  and	  the	  Declining	  

        Relative	  Quality	  of	  Teachers.”	  Journal	  of	  Policy	  Analysis	  and	  Management	  23	  (3):	  449–470.	  

(Costa+Carnoy)	  

Dee,	  T.,	  and	  J.	  Wyckoff.	  2013.	  “Incentives,	  Selection	  and	  Teacher	  Performance:	  Evidence	  from	  

        IMPACT.”	  Working	  Paper	  19529,	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Economic	  Research.	  

Eide,	  E.	  G.,	  D.	  Goldhaber,	  and	  D.	  Brewer.	  2004.	  “The	  Teacher	  Labour	  Market	  and	  Teacher	  Quality.”	  

        Oxford	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Policy	  20	  (2):	  230–44.	  

Ferraz,	  C.,	  and	  B.	  Bruns.	  (forthcoming,	  2014).	  “Paying	  Teachers	  to	  Perform:	  The	  Impact	  of	  Bonus	  

        Pay	  in	  Pernambuco,	  Brazil.”	  Manuscript.	  ,	  World	  Bank,	  Washington,	  DC.	  

Franco,	  M.	  2012.	  “Pre-­‐Service	  Training	  in	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean:	  A	  Background	  Study	  for	  

        the	  World	  Bank	  LAC	  Study	  on	  Teachers.”	  Manuscript,	  Washington,	  DC.	  	  

Fredriksson,	  P.,	  and	  B.	  Ockert.	  2007.	  “The	  Supply	  of	  Skills	  to	  the	  Teacher	  Profession.”	  Manuscript.	  

        Uppsala	  University,	  Uppsala,	  Sweden.	  	  


	  
	  


Garland,	  S.	  2008.	  “Reform	  School.”	  Daily	  Beast,	  December	  17.	  

        http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2008/12/17/reform-­‐school.html.	  

Grindle,	  M.	  S.	  2004.	  Despite	  the	  Odds:	  The	  Contentious	  Politics	  of	  Education	  Reform.	  Princeton,	  NJ:	  

        Princeton	  University	  Press.	  

Hanushek,	  E.A.	  2011.	  “The	  economic	  value	  of	  higher	  teacher	  quality.”	  	  Economics	  of	  Education	  

        Review,	  30:466-­‐479.	  

Hanushek,	  E.	  A.,	  and	  L.	  Woessmann.	  2007.	  “The	  Role	  of	  Education	  Quality	  for	  Economic	  Growth.”	  

        Policy	  Research	  Working	  Paper	  4122,	  World	  Bank,	  Washington,	  DC.	  

———.	  2012.	  “Schooling,	  Educational	  Achievement,	  and	  the	  Latin	  American	  Growth	  Puzzle.”	  

        Journal	  of	  Development	  Economics	  99	  (2):	  497–512.	  

Hanushek,	  E.,	  and	  S.	  Rivkin.	  2010a.	  “Using	  Value-­‐Added	  Measures	  of	  Teacher	  Quality.”	  Policy	  Brief	  9,	  

        National	  Center	  for	  Analysis	  of	  Longitudinal	  Data	  in	  Education	  Research,	  Washington,	  DC.	  

Hanushek,	  E.	  A.,	  and	  S.	  G.	  Rivkin.	  2010b.	  “Generalizations	  about	  Using	  Value-­‐Added	  Measures	  of	  

        Teacher	  Quality.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  100	  (2):	  267–71.	  

Hanushek,	  E.,	  Peterson,	  P.,	  &	  Woessmann,	  L.	  (2012).	  Achievement	  Growth:	  International	  and	  U.S	  

        State	  Trends	  in	  Student	  Performance.	  Harvard’s	  Program	  on	  Education	  Policy	  and	  Governance	  

        &	  Education	  Next.	  

Hernani-­‐Limarino,	  W.	  2005.	  “Are	  Teachers	  Well	  Paid	  in	  Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean?	  Relative	  

        Wage	  and	  Structure	  of	  Returns	  of	  Teachers.”	  In	  Incentives	  to	  Improve	  Teaching:	  Lessons	  from	  

        Latin	  America,	  edited	  by	  E.	  Vegas.	  Washington,	  DC:	  World	  Bank.	  

Hoxby,	  C.	  M.,	  and	  A.	  Leigh.	  	  2004.	  “Pulled	  Away	  or	  Pushed	  Out?	  Explaining	  the	  Decline	  of	  Teacher	  

        Aptitude	  in	  the	  United	  States.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  94	  (2):	  236–40.	  




	  
	  


Hoxby,	  C.	  M.	  (2004).	  Pulled	  Away	  or	  Pushed	  Out?	  Explaining	  the	  Decline	  of	  Teacher	  Aptitude	  in	  the	  

        United	  States.	  American	  Economic	  Review	  ,	  94(2):	  236–240.	  

Kane,	  T.	  J.,	  and	  D.	  O.	  Staiger.	  2012.	  Gathering	  Feedback	  for	  Teaching:	  Combining	  High-­‐Quality	  

        Observations	  with	  Student	  Surveys	  and	  Achievement	  Gains.	  Seattle:	  Measures	  of	  Effective	  

        Teaching	  project,	  Bill	  &	  Melinda	  Gates	  Foundation.	  

Loeb,	  S.,	  D.	  Kalogrides,	  and	  T.	  Béteille.	  2012.	  “Effective	  Schools:	  Teacher	  Hiring,	  Assignment,	  

        Development,	  and	  Retention.”	  Education	  Finance	  and	  Policy	  7	  (3):	  269–304.	  

McEwan,	  P.	  J.,	  E.	  Murphy-­‐Graham,	  D.	  Torres	  Irribarra,	  C.	  Aguilar,	  and	  R.	  Rápalo,	  R.	  Forthcoming.	  

        “Improving	  Middle	  School	  Quality	  in	  Poor	  Countries:	  Evidence	  from	  the	  Honduran	  Sistema	  de	  

        Aprendizaje	  Tutorial.”	  Educational	  Evaluation	  and	  Policy	  Analysis.	  

Ministerio	  de	  Educación,	  Chile.	  2005.	  Marco	  para	  la	  Buena	  Dirección.	  Santiago:	  MINEDUC.	  

        http://www.mineduc.cl/usuarios/convivencia_escolar/doc/201103070155490.MINEDUC.M

        arco_para_la_Buena_Direccion.pdf	  

Ministerio	  de	  Educación,	  Chile.	  2008.	  “Marco	  para	  la	  Buena	  Enseñanza.”	  Docente	  más.	  Santiago.	  

        (accessed	  July	  24,	  2012),	  http://www.docentemas.cl/docs/MBE2008.pdf.	  

Ministerio	  de	  Educacion	  del	  Ecuador.	  2012.	  Sistema	  Integral	  de	  Desarrollo	  Profesional	  Educativo.	  

        Ministerio	  de	  Educacion	  del	  Ecuador,	  Quito.	  (accessed	  September	  7,	  2012),	  

        http://sime.educacion.gob.ec/Modulo/SIPROFE/index.php?mp=9_0.	  

Mizala,	  A.,	  and	  H.	  Nopo.	  2011.	  “Teachers’	  Salaries	  in	  Latin	  America:	  How	  Much	  Are	  They	  (Under	  or	  

        Over)	  Paid?”	  IZA	  Discussion	  Paper	  5947,	  Institute	  for	  the	  Study	  of	  Labor,	  Bonn.	  

Mourshed,	  M.,	  C.	  Chijioke,	  and	  M.	  Barber.	  2010.	  How	  the	  World's	  Most	  Improved	  School	  Systems	  Keep	  

        Getting	  Better.	  London:	  OECD	  McKinsey.	  Available	  at	  




	  
	  


         http://mckinseyonsociety.com/downloads/reports/Education/How-­‐the-­‐Worlds-­‐Most-­‐

         Improved-­‐School-­‐Systems-­‐Keep-­‐Getting-­‐Better_Download-­‐version_Final.pdf	  

OECD.	  2012.	  Preparing	  Teachers	  and	  Developing	  School	  Leaders	  for	  the	  21st	  Century:	  Lessons	  from	  

         Around	  the	  World.	  Paris:	  OECD.	  

OECD	  (Organisation	  for	  Economic	  Co-­‐operation	  and	  Development).	  2013.	  Vol.	  I	  of	  PISA	  2012	  

         Results:	  What	  Students	  Know	  and	  Can	  Do—Student	  Performance	  in	  Mathematics,	  Reading	  and	  

         Science.	  Paris:	  OECD	  Publishing.	  DOI	  :10.1787/19963777.	  

Ome,	  A.	  2012.	  “The	  Effects	  of	  Meritocracy	  for	  Teachers	  in	  Colombia”	  (unpublished	  manuscript).	  

         Bogota,	  Colombia:	  Centro	  de	  Investigación	  Económica	  y	  Social:	  Fedesarrollo.	  	  

Picardo	  J.	  O.	  2012.	  “La	  formación	  de	  docentes	  en	  América	  Latina	  y	  El	  Caribe:	  caso	  El	  Salvador.”	  

         Manuscript.	  San	  Salvador.	  	  	  

Rockoff,	  J.	  E.	  2004.	  “The	  Impact	  of	  Individual	  Teachers	  on	  Student	  Achievement:	  Evidence	  from	  

         Panel	  Data.”	  American	  Economic	  Review	  94	  (2):	  247–52.	  

Rodríguez,	  A.,	  Dahlman,	  C.	  J.,	  &	  Salmi,	  J.	  (2008).	  Knowledge	  and	  innovation	  for	  competitiveness	  in	  

         Brazil.	  World	  Bank.	  

Salmi,	  J.	  (2009).	  The	  challenge	  of	  establishing	  world	  class	  universities.	  World	  Bank	  Publications.	  

Schwartz,	  J.,	  and	  J.	  Mehta.	  2014.	  “Ontario:	  Harnessing	  the	  Skills	  of	  Tomorrow.”	  In	  Lessons	  from	  PISA	  

         for	  Korea,	  Strong	  Performers	  and	  Successful	  Reformers	  in	  Education,	  edited	  by	  OECD	  Paris:	  

         OECD	  Publishing.	  Available	  at:	  http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264190672-­‐en.	  

Stallings,	  J.,	  &	  Knight,	  S.	  2003.	  “Using	  the	  Stallings	  Observation	  System	  to	  Investigate	  Time	  on	  Task	  

         in	  Four	  Countries.”	  Unpublished	  paper	  for	  the	  International	  Time	  on	  Task	  (ITOT)	  Project,	  

         World	  Bank,	  Washington,	  DC.	  

Tatto,	  M.	  T.,	  Ingvarson,	  L.,	  Schwille,	  J.,	  Peck,	  R.,	  Senk,	  S.	  L.,	  &	  Rowley,	  G.	  (2008).	  Teacher	  Education	  

         and	  Development	  Study	  in	  Mathematics	  (TEDS-­‐M):	  Policy,	  Practice,	  and	  Readiness	  to	  Teach	  


	  
	  


        Primary	  and	  Secondary	  Mathematics.	  Conceptual	  Framework.	  International	  Association	  for	  the	  

        Evaluation	  of	  Educational	  Achievement.	  Herengracht	  487,	  Amsterdam,	  1017	  BT,	  The	  

        Netherlands.	  

Thames,	  M.	  H.,	  &	  Ball,	  D.	  L.	  (2010).	  What	  Math	  Knowledge	  Does	  Teaching	  Require?.	  Teaching	  

        Children	  Mathematics,	  17(4),	  220-­‐229.	  

Tucker,	  M.	  ed.	  2011.	  Surpassing	  Shanghai:	  An	  Agenda	  for	  American	  Education	  Built	  on	  the	  World’s	  

        Leading	  Systems.	  Cambridge,	  MA:	  Harvard	  Education	  Press.	  

UNESCO.	  2012.	  Antecedentes	  y	  Criterios	  para	  la	  Elaboración	  de	  Políticas	  Docentes	  en	  América	  Latina	  

        y	  el	  Caribe.	  Santiago:	  UNESCO.	  	  

UNESCO	  Institute	  for	  Statistics.	  2010,	  2011,	  2012.	  Online	  database	  of	  UIS	  Statistics.	  Montreal,	  

        UNESCO	  Institute	  for	  Statistics.	  (accessed	  January	  15,	  2013),	  http://data.uis.unesco.org/.	  

Vaillant,	  D.,	  and	  C.	  Rossel.	  2006.	  Maestros	  de	  escuelas	  básicas	  en	  América	  Latina:	  Hacia	  una	  

        radiografía	  de	  la	  profesión.	  Santiago:	  Programa	  de	  Promoción	  de	  la	  Reforma	  Educativa	  en	  

        América	  Latina	  y	  el	  Caribe	  (PREAL).	  

        http://www.oei.es/docentes/publicaciones/maestros_escuela_basicas_en_america_latina_pre

        al.pdf.	  	  

Vegas,	  E.	  (2007).	  Teacher	  Labor	  Markets	  in	  Developing	  Countries.	  The	  Future	  of	  Children	  Journal,	  

        Vol.	  17,	  No.1	  Spring	  ,	  219-­‐232.	  

Vegas,	  E.,	  and	  I.	  Umansky.	  2005.	  “Improving	  Teaching	  and	  Learning	  through	  Effective	  Incentives.”	  In	  

        Incentives	  to	  Improve	  Teaching:	  Lessons	  from	  Latin	  America,	  edited	  by	  E.	  Vegas,	  21–62.	  

        Washington,	  DC:	  World	  Bank.	  




	  
	  


Woessmann,	  L.	  (2012).	  Peering	  over	  the	  Hedge:	  How	  Do	  the	  Neighbours	  Do	  It?	  	  In	  CESifo	  

        Forum	  (Vol.	  13,	  No.	  3,	  pp.	  16-­‐20).	  Ifo	  Institute	  for	  Economic	  Research	  at	  the	  University	  of	  

        Munich.	  


	  

	  




	  
