                                                        89544




 Building Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity
              in Young Systems:
The Experiences of Rwanda, Vietnam, and Yemen




                                                  Helena Hwang
                                                      June 2014
                        Poverty Reduction and Equity Department
                                                The World Bank
Acknowledgments

Helena Hwang, a consultant in the Poverty Reduction and Equity Department, wrote this meta
analysis under the guidance of Christina Malmberg Calvo (Acting Sector Director, Poverty
Reduction and Equity Department), Jaime Saavedra (Former Acting Vice President, Poverty
Reduction and Economic Management Network), and Gladys Lopez Acevedo (Lead Economist,
South Asia Region Office of the Chief Economist). Nidhi Khattri (Lead Evaluation Officer,
IEGCS), Verena Fritz (Senior Governance Specialist, PRMPS), and Lars Jensen (Monitoring and
Evaluation Specialist, AFTDE) provided peer reviews for the report. Ingrid Ivins (Statistician,
DECDG) led the World Bank Yemen project that is profiled as a case study, which she co-
authored, in this report. We gratefully acknowledge the funding for this report and the Rwanda
and Vietnam M&E assessments was provided through a trust fund from the Governance
Partnership Facility, with thanks to Piet Van Heesewijk (Senior Program Officer, PRMPS) and
Lilian Samson (Operations Analyst, PRMRT) for their support.

We would like to acknowledge that the Rwanda and Vietnam case studies in this paper
summarize PRMPR-managed M&E evaluations conducted by Vera Wilhelm (Program Manager
OPSKL), as well as Geraldine Baudienville, Alexandra Murray-Zmijewski, and Charles Gasana
from the Overseas Development Institute. Vu Cuong and Stephen Jones from Oxford Policy
Management. Ingrid Ivins and Helena Hwang also thank Wael Zakout (Yemen Country
Manager), Ali Dahhaq (M&E Unit Head, Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation),
and Wilfried Engelke (Senior Economist, MNSED) for their contributions to and comments on
the Yemen case study. The Vietnam M&E diagnosis was completed in 2009; the Rwanda M&E
diagnosis and the Yemen project concluded in 2010.

Helena Hwang summarized the M&E diagnoses and worked with Birgit Hansl (Senior
Economist, AFTP2); Alex Kamurase (Senior Social Protection Specialist, AFTSE), Peter
Isabirye (Operations Officer, AFMRW), Peace Aimee Niyibizi (Consultant, AFTP2), and Nga
Nguyet Nguyen (Senior Economist, EASPR) to update the Rwanda and Vietnam case studies.
We thank PRMPR consultant Gloria Rubio for the use of her presentations, publications, and
shared knowledge on the Mexico M&E system for our cross-country comparisons. Ms. Rubio’s
work has been cited in the paper and in the references. We also thank Keith Mackay (Consultant,
PRMPR) for initial comments on the Rwanda and Vietnam case studies, as well as Bertha
Briceno (Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, TWIWP); Alejandro Medina (Senior
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, LCCPP), Luke Jordan (Consultant, SASFP), and Salman
Asim (Consultant, SASED) for providing comments. We thank Anna Socrates for editorial
support, as well as Nelly Obias, Lanto Ramanankasina, and Gloria I. Ruiz for their
organizational support.




                                                                                             2
Table of Contents
Acknowledgments ....................................................................................................................................... 2
Introduction ................................................................................................................................................. 4
List of Acronyms ......................................................................................................................................... 6
Chapter 1: Key Findings and Implications for Future Initiatives to Build M&E Capacity in Fragile
and Conflict-Affected State ........................................................................................................................ 8
Chapter 2: Building M&E Capacity in Rwanda .................................................................................... 20
   Lessons Learned .................................................................................................................................... 21
   Country Context and Political Economy ............................................................................................ 24
   Three Phases of Building M&E Capacity ........................................................................................... 25
   Overall M&E System Structure .......................................................................................................... 27
            M&E Champions ......................................................................................................................... 27
            M&E Information Produced and Main Actors ......................................................................... 29
            Accountability Relationships ...................................................................................................... 32
   Strengths and Weaknesses of M&E System ....................................................................................... 33
   Sustainability and Next Steps for Strengthening Results-Based M&E in Rwanda ....................... 34
Chapter 3: Building M&E Capacity in Vietnam ................................................................................... 37
   Lessons Learned .................................................................................................................................... 38
   Country Context and Political Economy ............................................................................................ 40
   Three Phases of Building M&E Capacity ........................................................................................... 40
   Overall M&E System Structure .......................................................................................................... 43
            M&E Champions ......................................................................................................................... 43
            M&E Information Produced and Main Actors ......................................................................... 44
            Accountability Relationships ...................................................................................................... 51
   Strengths and Weaknesses of M&E System ....................................................................................... 52
   Sustainability and Next Steps for Strengthening Results-Based M&E in Vietnam ........................ 54
Chapter 4: Building M&E Capacity in the Republic of Yemen ........................................................... 55
   Lessons Learned .................................................................................................................................... 56
   Country Context and Political Economy ............................................................................................ 57
   Three Phases of Building M&E Capacity ........................................................................................... 58
   M&E Champions .................................................................................................................................. 63
Conclusions and Next Steps for Strengthening Results-Based M&E in the Republic of Yemen ...... 63
Conclusions ................................................................................................................................................ 66
References .................................................................................................................................................. 67
Annex A: List of People Interviewed....................................................................................................... 75

                                                                                                                                                             3
                                               Introduction

Purpose and Objectives
This study is funded by the Governance Partnership Facility to better understand country
experiences with building M&E capacity to identify paths to success and obstacles to reform. For
every country—whether recently emerging from conflict, low-income, or OECD—monitoring
and evaluation (M&E) is critical to evidence-based policymaking, budget decisions,
management, and accountability—all elements of good governance. Building M&E capacity in
fragile and conflict-affected states is not a well-documented topic, although analysts generally
agree that even in these challenging contexts, countries can set up monitoring capabilities, albeit
with heavy donor support. This study aims to strengthen the knowledge base by synthesizing and
comparing the experiences of Rwanda, Vietnam, and Yemen in building capacity for their
recently established M&E systems. The study also draws comparisons with Mexico’s more well-
developed M&E system.

This paper is directed to policymakers, development workers, donors, and other supporters of
M&E research, operations, and activities. We envision that providing country case studies on
implementing M&E programs in difficult circumstances will contribute to a South-South
knowledge exchange for key stakeholders who are working to advance newly established M&E
systems in their own countries.

Key Questions and Methodology
This paper examines the progress of M&E capacity-building in three very different countries and
contexts; each country had its own unique mix of M&E champions, relationships, and donor
collaborations; existing surveys and other data; and primary motivations for initiating M&E
capacity-building. The paper addresses the following key questions:

    1) What are the useful takeaways from the experiences of Rwanda, Vietnam, and Yemen?
    2) What is the role of incentives in bringing about M&E systems?
    3) What role does political economy play, and how will governments use the M&E
       information that is produced?
    4) What challenges did the three countries faced during the capacity-building process?
    5) To what extent will M&E capacity last after donor efforts and projects conclude or if
       M&E champions leave the government?

Vietnam was selected as a country case study because it has been relatively successful in
developing a results-based M&E framework to monitor its national poverty reduction strategy.
The Rwanda and Yemen case studies illustrate the challenges of M&E capacity-building in
fragile and conflict-affected states. The addition of Mexico—a country with a well-developed
M&E system—provides a useful point of comparison.1 We note that the demand for M&E data
from newly established governmental systems is often a donor-driven requirement for reporting
1
 For the Mexico comparison, the author used Gloria Rubio’s publications and presentations authored for the
Mexican government. These are as follows:
Rubio, Gloria (October 2011). The Mexican Government’s M&E System. Washington DC: the World Bank.
Rubio, Gloria (May 2010). “Integrating Evaluation into Decision Making: The Mexico Experience.? Presentation
delivered in Accra, Ghana.

                                                                                                               4
and monitoring. Thus, in this paper, building M&E capacity predominantly refers to setting up
monitoring and reporting capabilities, before undertaking the evaluation portion of the process.
Although initially basic, the newly minted monitoring arrangements assist fragile and conflict-
affected countries in supporting efforts to improve service delivery and government
accountability.




                                                                                                   5
List of Acronyms

ADB                Asian Development Bank
AMT                Aligned Monitoring Tool
CAS                Country Assistance Strategy
CFAA               Country Financial Accountability Assessment
CG                 Consultative Group
CPIA               Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
CPRGS              Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy
CSO                Civil Society Organization
DAC                Development Assistance Committee (OECD)
DFID               (UK) Department for International Development
DPPR               Fourth Development Program for Poverty Reduction (Yemen)
EC                 European Commission
EDPRS              Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (Rwanda)
                   Economic, Financial, and Administrative Reform Program
EFARO
                   (Yemen)
GFS                Government Finance Statistics
GSO                General Statistical Office
GTZ                German Agency for International Cooperation
HCS                Hanoi Core Statement
HIPC               Highly Indebted Poor Country
IDA                International Development Association (World Bank Group)
IEG                Independent Evaluation Group (World Bank Group)
IMF                International Monetary Fund
IMT                Independent Monitoring Team
LDC                Least Developed Country
LICUS              Low Income Country Under Stress
M&E                Monitoring and Evaluation
MARD               Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (Vietnam)
MDG                Millennium Development Goal
MfDR               Managing for Development Results
MIS                Management Information System
MOLISA             Ministry of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs (Vietnam)
MOPIC              Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation
MPI                Ministry of Planning and Investment (Vietnam)
MSI                Management Systems International
MTEF               Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
MTR                Mid-Term Review
NGO                Non-Governmental Organization



                                                                                  6
NPA      National Planning Authority (Uganda)
NSDS     National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (Rwanda)
NSIS     National Statistical Indicator System
NSO      National Statistical/Statistics Office
NSS      National Statistical System
ODA      Official Development Assistance
ODI      Overseas Development Institute
OECD     Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
OPM      Oxford Policy Management
PFM      Public Financial Management
PFM      Public Finance Management
PMU      Project Monitoring Unit
PRGF     Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
PRS      Poverty Reduction Strategy
PRSC     Poverty Reduction Support Credit
SEDP     Socio-economic Development Plan
SFD      Social Fund for Development (Yemen)
         Third Socio-Economic Development Plan for Poverty Reduction
TFYP     (Yemen)
UNDP     United Nations Development Programme
USAID    United States Agency for International Development
VAMESP   Vietnam Australia Monitoring & Evaluation Support Programme
VDG      Vietnam Development Goal
VDR      Vietnam Development Report
VHLSS    Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey




                                                                        7
Chapter 1: Cross-Country Analysis for Building M&E Capacity in Fragile and Conflict-
Affected States

The M&E implementation experiences of Vietnam, Rwanda, and Yemen illustrate paths to
success as well as obstacles to reform. Each case study provides detailed information about
M&E champions; the sequence of reforms; accountability relationships; system strengths,
weaknesses, and usage; and some thoughts on next steps. This first chapter uses comparisons
with Mexico as a benchmark to highlight commonalities and differences across all three
countries. The comparisons with Mexico also raise leading questions about incentives, political
economy, challenges countries are likely to face, and sustainability.

In presenting case studies of three countries with vastly different M&E experiences, this study
aims to achieve the following:
     Provide useful takeaways from the experiences of three different countries.
     Increase understanding of the role and effectiveness of incentives in building M&E
       capacity. Explore how each country will use the information produced for decision-
       making and how information will play key roles in future similar initiatives.
     Raise awareness of the political economy implications of building an M&E system.
     Examine the challenges and obstacles each country faced along the way.
     Consider how sustainable M&E capacity is and how likely it will last after project and
       donor efforts end or M&E champions leave government.

What are some useful takeaways from the experiences of Mexico, Rwanda, Vietnam, and
Yemen?

The comparisons across these four countries are summarized into two useful frameworks to help
policymakers and other colleagues that work on the daunting and important task of building
M&E capacity in young systems: mechanics and process of building M&E capacity.

The first framework revolves around the mechanics of building M&E capacity: documenting and
comparing main activities, M&E champions, accountability relationships, and what information
was produced. While there is no single correct path, the country cases illustrate the importance
of utilizing what capacity exists, and for donors to aim to build local capacity and buy-in while
striving to avoid proliferation of indicators and donor-driven reporting demands. Indeed, while
donors played important roles in Rwanda, Vietnam, and Yemen, the focus of the case studies is
more on the role that government and civil society played. Building statistical capacity is clearly
also a key task, and it involved integrating the national statistics office as early as possible and
clarifying roles and responsibilities between it and whatever government agency was overseeing
the results of government programs and policies. For example, in Vietnam, the General
Statistics Office has a clear mandate for monitoring poverty reduction, whereas the Ministry of
Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs uses the information it generates for targeting. Along those
lines, the need to work closely across line ministries to reduce the number of indicators is also
illustrated in many of the country examples. While Rwanda’s Economic Development and
Poverty Reduction Strategy had 93 indicators at the national level and 425 indicators across its
11 sectors, Yemen’s Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation held many workshops


                                                                                                  8
with line ministries to decrease its number of Fourth Development Program for Poverty
Reduction indicators from 450 to below 200.

Mexico, Rwanda, Vietnam, and Yemen—countries with very different experiences,
governments, and political cultures—illustrate what different key activities of advancing M&E
capacity can look like. In the late 1990s, Mexico’s Oportunidades conditional cash transfer
program had a rigorous impact evaluation component that became a model for Mexican public
administration and paved the way for more social development programs to use impact
evaluation methodologies in the future. While Rwanda set up a comprehensive and well-
defined agency to oversee M&E activities, Vietnam built on past successes to inform future
challenges. Yemen used South-South and North-South examples to avoid reinventing the wheel
and learn from what worked for other countries. Donors played a key role, especially in Rwanda
and Yemen.
The rest of this chapter will discuss the second framework, which is a comparison across the
process of such an initiative, from incentives and political economy issues through to challenges
faced and assessment of sustainability.

What are the incentives for building M&E capacity?

There are many different incentives for building M&E capacity, and the process is broad enough
to accommodate them. A common theme of the country experiences in this study is that they all
used high-quality data and information that came out of the M&E process to support national
strategies and inform evidence-based policymaking; the fact that M&E-derived data will have
practical applications is the heart of the process. If the data are poor quality, policymakers will
not use the data. Ultimately, if the data are not being used, a country has no incentive to set up
processes, tools, and capabilities to improve data quality. The countries in this study exemplify
how considerable progress can be made to improve data quality and to ensure that information
will be used. Their experiences can be summed up as follows:

      In Mexico, used as a point of comparison for the three country case studies,
       implementing incentives led to increased transparency and accountability, as well as
       improved efficiency and effective resource allocation. From 2000 to 2006, the
       government conducted more than 500 external evaluations, but used very little of this
       information. But in 2006, Mexico’s Federal Budget and Fiscal Responsibility Law
       established a government-wide performance evaluation system to strengthen transparency
       and accountability, in addition to assessing progress in meeting policy and program
       objectives that would inform performance-based budgetary decision-making.
      Rwanda demonstrated the importance of using M&E information for evidence-based
       policymaking.
            Establishing upward accountability and supporting the government’s control were
               key to improving Rwanda’s M&E capacity.


                                                                                                 9
              The line ministries received government incentives throughout the budget
               process. Indeed, the release of the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction
               Strategy report is strategically timed to influence the debate on resource
               allocations.
            The president’s office dispensed the incentives for building M&E capacity,
               leading to better implementation of policies and oversight of resource allocations.
      Vietnam shows how indicators can support a national strategy.
            The government built M&E capacity to satisfy donor requirements, address
               system weaknesses, support better policy decision-making, improve effective
               resource allocation, and perhaps also to increase transparency.
      Yemen had to first address the proliferation of data, illustrating a common M&E
       challenge of “too much data, not enough information,? before incentives could be
       effective.
            Donors led the initiatives to build M&E capacity, but the incentives included
               support to the government, as well as accountability to donors.
            Although the topic of M&E had been raised in the country for several years
               before the grant approval, no policies or activities had been implemented.

What role does political economy play, and how will governments use the M&E
information produced?

As the political economic context is unique to each country, the role of M&E information and
how it is used differs.

      Mexico’s fiscal concerns led to increased interest in having the Ministry of Finance
       promote public expenditure efficiency and effectiveness in 2006. Also, the Ministry of
       Finance and the National Evaluation Council entered into a strategic partnership in 2007.
       Both agencies worked closely with the Ministry of Public Management on a revised set
       of evaluation guidelines for regulating M&E activities, ensuring evaluation quality and
       usage, creating evaluation counterparts in line ministries, and setting up a systematic
       feedback mechanism.
      Rwanda’s political economy is unique because external donors fund most of the
       government’s budget, making the government more responsive to donors’ needs to report
       measurable results. M&E information also supports the president’s decision-making, and
       the president uses this information to review performance across all levels of
       government. The M&E information also supports the country's decentralization process
       by strengthening accountability mechanisms between the central and sub-national
       governments.
      Vietnam’s government—while not democratically elected—enjoys uncontested
       legitimacy and effective control over its territories. It has a relatively high capacity to
       formulate and implement its policies, including taking long-run strategic perspectives.

                                                                                               10
       The government is also highly committed to poverty reduction, as evidenced by its
       historically remarkable performance in reducing poverty. Vietnam’s development
       continues an egalitarian pattern, especially compared to development in many other fast-
       growing economies. The government has also effectively led the development agenda,
       while actively learning from and selectively applying lessons from donor support. Deeply
       entrenched institutions, including those in the planning system, provide stability and
       accountability, although operating through structures and processes that are quite unlike
       Western democratic models. Conversely, the deeply entrenched institutional
       arrangements, and the incentives generated for individual and organizational behavior,
       may militate against rapid and fundamental reforms.
      The World Bank project profiled in the Yemen section finished only a few months before
       unrest began in the Middle East. Therefore, we are not certain whether the suggested next
       steps to strengthen the sustainability of the M&E capacity were ever implemented. The
       Yemen example illustrates how progress can be interrupted by renewed instability;
       though we hope that the process will continue after hostilities end, including plans for the
       Fourth Development Program for Poverty Reduction to better integrate M&E.

What challenges were faced along the process of building capacity?

Not only does the process of building M&E capacity have many stops and starts along the way,
but also there is no single, correct path given there will be challenges related to issues ranging
from low statistical capacity to political incentives to be less transparent.

      Mexico expected that building a logical framework would help improve consistency and
       quality in program design.
            In practice, however, the Ministry of Finance and line ministry budget officials
               struggled to take full advantage of the framework’s fairly comprehensive
               performance measurement, given the need to provide quarterly reports of
               indicators. Thus, programs were often discouraged from registering a broader set
               of indicators with the Performance Evaluation System that may take a year or
               more to be measured, even if they are necessary to fully account for program
               outcomes.
            Setting meaningful targets for indicators resulting from strategic planning
               exercises was another difficulty. According to the 2008 specific performance
               evaluation, approximately 20 percent of the indicators achieved levels that were
               20 percent higher than the established target values, raising questions about the
               merit of the target-setting process.
      Rwanda’s donors played a key role in supporting capacity building; however, in some
       sectors, such as the health sector, donor reporting demands reportedly overburdened the
       system.


                                                                                                11
   In Vietnam, while the Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy contained
    a more developed and integrated M&E system, its system paralleled the existing planning
    system.
         It is unclear how much the earlier strategy’s M&E system—as opposed to the
            policy matrix for the Poverty Reduction Support Credit—influenced government
            actions. The planning for the poverty reduction strategy influenced the planning
            process for the Socio-economic Development Plan, but the development plan’s
            approach remains only partially results-focused and its M&E approach does not
            amount to a fully developed “M&E system? as defined by the literature. The
            SEDP 2011–2015 preparation timetable did not appear to reorient the planning
            system toward a more thorough results-based approach.
         The 2007 Vietnam Development Report 2007 (World Bank, 2006) noted that
            progress in reforming the strongly entrenched central planning system was partial
            and uneven. The report critiqued the “lack of a coherent conceptual and
            regulatory framework,? as well as the “confusion in ministries, agencies, and
            provinces on what the government can and cannot legitimately plan for.? It also
            noted that “no systematic or consistent guidelines? were tailored to specific needs
            at different levels of government. Official instructions are fairly general, which
            can contribute to innovation among supporters, but also contribute to stagnation to
            those who want to keep the status quo.
   Yemen’s government lacked capacity to actually implement the project and sustained
    political delays that set progress back. The World Bank worked very closely with the
    Yemeni authorities and the M&E unit of the Ministry of Planning and International
    Cooperation to carry out the project as best as possible under the circumstances.
         Low project implementation capacity and political delays affected the
            implementation and some of the final project outcomes.
         The local project coordinator initially faced a steep learning curve.
         Although the grant was approved in March 2007, it did not become effective until
            October of that year. Eventually, a fully-staffed and Ministry-supported M&E unit
            was running. The project coordinator kept in regular contact with the team leader,
            submitting Terms of Reference and contracts for comments and approval, and the
            team leader’s regular supervisory missions took place during his regular biannual
            visits to Yemen. The project coordinator also worked closely with the Yemen
            Country Office on procurement and financial management issues.
         The Yemeni Cabinet had to approve key reports before the project could
            commence. While the team understood the justification for approval, the process
            was lengthy and competed against other, perhaps more urgent, submissions. This
            step also contributed to the delays between project stages.



                                                                                            12
              It was often difficult to find and attract international experts—especially Arabic-
               speaking experts—to come to Yemen.

To what extent will M&E capacity last beyond the profiled donor efforts, projects, or if the
M&E champions leave the government?

There are many unpredictable factors that could influence sustainability of M&E activities and
agreement in place. However, a more useful way to look at this issue may be to see whether the
process of building M&E capacity created a culture that prioritizes evidence-based
policymaking. In that case, even if conflict arises, the M&E champions and/or donors leave, or
there is a regime change, there is still a culture of using results to aid decisionmaking. As in the
case of Yemen, this particularly important in fragile and conflict-affected states, as many of the
program efforts are donor-driven.

      Many of Mexico’s elements for continuity and sustainability in building an M&E system
       rest on a fairly solid legal framework. Demands from civil society and Congress for
       accountability and performance measurement and the economic and political factors that
       contributed to this demand remain valid and are likely to persist. Moreover, M&E
       initiatives at the state level have increased. A number of states, regardless of their
       governing party, have created M&E institutions and systems resembling those at the
       federal level. Although some M&E institutionalizations have been achieved, progress to
       date relies heavily on key champions in the presidency, the line ministries (the Ministries
       of Social Development, Finance, and Public Management), and the National Evaluation
       Council.
      Rwanda made considerable advancements in building M&E capacity over the past 10-15
       years. Rwanda’s system now has reporting structures, working groups, processes, and
       forms embedded across line ministries and at the sub-national government level.
      Vietnam’s incentives continue past the 2009 case study, because M&E capacity was a
       priority for better informed policy decision-making and to satisfy donor requirements.
       Vietnam’s experience shows the substantial institutional capacity that is required for
       moving toward a comprehensive and results-based M&E system, even in favorable
       circumstances. Vietnam’s experience also suggests that the system depends on finance
       and planning systems that link resource allocation to performance and provide sufficient
       autonomy and flexibility over resource use that public sector managers can genuinely be
       held accountable for performance.
      Yemen faced challenges to the sustainability of its M&E capabilities from the M&E
       unit’s relationship with country’s central statistical organization. Line ministries
       particularly lacked access to this data and experienced delays in data gathering and
       reporting. The cabinet passed a resolution to reinforce the statistical organization’s
       integration with the M&E capabilities of the Ministry of Planning and International


                                                                                                 13
       Cooperation and the line ministries, but at the end of the World Bank project, the
       resolution was not in full effect.

These comparisons are briefly summarized in Tables 1.1 and 1.2, on the following pages.




                                                                                          14
        Table 1.1 Mechanics of Building M&E Capacity: Comparison of Mexico, Rwanda, Vietnam, and Yemen

                 Mexico*                             Rwanda                                Vietnam                              Yemen

Key Activities   - Government implemented            - Donors played key role              - Government established             - Government and donors
                 Oportunidades in the late           supporting monitoring training and    monitoring and evaluation for the    worked closely to develop
                 1990s, which had rigorous           activities immediately after          Comprehensive Poverty                the M&E master plan and
                 impact evaluation built into        conflict ended.                       Reduction and Growth Strategy.       strategy
                 project design that became a
                                                     - Rwanda implemented Vision           - General Statistics Office was      - Government and donors
                 role model.
                                                     2020 and its Poverty Reduction        tasked with conducting a biannual    worked closely together to
                 -2006 Federal Budget and            Strategy Paper.                       household living standard survey,    operationalize a M&E unit in
                 Fiscal Responsibility Law                                                 while independent organizations      the Ministry of Planning and
                                                     - The government instituted the
                 established government-wide                                               interviewed citizens directly to     International Cooperation
                                                     National Institute of Statistics in
                 performance evaluation system                                             gather information for analysis.
                                                     Rwanda as the leading statistical
                 - M&E in Mexico evolved into        agency.                               - Donors provided technical
                 the Performance Evaluation                                                assistance to develop the Decision
                 System, which aims to                                                     555 M&E framework for the
                 strengthen transparency and                                               Socio-Economic Development
                 accountability, assess results in                                         Plan 2006-10.
                 policy/program objectives to
                 inform performance-based
                 budgeting decisionmaking
                 process.




                                                                                                                                              15
M&E             - Presidency                    - President                             - Ministry of Planning and           - Former Deputy Prime
Champions                                                                               Investment                           Minister
                - Line Ministries, including   - Prime Minister
                Ministry of Social Development                                          - Legislative branch of              - Former Minister of
                                               - Ministry of Finance and
                                                                                        government                           Ministry of Planning and
                - National Evaluation Council  Economic Planning
                                                                                                                             International Cooperation
                                                                                        - Donors
                                                                                                                             (and current Managing
                                                                                                                             Director of Social Fund for
                                                                                                                             Development)

                                                                                                                             - Vice Minister of the Fourth
                                                                                                                             Development Program for
                                                                                                                             Poverty Reduction

Accountability - National Evaluation Council    - President leads Annual                - Donors, the Ministry of            - At time of analysis, the
Relationships evaluates social sector           Leadership Retreats that review         Planning and Investment, sector      Ministry of Planning and
               programs                         the previous year’s performance of      ministries, and the legislative      International Cooperation
                                                ministries, departments and             branch of government all utilize     coordinated the monitoring
                - Performance Evaluation
                                                government agencies.                    M&E information, though it is        process and reporting to and
                System coordinated by the
                                                                                        not yet used for budget allocation   from other sectors were
                Ministry of Finance, with       - Districts report to the President’s
                                                                                        decisionmaking.                      aligned accordingly.
                technical advice by National    Office through the Imihigo
                Evaluation Council              process.                                - Ministries use M&E information - No specific accountability
                                                                                        to manage projects and programs. relationships were set up at
                - Ministry of Finance is in
                                                                                                                         time of analysis, as the aim
                charge of performance-based
                                                                                                                         was to operationalize and
                budgeting initiative
                                                                                                                         maintain an M&E system
                                                                                                                         focused on poverty
                                                                                                                         reduction.



                                                                                                                                            16
Frameworks    - Performance Evaluation           - Rwanda utilizes four sets of         - Vietnam utilizes a number of     - At time of analysis,
Used/M&E      System covers federal              indicator matrices that are reported   frameworks: the Poverty            Government of Yemen had
Information   spending of executive branch       on biannually, used for donors and     Reduction Support Credit Matrix,   agreements with line
Produced      agencies and federally funded      national and sectoral-level            Framework for ODA projects,        ministries on what
              programs administered at the       indicators.                            Decision 555 M&E framework,        information would be
              local level. Its three main                                               and the Medium-Term                collected and reported, and
                                                 - Rwanda implements a number of
              components are: performance                                               Expenditure Framework              had a partially completed
                                                 national surveys to gather baseline
              indicator monitoring,                                                                                        indicator database.- At time
                                                 demographic, economic, and             - The National Statistical
              evaluation, and a feedback                                                                                   of analysis, Government of
                                                 social indicators.                     Indicator System defines a core
              mechanism.                                                                                                   Yemen had passed a
                                                                                        list of statistics the General
                                                 - At the district and sector levels,                                      resolution to incorporate
              Requires programs to identify                                             Statistics produces, through
                                                 District Development Plans link                                           National Statistics Office
              performance indicators                                                    surveys including the biannual
                                                 subnational strategy and each                                             with the Ministry of Planning
              through a Matrix of Indicators                                            Vietnam Household Living
                                                 ministry writes its own Sector                                            and International
              for results.                                                              Standards Survey.
                                                 Strategic Plan.                                                           Cooperation, as well as line
              - Annual Evaluation Program                                                                                  ministries and other
              which specifies each year what                                                                               agencies.
              evaluation tools will be applied
              to which programs.

              - Following annual
              evaluations, program
              managers, as well as planning,
              evaluation, and budget units
              within ministries, are required
              to provide an evaluation
              response document as
              feedback.


                                                                                                                                         17
        Table 1.2 Building M&E Capacity Process: Comparison of Mexico, Rwanda, Vietnam, and Yemen

                 Mexico*                           Rwanda                                Vietnam                               Yemen

Incentives for   - Increased transparency          - Decentralization                    - Reporting to donors                 - Mainly donor-led efforts to
Building M&E     - Improvements to efficiency      - Upward accountability               - Support for government              support donor reporting
Capacity         - Effectiveness resource          - Reporting to donors.                efficiency                            needs
                 allocation.                                                             - Improved effectiveness of           - Support to the government.
                                                                                         resource allocation
                                                                                         - Feedback into policy and
                                                                                         budgetary decision-making
                                                                                         - Somewhat provide transparency
Political        - Fiscal concerns led to          - Most of the government budget       - A remarkable performance in         - The unrest in the country
Economy          increased pressure for public     is funded by donors.                  poverty reduction and the             and the Middle East only a
                 expenditure efficiency and                                              continuing egalitarian pattern of     few months later illustrates
                 effectiveness in 2006.            - The president has a strong          development has fostered a keen       how progress can be
                                                   interest in using M&E information     emphasis on data.                     interrupted by instability.
                 - The National Evaluation         for decision-making and to support
                 Council, and the Ministries of    decentralization by strengthening     - Deeply entrenched                   - The country had clear plans
                 Finance and Public                accountability mechanisms             institutions—including those in       for the 4th DPPR to better
                 Management worked together        between central and sub-national      the planning system—provide           integrate M&E, and we hope
                 on a revised set of evaluation    governments.                          stability and significant levels of   that the work will pick up
                 guidelines for regulating M&E                                           accountability though operating       where it ended and continue.
                 activities, ensuring evaluation                                         through structures and processes
                 quality and usage, creating                                             that are quite unlike Western
                 evaluation counterparts in line                                         democratic models.
                 ministries, and instituting a
                 systematic feedback
                 mechanism.

Challenges       - The first phase (2000–06) of    - Sectors such as the health sector   - The timetable for the SEDP          - The M&E unit’s
Faced            M&E system development            are overburdened by donor             2011–2015 did not reorient the        relationship with the Central
                 lacked incentives and             reporting demands.                    planning system toward a more         Statistical Organization may
                 institutional arrangements.                                             thorough-going results based          challenge progress.

                                                                                                                                              18
                 More than 500 external                                             approach.                             - Line ministries in particular
                 evaluations were conducted,                                                                              lacked access to statistical
                 but produced very little                                           - Progress in reforming the
                                                                                                                          data and suffered delays in
                 information that was used.                                         strongly entrenched central
                                                                                                                          data gathering and reporting.
                                                                                    planning system was partial and
                 - Another difficulty with SED                                      uneven.                               - Key reports had to be
                 is setting meaningful targets                                                                            approved by the Cabinet
                 for indicators resulting from                                                                            before the project could
                 strategic planning exercises.                                                                            move on to other activities.


Sustainability   - Although some M&E             - Reporting structures, working    - Building M&E capacity was a         - Unrest following the
                 institutionalization has been   groups, processes, and forms are   priority for better informed policy   project hindered progress.
                 achieved, progress to date      embedded across line ministries    decision-making and to satisfy
                 relies heavily on key           and at the sub-national            donor requirements. Substantial       - Many of the government
                 champions in the presidency,    government level.                  institutional capacity was built to   staff working on this
                 the line ministries (the                                           advance these goals.                  initiative were fired.
                 Ministries of Social            - Much of the demand for use
                 Development, Finance and        comes from the President.
                 Public Management), and the
                 National Evaluation Council.




                                                                                                                                         19
          Chapter 2: Building M&E Capacity in Rwanda

Incentives for      - Decentralization
Building M&E        - Upward accountability
Capacity            - Reporting to donors

Political Economy   - Most of the government budget is funded by donors.

                    - The president has a strong interest in using M&E information for decision-making and to support decentralization.

Challenges Faced    - Sectors such as the health sector are overburdened by donor reporting demands.

Sustainability      - Reporting structures, working groups, processes, and forms are embedded across line ministries and at the sub-national government
                    level.

                    - Much of the demand for use comes from the President.

Key Activities      - Donors played key role supporting monitoring training and activities immediately after conflict ended.

                    - Rwanda implemented Vision 2020 and its Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.

                    - The government instituted the National Institute of Statistics in Rwanda as the leading statistical agency.

M&E Champions       - President, Prime Minister, and Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning

Accountability      - President leads Annual Leadership Retreats that review the previous year’s performance of ministries, departments and government
Relationships       agencies.

                    - Districts report to the President’s Office through the Imihigo process.

Frameworks          - Rwanda utilizes four sets of indicator matrices that are reported on biannually, used for donors and national and sectoral-level
Used/M&E            indicators.
Information
Produced            - Rwanda implements a number of national surveys to gather baseline demographic, economic, and social indicators.

                    - At the district and sector levels, District Development Plans link subnational strategy and each ministry writes its own Sector
                    Strategic Plan.


                                                                                                                                               20
Lessons Learned from the Rwanda Experience

By identifying and building on existing M&E capacities and capabilities, rather than starting
over, Rwanda was able to use limited resources wisely and ensure ownership and acceptance of
the new systems. As this case study shows, Rwanda took the following actions:2
     Its capacity-building work adapted existing donor-driven M&E activities.
     Budgetary M&E provided a foundation for future M&E improvements and allowed those
       working on this initiative to develop capabilities gradually.
     To progress toward a full M&E system, it built up its statistical capacity, established a
       statistical baseline, instituted national surveys, and set up a national statistics office.
     It set up a central government agency (MINECOFIN) to coordinate and lead all M&E
       activities, including those within the line ministries and districts.
     The central agency selected and monitored statistical indicators and created high-quality
       reports about those indicators.

These processes were put in place gradually, as Rwanda simultaneously built capacity and M&E
systems. Building capacity and M&E systems simultaneously increased the sense of ownership
among staff, while at the same time reduced dependence on specific staff members to produce
M&E information. Rwanda began with simple budget monitoring and expanded into more
sophisticated M&E tasks.

Over time, accountability relationships developed among the top levels of government,
MINECOFIN, the line ministries, and the districts. When relationships became formalized, each
group provided monthly, quarterly, and annual reports to measure progress toward the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy targets. In Rwanda’s situation, a gradual approach
made sense, since introducing overly complex systems that could not be implemented at the local
level and used with local capacities would have discouraged local staff efforts. Without the
participation of local staff, the overall M&E system-building process would have been
undermined. Because the processes developed gradually, producing M&E information did not
become a burden on small numbers of local staff members. Smaller agencies thus avoided the
loss of skills that would result from high staff turnover.




2
  This case study summarizes the main findings from a World Bank-commissioned report that the Overseas
Development Institute (ODI) completed. The ODI team was led by Geraldine Baudienville and also consisted of
Alexandra Murray-Zmijewski, and Charles Gasana, under the management of Kene Ezemenari, Helena Hwang, and
Gladys Lopez-Acevedo at the World Bank. Keith Mackay also provided substantial comments. Helena Hwang
summarized the findings and included them in the case study, with useful discussions with and comments from
Birgit Hansl, Peace Aimee Niyibizi, Alex Kamurase, and Peter Isabirye from the World Bank office in Kigali,
Rwanda.


                                                                                                        21
                            Figure 2.1. Building M&E Capacity in Rwanda



                                         Begin M&E activities with basic tracking
                                        systems at the sector level on inputs and
                                             outputs around key indicators.




                   Streamline M&E throughout the
                  government while deepening and
                                                                  Expand M&E further across sectors and
                adapting the scope of M&E activities to
                                                                   subnational entities, as capacities are
                 meet the government’s information
                                                                                 built up.
               needs and working to keep M&E systems
                              integrated.




                                         Incorporate more complex frameworks
                                          (including outcome monitoring) once
                                         basic frameworks are mastered and can
                                          be used by financial management and
                                             basic process monitoring (inputs,
                                                  activities, and outputs).



Rwanda’s president and prime minister led the top-down process of building M&E capacity;
because the highest levels of government used M&E information, they reinforced the importance
of M&E activities. The highest levels of government—the president’s and the prime minister’s
offices—drove the culture of performance, tracked progress toward the poverty reduction
strategy goals, and held government staff accountable for achieving results. The directives from
the top used incentives such as national pride, in combination with consequences for insufficient
performance such as the potential loss of one’s job.3 Presenters at the formal Annual Leadership
Retreat provided official reporting to peers and the president himself on performance measured
against the poverty reduction strategy goals and progress on retreat-specific action items from
the previous year.4 This public forum proved very effective in yielding results. For example, both
the president and prime minister’s offices became increasingly involved in information and
performance management of the district Imihigo contracts—performance agreements between
the President and the mayors, which are now formalized around strategic indicators and targets
linked to the poverty reduction strategy and the Millennium Development Goals.

The central coordinating agency, MINECOFIN, received training and technical assistance from
donors to build capacity5, and having an agency such as MINECOFIN responsible for the
management and oversight of M&E activities enhanced sustainability. MINECOFIN’s Planning
3
  According to interviews, underperforming government staff may be transferred to a different and usually less
prestigious post if results are not meeting expectations; in extreme cases, a staff member will lose his or her job.
4
  These retreat-specific action items are generally associated with problem areas in reaching poverty reduction
strategies or Millennium Development Goals. Challenging areas are heavily monitored by the prime minister’s and
president’s office over the year.
5
  Updated information kindly provided by staff from the World Bank’s Kigali office.

                                                                                                                22
Department is the central authority for M&E for the Economic Development and Poverty
Reduction Strategy and leads the national development strategy for planning and coordinating
sectoral and sub-national planning. MINECOFIN’s Budget Department coordinates all sector
and district budget reports and ensures that the budgeting and the medium-term expenditure
framework are in line with national economic development and the poverty reduction strategy
indicators. Within the Budget Department is a new unit, the Project Management and Monitoring
Unit, headed by an M&E director, a newly created position. The unit manages, monitors, and
reports on the implementation of development and investment projects. It works closely with the
Directorate of National Development Planning & Research to provide progress reports for
development projects. The External Finance Unit is the liaison between donors and
MINECOFIN and monitors donor financial support, which affects budget and planning.

In January 2011, MINECOFIN began recruiting poverty reduction strategy facilitators who are
based within line ministries and agencies. Facilitators are now placed in the agencies for Health,
Agriculture, Trade and Industry, Education, Infrastructure, Information Communication
Technology, Justice, Youth, and Kigali City, as well as for all provinces and the National
Institute of Statistics of Rwanda. The facilitators partner closely with MINECOFIN to ensure
that poverty reduction strategy priorities are reflected during implementation and that cross-
cutting issues are integrated into poverty reduction strategy planning and M&E. The facilitators
also assist sectors in establishing and overseeing the M&E system. Their additional
responsibilities include ensuring that sector working groups and joint sector reviews are well
organized and use accurate information.

Rwanda relied on key entry points in building M&E capabilities. M&E activities ideally are
designed to support political priorities and national strategies to ensure relevant information is
produced and used, as well as to strengthen ownership and sustainability of the M&E system.
Despite obstacles, the importance of accountability was a key incentive that moved the process
forward in Rwanda—a state recovering from a period of fragility and conflict. M&E systems
furthered the state-building process in Rwanda by improving coordination and defining
accountability relationships among different parts of the government. The four key entry points
from these incentives that enabled progress are listed below:

Entry point 1: Rwanda’s national strategy required M&E systems to improve
understanding of the population’s needs and to collect baseline information for poverty
reduction strategy planning. The Vision 2020 plan for long-term economic development
emphasized the importance of M&E, ensuring that “poverty reduction achieved through the
medium-term expenditure framework will be monitored and will feed back into the elaboration
of sector and provincial plans.?6 Rwanda’s 2000 Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
reaffirmed the government’s commitment to implementing M&E activities, stating that
“statistics are essential to plan and monitor the poverty reduction strategies and to successfully
implement a development framework.?7 The interim strategy also identified key priorities for the
development of M&E systems and activities, including building statistical capacities and
collecting baseline information through a national census and household living condition
surveys.

6
    Republic of Rwanda, 2000a.
7
    Republic of Rwanda, 2000c.

                                                                                               23
Entry point 2: Rwanda’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper began a concerted effort to
create and implement a more formal M&E system, notably by outlining key indicators and
identifying institutions responsible for collecting and monitoring overall progress. The
second generation Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy drew lessons from
the process of drawing up the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, in which some priority areas
saw progress but others were hindered by implementation problems. The poverty reduction
strategy would achieve greater efficiency from improving incentives to execute policy and
relaxing the constraints that prevented policies from being carried out. From this perspective,
policymakers implemented measures, including public administration reforms, increased
alignment between donors and the poverty reduction strategy priorities, and improved
monitoring systems at the sectoral and district levels to enable closer follow-up on progress.

Entry point 3: M&E became a political tool to support decentralization, a key component
of Rwanda’s state-building process, through strengthened accountability mechanisms
between central and sub-national governments. The Rwandan government transferred some
funding and responsibilities for poverty reduction from the central government to the sub-
national governments: It also introduced M&E activities to measure progress at the sub-national
level and to support accountability mechanisms between central and decentralized entities. In
2000, MINALOC, a new ministry for local government, community development, and social
affairs, was created to assist the central government in overseeing the activities and performance
of sub-national governments. However, at this early stage, the lack of local administrative staff
qualified to design and implement programs undermined decentralization efforts.

Entry point 4: Donors played a major role by demanding M&E information for their own
reporting and also by providing technical assistance to help build local capacities. Donors
have provided much technical assistance to all Rwandan government agencies. Donor support
was crucial to restoring government functions, building statistical and reporting standards, and
creating an opportunity for MINECOFIN to become a central leading champion for M&E. In
2008, the Rwandan government developed a Common Performance Assessment Framework for
joint government and budget support and for donor monitoring of government programs. The
performance assessment framework is the basis of support for donor disbursements to the
government’s budget and is a subset of the government’s monitoring framework for the
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy.

Country Context and Political Economy

Following Rwanda’s devastating 1994 genocide and civil war, the country has made substantial
progress in stabilizing and rehabilitating its economy. Its first Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper,
finalized in 2002, prioritized medium-term challenges and allowed the national priority areas of
human development, economic infrastructure, governance, private sector development,
institutional capacity building, rural development, and agricultural transformation to be adapted
at the sectoral, provincial, and district levels. Since then, Rwanda has achieved major economic
progress, led by the agriculture and services sectors. However, poverty reduction results have
been disappointing, leading the government to prioritize this goal in the new Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy, launched in 2008. In addition, Rwanda’s Vision


                                                                                                24
2020 plan puts forth the country’s long-term development goal of moving toward a knowledge-
based, service-oriented economy by 2020.

Decentralization, upward accountability, and control have all been instrumental in increasing the
demand for and use of M&E information in Rwanda. The political commitment to
decentralization has grown over time, as witnessed in the Economic Development and Poverty
Reduction Strategy, which introduces district-level programs through the Vision 2020 Umurenge
Programme.8 District authority has been strengthened with the 2006 introduction of the
performance-based district Imihigo contracts between the president and the mayors and
supervised by the prime minister. The Imihigo contracts attempt to accelerate the implementation
of priority programs by reinforcing district accountability. The president’s and prime minister’s
offices have become increasingly involved in the performance and information management of
these contracts, which are now formalized around strategic indicators and targets. The Imihigo
contracts were not initially based on specific indicators, but rather on a list of priorities. Now,
specific indicators are more formally defined and linked to the Millennium Development Goals,
the Vision 2020 plan, and Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy indicators.
The president uses M&E information to review performance across levels of government and to
inform decision making.

The Three Phases of Building M&E Capacity in Rwanda

Phase 1: The immediate post-conflict period (1994–99).
Immediately after the end of the conflict, the Rwandan government made the delivery of basic
services a priority. M&E at the time was very limited and mainly consisted of reporting ongoing
activities. During this period, the MINECOFIN agency became the central coordinating body—
in fact, MINECOFIN reported to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)—
and donors supported improving the government’s statistical base and providing basic training
for simple monitoring activities. Donor funding was backed up by World Bank and IMF M&E
systems. The World Bank allocated funding to sectors and monitored basic status reports on
procurement and disbursement, arrival and distribution of supplies, and progress of
reconstruction activities. Procurement agencies prepared monthly and quarterly reports, and
MINECOFIN reported quarterly on the execution of the economic recovery program. In
comparison, the IMF’s M&E requirements focused on macroeconomic information and the
assessment of public sector reforms; IMF staff assisted MINECOFIN and National Bank of
Rwanda in compiling the data. Table 2.1 lists the M&E efforts related to the World Bank and
IMF activities.




8
  Rwanda is now divided into five provinces ( intara) (the Northern, Western, Eastern and Southern provinces and
Kigali City) and subdivided into 30 districts (akarere). These are further divided into 406 umurenge, or subdistricts,
which are subdivided into 2,150 cells (akagari) and finally 14,975 umudugudu, which represent the smallest
administrative division.

                                                                                                                  25
            Table 2.1. Phase I (1994–99): Key M&E Frameworks and Activities
 M&E framework               M&E activities
 World      Bank     program Procurement and disbursement reporting by procurement
 monitoring                  officers
                             Execution of reports by MINECOFIN
                             Reports submitted to the World Bank
 IMF macroeconomic reporting Macroeconomic reporting
                             Reform progress reports
                             Reports submitted to IMF

Phase II: The intermediate period (2000–04).
Increased political stability enabled the Rwandan government to start planning a longer-term
development strategy for the country. During this time Rwanda generated a nascent M&E system
with a solid statistical baseline, targets linked to suitable country-specific strategies, and
measurable inputs based on a budgeting system. The preparation of the Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper and Vision 2020 planned Rwanda’s objectives, priorities, and major policies for
the next five years to achieve the country’s long-term development goals. Rwanda provided a
statistical baseline and strategic goals and established a medium-term expenditure framework for
budget monitoring that was the backbone of the M&E system. The new framework linked
policymaking, planning, and budgeting into the annual budgeting process. Table 2.2 details the
six stages of the comprehensive medium-term expenditure framework. In addition, the Rwandan
government created a planning unit within MINECOFIN. For the first time, line ministries
became responsible for their own reporting in 2004. Table 2.3 lists the key M&E activities
during this phase.




                                                                                             26
 Table 2.2. The Six Stages of the Comprehensive Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
    STAGE                                  CHARACTERISTICS
  I. Development of a                     A macroeconomic model that projects
     Macroeconomic and Fiscal              revenues and expenditure in the medium term
     Framework                             (multi-year)
 II. Development of Sectoral              Agreement on sector objectives, outputs, and
     Programs                              activities
                                          Review and development of programs and
                                           subprograms
                                          Program cost estimation
III. Development of Sectoral              Analysis of inter- and intra-sectoral trade-offs
     Expenditure Frameworks               Consensus-building on strategic resource
                                           allocation
IV. Definition of Sector Resource         Setting medium-term sector budget ceilings
    Allocations                            (with cabinet approval)

V. Preparation of Sectoral                Medium-term sectoral programs based on
    Budgets                                budget ceilings
VI. Final Political Approval              Presentation of budget estimates to the cabinet
                                           and parliament for approval
   Source: PEM Handbook (World Bank, 1998a: 47–51), adapted by Le Houerou and Taliercio, p. 3 Working
   Paper, February 2002.



            Table 2.3. Phase II (2000–04): Key M&E Frameworks and Activities
 M&E
                M&E activities
 framework
 Vision 2020    Set long-term strategy, baseline indicators (2000), and targets (2010 & 2020)
 Interim
                Identified survey priorities for obtaining baselines including the Household
 Poverty
                Living Conditions Survey (EICV), the Census, the Demographic and Health
 Reduction
                Survey (DHS), the Core Welfare Indicators Survey (CWIQ), the Participatory
 Strategy
                Poverty Assessment Survey (PPA)
 Paper
 Poverty        Annual reporting on 180 indicators for monitoring the impact of poverty
 Reduction      reduction
 Strategy       Annual budget reports (medium-term expenditure framework) for monitoring
 Paper          the budget inputs and outputs

Phase III: The development period (2005–10).
Rwanda took major steps to move toward a modern results-based M&E system. Phase III
involved the government’s efforts to formalize M&E and to improve the statistical base by
establishing the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) as the leading statistical
agency in 2006. Rwanda’s objectives were to harmonize and raise statistical standards across
government agencies, and the national institute has improved data quality and reporting
standards for the statistics that it produces, as well as assisted other government agencies. The


                                                                                                  27
institute’s efforts have raised the statistical base for M&E. The Rwandan government began
planning for the second generation Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, with the introduction of
the current Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy in 2007. The institute was
also central to the creation of the poverty reduction strategy’s flagship—the Vision 2020
Umurenge Programme—an important step for national strategies and M&E. The development of
the poverty reduction flagship policy directly resulted from the outcomes of the national
household living conditions survey, Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 2, which
was carried out with external technical assistance from the national statistics office, which at the
time was under MINECOFIN. The government and the development community recognize that
further leadership efforts will be required to continue to develop and maintain an effective
system.

            Table 2.4. Phase III (2005–10): Key M&E Frameworks and Activities
 M&E framework        M&E activities
 Creation of the      Producing statistics, standardizing the quality of statistics, conducting
 National Institute   national surveys including the Integrated Household Living Conditions
 of Statistics of     Survey 2)
 Rwanda
 Economic             Biannual reporting on 425 indicators (individual line ministry matrices,
 Development and      national results and policy matrices, CPAF, DPAF)
 Poverty              Sectoral public expenditure reviews
 Reduction
 Strategy
 Imihigo contracts    Monthly, quarterly, and annual performance reporting from the districts

Overall M&E System Structure

M&E champions
There were three M&E champions during this process: the president and prime minister, the
donors, and MINECOFIN.

The president and prime minister. The president and prime minister were instrumental in
developing an M&E system. The process of developing an M&E system benefitted from the
strong leadership and support of the president and prime minister; the information generated was
regularly sent to them for review and use in decision making. Because the top level of
government reviewed and used the information generated through the M&E process,
stakeholders in Rwanda had a strong incentive to move the process forward, as well as a
continued incentive to keep improving the timeliness, quality, and reliability of information. The
president and prime minister used the information to hold line ministries and district mayors
accountable for results.

Donors. Donor support provided guidance in the development of M&E processes. Clear
differences exist in the quality of information collected from sectors that received support and




                                                                                                 28
those that did not.9 Donors build demand, increase local capacity, and often provide the
framework and initiate the information gathering and usage that starts an M&E system. Out of
eleven sectors, only the Health and Education sectors currently have a management information
system, although management information systems for Agriculture and Labor are in progress.
Donors use M&E information for upcoming rounds of budget support disbursements, which
currently account for approximately half of the government budget in Rwanda. The budget
heavily relies on donor grants, which in 2010–11 accounted for 39 percent of total
expenditures.10

MINECOFIN. MINECOFIN, which received training and technical assistance from donors to
build capacity, also is a leader in the M&E process. Integrating the annual Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy report results into the decision-making process for
budget allocations has strengthened MINECOFIN’s leverage with other key actors to move the
process forward and collaborate on improving M&E.

MINECOFIN leads and manages the M&E system and continues to coordinate the planning
process, particularly for Vision 2020 and the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction
Strategy; MINECOFIN, like all other line ministries, is accountable to the president. Following
the end of the Rwandan conflict, MINECOFIN received technical assistance from the World
Bank and the IMF to build M&E capacity. MINECOFIN carries out its leadership and
coordinating role through three key departments (the Planning and the Budget Departments and
the External Finance Unit), as illustrated in Figure 2.2. MINECOFIN also reviews a number of
reports before transmittal to the president and prime minister.




9
  Since 2000, the largest budget support donors have been the World Bank, the European Commission (EC), and
Department for International Development (DfID) (Chiche, 2007; Republic of Rwanda, 2008a).9 As of 2009, there
were nine budget support donors: six gave general and sectoral budget support (the African Development Bank
(AfDB), DFID, EC, Germany, the Netherlands, the World Bank); one gave only general budget support (Sweden);
and two gave only sectoral budget support (Belgium and Norway).
10
   Republic of Rwanda, Figures provided by the World Bank’s Kigali office.

                                                                                                          29
                      Figure 2.2. The MINECOFIN Organizational Structure




M&E Information Produced and Main Actors

Surveys. Vision 2020 and the Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper expressed a need for
Rwanda to establish a statistical baseline. Therefore, the government carried out a number of
national surveys to gather baseline demographic, economic, and social data. These include the
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey, the Census, Public Expenditure Tracking
Survey , the Demographic and Health Survey, the Core Welfare Indicators Survey, the
Participatory Poverty Assessment Survey, and several annual agricultural surveys on food
production. Phase III of Rwanda’s process involved the government’s efforts to formalize M&E
and to improve the statistical base by establishing a national statistics office, the National
Institute of Statistics of Rwanda to harmonize and raise statistical standards across government
agencies. After the national institute became the leading national statistical agency in 2006, the
government began planning for the second generation Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, which
culminated in the introduction of the current Economic Development and Poverty Reduction
Strategy in 2007. The national institute has improved data quality and reporting standards for
statistics production, and it also provides technical assistance to other government agencies,
improving the statistical base for M&E overall. In keeping with national strategies and the
importance of M&E, the national institute was central to the development of the flagship Vision
2020 Umurenge Programme. The flagship program directly resulted from the Integrated
Household Living Conditions Survey 2outcomes and was carried out with external technical
assistance by the national statistics institute, which was under MINECOFIN at the time.

M&E Framework. The 2007 poverty reduction strategy set a five-year plan to work toward the
longer-term goals of Vision 2020 and the Millennium Development Goals. Under the poverty
reduction strategy, the M&E framework uses four sets of indicator matrices, which are reported
on biannually and provide information for donors as well as national- and sectoral-level
indicators. Line ministries, districts, and donors have been harmonized into the framework,
which using the following indicator matrices:

                                                                                               30
1. Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy Results and Policy Matrix—
This national level matrix summarizes the key poverty reduction strategy indicators from all
sector matrices that the government and stakeholders use to monitor national development
towards poverty reduction strategy goals. It includes 93 indicators. The release of the poverty
reduction strategy annual report is strategically timed to influence the debate on resource
allocation. In March and April of each year, all sectors undergo joint sector reviews that look
back critically at performance over the past year and identify priorities and strategies for the
years ahead. Based on this analytical work, the line ministries prepare annual progress reports
and strategic plans in line with government priorities and budget requests.11

2. Sector-Specific Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy Matrices—The
poverty reduction strategy facilitators who designed and completed the sector logframes (logical
frameworks) initially created these matrices. Each line ministry has a poverty reduction strategy
logframe and an indicator matrix. Approximately 425 indicators exist for all 11 sectors. The
government and stakeholders use the logframe approach to monitor sectoral development, and
sector working groups review it for quality. Sector indicators are selected through a participatory
process guided by the overarching priorities of the poverty reduction strategy and coordinated by
the poverty reduction strategy facilitators based in line ministries, who follow the SMART12
guidelines. The poverty reduction strategy facilitators—semi-expert local contractors who were
tasked with designing and completing the sector logframes—were key to the success of the
logframes. The facilitators had some M&E skills, but also received on-the-job training and
learned through the process of defining indicators, coordinating stakeholders’ views, and
ensuring alignment with the poverty reduction strategy priorities. They were guided by the
MINECOFIN Planning Department, which acted as a coordinator, guided the facilitators, who
remained on contract to keep them incentivized. The facilitators also acted as M&E sector
experts and trainers for the sectoral staff.13

3. Common Performance Assessment Framework—This framework is a subset of 47
indicators from the national-level Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy
results and policy matrix. The framework monitors government commitments that were made in
budget support agreements to inform future disbursements. All budget support partners use the
framework, which includes 45 indicators selected from sector indicators.14 The framework
incorporates multiple data sources including sector information systems (e.g., the health
information management system and agricultural crop assessments), MINECOFIN fiscal data,
and Imihigo contract reports and surveys.

4. Donor Performance Assessment Framework—This framework forms part of a mutual
review process designed to strengthen mutual accountability at the national level. The donor
framework assesses bilateral and multilateral donor and government performance against 31
indicators in the seven areas listed on the following page:


11
   Republic of Rwanda, 2007e.
12
   Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Timebound.
13
   Information on EDPRS facilitators was collected in interviews with MINECOFIN staff.
14
    Common Performance Assessment Framework, April 28 2011 version, provided by the World Bank’s Kigali
office.

                                                                                                    31
      Financing national strategies in support of the Millennium Development Goals and
       Vision 2020
      Using national systems and institutions to strengthen ownership sustainability and reduce
       transaction costs
      Facilitating longer-term planning and implementation through predictable development
       financing
      Reducing transaction costs and strengthening partnerships through a coordinated
       approach
      Streamlining delivery at the sector level through the effective use of comparative
       advantage
      Providing sector-specific indicators
      Providing budget support that enhances ownership and predictability and reduces
       transaction costs

District-Level M&E. At the district level, District Development Plans were established to link
sub-national strategy to the 2007 poverty reduction strategy. However, the Imihigo contracts are
the main method of performance management at the district level and have recently been
formalized around strategic indicators and targets linked to the 2007 poverty reduction strategy
and the Millennium Development Goals. The Imihigo indicators—reported monthly, quarterly,
and annually—are more comprehensive in capturing the 2007 poverty reduction strategy, the
Millennium Development Goals, and sector- and district-specific priorities, and are used by the
line ministries for district-level data. When the Imihigo contracts were first introduced in 2006,
districts chose indicators, not all of which reflected key national priorities. By 2008, the line
ministries demanded that the central agencies MINECOFIN and MINALOC develop new
guidelines and reporting structures so that districts would provide required information.

District data collection comprises more than 100 indicators to compile three monthly reports for
MINALOC and MINECOFIN. The Imihigo program requires annual plans (signed by the
president) and monthly reports. Districts send monthly reports to MINALOC, which in turn
submits quarterly reports to the Office of the Prime Minister. The quality of these reports is
verified by quarterly visits from the prime minister and the line ministers to the provinces to
review implementation and progress of strategic plans. MINALOC coordinates the substantive
evaluation, with oversight from the Office of the Prime Minister, and presents a report to the
president at an annual national evaluation event. At these events, district governors also present
summary performance reports and strategic plans for the future. Throughout the rest of the year,
the strategic policy unit in the Office of the President periodically requests information on
different aspects of public policy development and implementation.

M&E for Sector-level and Line Ministries. Each ministry writes its own five-year sector
strategic plan that is aligned with the 2007 poverty reduction strategy. They also write annual
action plans that are based on the sector-specific matrix indicators and require biannual progress
reports. The budget sets resources for strategy implementation and requires a quarterly execution
report. The results of the progress of the poverty reduction strategy and budget execution are
discussed in the joint sector and joint sector budget reviews. MINECOFIN coordinates and
receives all reporting. The Education and Health sectors have been leaders in this process. The
joint sector budget reviews occur twice a year, feed into the national budget review, and provide

                                                                                               32
a space for dialogue on performance and policy with all relevant stakeholders. The sector
working groups develop the sector strategic plans that feed into the poverty reduction strategy.
Poverty reduction strategy facilitators work with the sector working groups to ensure adherence
to M&E best practices and to streamline M&E matrices across government. Sector working
groups are an essential tool for informed dialogue on sector-specific technical issues and an
important policy coordination mechanism between government, donors, and other stakeholders.
Line ministries, coordinating with the MINECOFIN Planning Office, plan sectoral strategies in
line with the poverty reduction strategy and prepare sector budgets in coordination with the
MINECOFIN Budget Office. Their indicators, reports and reviews are linked to the strategy.

Accountability Relationships

Rwanda’s M&E system is producing information that has improved in quality and timeliness,
which increases the government’s use of M&E information. The timing of the poverty reduction
strategy report feeds into the budgeting process, allowing decision makers to use M&E
information in the debate on resource allocations. As mentioned earlier, M&E has been used
between the central government and the line ministries, as well as between the central
government and the sub-national governments. This process of using M&E information is
illustrated in the established accountability relationships.

Accountability to the President and Annual Leadership Retreats. The Annual Leadership
Retreats (involving the president, prime minister, ministries, departments, and government
agencies) began in 2005 to review the previous year’s performance and anticipate the subsequent
year’s implementation. Attendees discuss performance against targets, and officials are
encouraged to form strategic policy actions to counteract problems in struggling areas. The
annual forum provides strong leadership for results-based M&E and a significant focus on
meeting targets. Fear of being criticized in front of peers is a strong incentive for agency and
department officials to show results. When a challenge is identified, the agency is required to
regularly report to the Prime Minister’s Office. The continuous assessment ensures that agencies
and departments adhere to recommendations, overcome challenges, and meet performance
targets.

The Imihigo process characterizes the relationship between the Office of the President and the
districts. District officials have incentives to consistently adhere to the targets: fear of
disappointing the president, a financial reward of RWF5 million, and the pride associated with
being the winning district (with widely circulated results). By 2010, the Imihigo contracts have
sufficiently improved to become an effective M&E tool in the wider poverty reduction strategy
M&E efforts. The contracts, signed between district mayors and the president, actually stimulate
competition within and among local governments, and at the end of the year, the contracts are
again presented to the president in a ceremony called kurata ibigwi, which is a day for mayors to
show accountability in public and hold national dialogue over key issues. This annual ritual also
opens up local authorities’ activities to public and central government scrutiny and ends with
rewards for good performance and local innovation.
When the Imihigo contracts were first introduced in 2006, the districts chose indicators that did
not always reflect key national priorities. By 2008, line ministries demanded that MINECOFIN
and MINALOC develop new guidelines and reporting structures so that districts could provide

                                                                                              33
them with required information. Imihigo indicators are now more comprehensive and capture
higher quality information. Most Imihigo contracts were conceptualized as annual rolling plans
for the District Development Plans, so the indicators now strongly harmonized with the district
plans. Over time, Imihigo evaluations have revealed the need for changes and adjustments, so at
present, some Imihigo contracts are no longer fully aligned to the District Development Plans,
except for select districts that have regularly updated their five-year plans.

Strengths and weaknesses
As noted earlier, a key strength of Rwanda’s M&E system was the role of donors in the early
stages. Donors generated demand for M&E information and contributed to building capacity at a
crucial time. Coordination between donors in the early stages provided relatively good aid
harmonization and alignment, which helped to avoid overburdening limited local capacities or
undermining local efforts to build M&E systems by imposing additional frameworks and
requirements. However, having a Donor Performance Assessment Framework outside of the
national framework is a weakness that needs to be addressed. The president and prime minister’s
roles in the results agenda have been important, because as leaders in the highest levels of
government, they have rewarded good performance and penalized poor performance and the
failure to achieve goals, including demotion and firings.

While Rwanda has extensive monitoring and use of reporting in budget allocation decisions, it
does not yet have the capacity for analyzing results and evaluating either planning or budgeting.
Despite progress, Rwanda still faces a number of challenges, mainly related to M&E capacity
limitations. Biannual Common Performance Assessment Framework and poverty reduction
strategy matrix discussions lack baselines for some data and lack appropriate, reliable, and
timely monitoring indicators. Examples of Common Performance Assessment Framework
indicators that lack baselines and remain unmeasured include the following: “Under age 5
mortality attributable to confirmed malaria,? “The percentage of households in the bottom two
categories of extreme poverty by UBUDEHE15 classifications,? and “the number of new non-
farm jobs created.?16 Also, Donor Performance Assessment Framework indicator 8, “The
percentage of ODA17 united,? has not been assessed because of data unavailability; its
discontinuation has been proposed.18 In planning, the annual progress report published for the
poverty reduction strategy does not analyze the results, but simply examines what is on and off
track and presents some ideas on how to amend problematic areas. The progress contains no
further analysis to examine whether the policies are actually effective at reducing poverty. On
the budget side, several sectoral public expenditure reviews have been conducted, as well as a
public expenditure tracking survey. However, these assessments are not yet systematically
carried out across all sectors and are conducted by consultants—who likely do not use or
integrate the findings in the way that government staff would. A key challenge of the capacity


15
   "Ubudehe", a traditional Kinyarwnda word that defines the collective effort employed towards solving social
problems.
16
   Common Performance Assessment Framework, April 28 2011 version provided by the World Bank ’s Kigali
office.
17
   ODA stands for Official Development Assistance.
18
   Proposed Donor Performance Assessment Framework targets for FY 2011/12 and FY 2012/13, provided by the
World Bank’s Kigali office.

                                                                                                           34
building process is when donors overburden the system with reporting demands, such as those in
Rwanda’s health sector.

The strengths and weaknesses of the Rwanda M&E system are further illustrated in Figure 2.3
below.

               Figure 2.3. Strengths and Weaknesses of Rwanda’s M&E System

                     Strengths                                    Weaknesses

      •Top-down approach and strong                 •Overall M&E capacity limitations.
       involvement and usage from the               •Uneven quality of statistics, relevance
       highest level of government (the              across indicators, reporting, and
       president and prime minister) made            analyses vary across sectors.
       M&E activities a priority.                   •Lack of time and skills to evaluate
      •Strengthened accountability                   information.
       mechanisms between the central               •Inability to cope with reporting at
       government and sub-national                   district level.
       government and sectors.
                                                    •Proliferation of indicators and “too
      •Donor technical assistance is successful      much data, not enough information?
       in increasing local capacity for              (400 reports sent to the Office of the
       information collected and generating          Prime Minister every year, 425
       initial demand for M&E information.           Economic Development and Poverty
      •Relatively good aid harmonization and         Reduction Strategy performance
       alignment.                                    indicators).
                                                    •M&E activities that occur outside of
                                                     the national framework.



Sustainability and Next Steps for Strengthening Results-Based M&E in Rwanda

This chapter illustrates the advancement of the past 10–15 years in building M&E capacity in
Rwanda. Reporting structures, working groups, processes, tools, and templates embedded across
line ministries and at the sub-national government level have contributed to the sustainability of
the M&E systems. The use of data is at a high level, and the emphasis on results from the
president’s and donors’ perspectives have significantly contributed to integrating this work.

During the 2010 field visit to Rwanda to gather information for this case study, the research team
was able to observe how the government had begun additional programs to further M&E
capacity. For academic education and public sector training, the Public Sector Capacity Building
Secretariat worked with Rwandan academic institutions to develop and launch M&E training for
government employees, as well as a degree course in the School of Finance and Banking.
MINECOFIN also implemented several additional capacity-building efforts: it sponsored an
initiative to house a planning department in each line ministry and a training of M&E trainers, at



                                                                                               35
which international staff trained 37 MINECOFIN staff and poverty reduction strategy facilitators
to conduct future M&E training.




                                                                                             36
          Chapter 3: Building M&E Capacity in Vietnam

Incentives for      - Reporting to donors
Building M&E        - Support for government efficiency
Capacity            - Feedback into policy and budgetary decision-making
                    - Somewhat provide transparency
Political Economy   - A remarkable performance in poverty reduction and the continuing egalitarian pattern of development has fostered a keen emphasis
                    on data.

                    - Deeply entrenched institutions provide stability and significant levels of accountability though operating quite unlike Western
                    democratic models.

Challenges Faced    - The timetable for the SEDP 2011–2015 did not reorient the planning system toward a more thorough-going results based approach.

                    - Progress in reforming the strongly entrenched central planning system was partial and uneven.

Sustainability      - Building M&E capacity was a priority for better informed policy decision-making and to satisfy donor requirements.

Key Activities      - Government established monitoring and evaluation for the Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy.

                    - General Statistics Office tasked with conducting a biannual household living standard survey, while independent organizations
                    interviewed citizens directly to gather information for analysis.

                    - Donors provided technical assistance to develop the Decision 555 M&E framework for the Socio-Economic Development Plan 2006-
                    10.

M&E Champions       - Ministry of Planning and Investment, Legislative branch of government, and Donors

Accountability      - Donors, the Ministry of Planning and Investment, sector ministries, and the legislative branch of government all utilize M&E
Relationships       information for project and program management, though it was not yet used for budget allocation decisionmaking.

Frameworks          - Vietnam utilizes a number of frameworks: the Poverty Reduction Support Credit Matrix, Framework for ODA projects, Decision 555
Used/M&E            M&E framework, and the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Information
Produced            - The National Statistical Indicator System defines a core list of statistics the General Statistics produces through surveys.


                                                                                                                                                 37
Lessons Learned from the Vietnam Experience

As this chapter will show,19 the process of strengthening results-based M&E is closely tied to
strengthening and reforming the public finance and planning systems. Without a clear link
between resource allocation and performance, there will be few incentives to encourage the
systematic use of results-based approaches. In Vietnam’s case, engaging the Ministry of Finance
to use M&E information in its project review and budget allocation decision-making processes
became a priority.

While Vietnam’s M&E capacity is still low, the country has fairly successfully made initial
efforts to strengthen M&E in response to donor requirements. Vietnam has implemented a range
of parallel initiatives, including introducing innovations in the planning system, piloting a
medium-term expenditure framework, and strengthening the statistical systems, which have
increased the focus on results and on enhanced M&E systems. Vietnam adopted its first poverty
reduction strategy when it had already made staggering achievements in bringing about poverty
reduction in more than fifteen years of economic reform and in the absence of a comprehensive
M&E system. The process of statistical system development—under way for almost two
decades—is still not coherently managed, however. While Vietnam has made substantial
progress, it still faces a significant agenda of capacity strengthening, particularly at the sub-
national level.

The move toward a comprehensive and results-based M&E system requires substantial
institutional capacity, even in a favorable environment. A successful results-based M&E system
depends on finance and planning systems that provide incentives for performance information,
link resource allocation to performance, and provide sufficient autonomy and flexibility over
resource use so that public sector managers can genuinely be held accountable for performance.
But this type of M&E system represents an unrealistic short- to medium-term objective in a
fragile or conflict-affected state. In Vietnam, the key priority for an M&E system is to sharply
focus on a small number of key indicators that are critical to achieving poverty reduction and
sustained transition away from fragility. The system is also likely to focus on strengthening
accountability systems to improve service delivery, where sources of information and the
capacity to collect and interpret this information are both likely to be in scarce supply.

The type of M&E information that is potentially relevant to stakeholders depends on the degree
of autonomy that resource users have. Within a strictly centrally planned system, resource
managers are held accountable for outputs produced with the inputs that are supplied to them.
Vietnam has made progress toward making information more publicly available, particularly
through making information available online. Available information includes budget information
that was until recently a state secret, data from the General Statistical Office, and some raw

19
  This chapter summarizes a larger report on Vietnam’s M& E system, commissioned in August 2009 and managed
by Vera Wilhelm in the Poverty Reduction and Equity Group. The report, authored by Vu Cuong and Stephen Jones
of Oxford Policy Management, was researched and written in partnership with the Oxford Policy Management
Group and the World Bank Vietnam Country Office. The study is based on interviews undertaken by a World Bank-
OPM team in Vietnam during the week of April 6, 2009, as well as a review of documentation. The list of those who
were interviewed and the documents that were consulted is attached at the end of the report. In addition, the team
made a case study visit to Hoa Binh province. Information about the study was provided to interviewees by email (in
English or Vietnamese) prior to the interviews. The full bibliography of the literature review that accompanied this
report is in Appendix A. Helena Hwang conducted additional interviews and document reviews to supplement the
report for this paper.

                                                                                                                38
survey data for research and analytical purposes; however, this information is not consistently
presented in a readily accessible or interpretable format.

Vietnam has taken steps to strengthen use of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) information and
to move toward the use of results-based planning approaches. These actions are part of the
process of moving away from an entrenched central planning system, where the demand for
information and the realization of the need for evidence-based policymaking is strengthening.
The country’s 2006–10 Socio-economic Development Plan sought to establish a comprehensive
set of indicators within a logical framework; however, the framework is not being used for
monitoring development plan performance. A number of key steps are illustrated in Figure 3.1.

Figure 3.1. Building an M&E System and Capacity in Vietnam




                                                                                            39
The Country Context and Political Economy
This study seeks to identify lessons for countries developing M&E in more fragile contexts.
Vietnam’s situation is, in many senses, the polar opposite of a fragile context. The government,
while not democratically elected, enjoys uncontested legitimacy and effective control over its
territories. The country has a relatively high level of capacity to formulate and implement its
policies, including taking long-run strategic perspectives. Vietnam also has a high level of
commitment to poverty reduction objectives, as evidenced by its historically remarkable
performance in bringing about poverty reduction and the continuing egalitarian pattern of its
development, compared to that of many other fast-growing economies. The Vietnamese
government has also demonstrated a strong capacity to exercise effective leadership of the
development agenda while actively learning from and selectively applying lessons from donor
support. Vietnam has deeply entrenched institutions—including those in the planning system—
which provide stability and accountability, although operating through structures and processes
that are quite unlike Western democratic models. Conversely, the deeply entrenched nature of
the institutional arrangements—and the incentives that these generate for individual and
organizational behavior—may militate against rapid and fundamental reforms. It is therefore
difficult to draw direct lessons from Vietnam that parallel with more fragile contexts.

The Three Phases of Building M&E Capacity in Vietnam

Phase I: M&E of the Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (2000–05).
Vietnam’s first poverty reduction strategy20 was the Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and
Growth Strategy, which the Prime Minister approved in May 2002. Although the M&E system
for the poverty reduction strategy was not integrated into the existing planning system, it only
had limited influence on M&E practice within the government. Still, key stakeholders such as the
World Bank thought of Vietnam’s poverty reduction strategy as an important first attempt in
modernizing the country’s strategic planning process and a more extensive use of empirical
evidence. The Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (with a three-year time
frame) coexisted with the 2001–05 Socio-economic Development Plan which was prepared
within the context of the 2001–10 Socio-economic Development Strategy.

The poverty reduction strategy’s monitoring system comprised a set of indicators based on the
Vietnam Development Goals. The indicators included the following: “(i) indicators to monitor
outputs of economic development and poverty reduction; (ii) indicators to monitor and evaluate
inputs of resources for the [Socio-economic Development Strategy]; (iii) indicators to monitor
and evaluate the achievements according to the targets laid out in the [Socio-economic
Development Strategy]; and (iv) indicators to evaluate the impact of every program and strategy
affecting the poor and the whole society. This system of indicators will be developed in detail by
regions, provinces, rural/urban areas, and gender; and some indicators will be further
disaggregated according to economic sector, social quintile, and ethnicity.?21



20
   The Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy qualifies as a poverty reduction strategy in the sense
that it is a document accepted as such by the IMF and World Bank and used as the basis for, respectively, a Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility Program and a Poverty Reduction Support Credit, or, where relevant, for debt relief
through the Heavily Indebted Poor Country process. Vietnam has had a series of socio-economic development plans
that guided policy and investment during its most successful period of poverty reduction.
21
   See SRV, 2003, p. 137. Cited on page 2 of OPM report, and IMWG, 2003. Cited on page 3 of OPM report.

                                                                                                               40
Within the central planning system, monitoring served as an (external) oversight and audit
function through which higher levels of government exercised control over lower levels. This
system encouraged a defensive approach to the supply of information; those supplying and those
receiving information had a strong incentive to manipulate it. The changes to Vietnam’s planning
and budgeting systems from 2004 (when the 2002 Budget Law was implemented) represent the
first significant change in planning practice, with the provision of significant block grants to
lower levels of government and agencies, making the detailed monitoring of inputs more difficult
and less relevant.

To better produce and use M&E information, the General Statistical Office conducted a biannual
household living standard survey; independent research organizations (nongovernmental
organizations and universities) would interview citizens to collect and analyze data, and line
ministries and provinces will report on implementation of the Comprehensive Poverty Reduction
and Growth Strategy. The Ministry of Planning and Investment coordinates with the line
ministries to prepare the annual reports on poverty reduction strategy implementation. Table 3.1
sets out the key M&E activities for Phase I.


               Table 3.1 Phase I (2000–05): Key M&E Frameworks and Activities
 M&E framework                  M&E activities
 Comprehensive        Poverty First initiative to modernize the strategic planning process
 Reduction and Growth Strategy and increase use of empirical evidence, established set of
                                indicators to deepen analysis of impact of government
                                policies (2002).
 Socio-Economic Development
 Plan 2001–05
 2002 Budget Law                Provision of significant block grants to lower levels of
                                government and to agencies, making the detailed monitoring
                                of inputs more difficult and less relevant.
 Policy    Matrix   for     the  Promulgated the Law of Statistics.
 Comprehensive        Poverty  Strengthened statistical agencies at various levels.
 Reduction and Growth Strategy  Promoted transparency and data quality.
                                 Strengthened the statistical database.
                                 Strengthened the national accounts within two years and
                                    improved budget data quality to correspond to the
                                    Government's fiscal statistical standards.
                                 Presented a website of Vietnam in the International
                                    Fiscal Statistical Book published by the IMF.
                                 Collected high quality data on the poverty situation and
                                    trends, and ensure that data and information is
                                    publicized and used regularly.
                                 Implemented enterprise surveys to collect high-quality
                                    data on growth and employment trends and made it
                                    publicly available.




                                                                                             41
Phase II: Developing the Decision 555 M&E Framework for Socio-Economic Development
Plan 2006–10 (2005–09).

In May 2007, the Ministry of Planning and Investment produced an M&E framework for the
Socio-economic Development Plan 2006–10, known as the Decision 555 framework. The
framework had a comprehensive set of targets, including a specific set of poverty reduction and
social development targets by 2010, to implement commitments by the president at the UN
Millennium Summit. Many donors provided technical assistance to create the Decision 555
framework, including the World Bank, the Asia Development Bank, the Department for
International Development, and the United Nations Development Programme. A 2008 Asia
Development Bank review found that, unlike Vietnam’s previous monitoring frameworks, the
Decision 555 framework is a results chain that links the main goals to clear and specific
objectives, and each objective is linked to specific input, output, and outcome indicators. The
review also summarized data reporting responsibilities and assigned them to each ministry,
central agency, and government agency for reporting.

However, because some ministries saw the Decision 555 framework as an output of donor
technical assistance that was only institutionalized at the ministry level, it lacked the legal status
or authority to guide other ministries or provinces or to replace existing reporting systems. In
addition, the framework was “retrofitted? to the existing plan, meaning that an implicit logical
framework was developed for each element of the Socio-economic Development Plan, drawing
mainly on existing information sources as indicators. The indicators identified for donor-funded
projects did not necessarily link with the indicators highlighted within the development plan’s
monitoring system. The Ministry of Planning and Investment also lacked authority to initiate a
new data collection for indicators in the Decision 555 framework that were not already part of
the National Statistical Indicator System. Therefore, the Socio-economic Development Plan
2006–10 midterm review published in this format was not regarded as an official government
document, and a separate report in the traditional official format was instead submitted to the
Communist Party Central Committee. In addition, the Socio-economic Development Plan
Annual Report and the main ongoing regular monitoring of development performance by donors
did not use the Decision 555 framework. Donors mainly relied on the Poverty Reduction Support
Credit policy matrix.

In 2007, the World Bank reviewed 21 countries and selected Vietnam as one of nine that had
achieved significant progress in establishing an operational development strategy and a results-
oriented framework.22 Vietnam was classified as having “largely developed? a unified strategic
framework, a prioritized national development strategy, and a process of providing stakeholder
access to information. Vietnam was also seen as having taken some action on the other criteria
(establishing a strategic link to the budget, improving the overall quality of development
information, and coordinating a country-led M&E).

Looking forward, the key test of progress is the extent to which the preparation process for
Socio-economic Development Plan 2011–15 embeds the changes to M&E set out in the Decision
555 framework. While the poverty reduction strategy had a more developed and integrated M&E
system, that strategy existed in parallel to the existing planning system, so it is unclear to what
extent its M&E system, as opposed to the Poverty Reduction Support Credit policy matrix,

22
     World Bank, 2007. Cited on p 5 of the OPM report

                                                                                                   42
influenced government actions. The process of developing the poverty reduction strategy
certainly influenced the planning process for the Development plan, but fundamentally the
approach remains only partially results-focused. The M&E approach for the development plan
does not amount to “M&E system? development in the sense set out by subject matter experts.23
The timetable envisaged for the preparation of the development plan did not provide much scope
for reorienting the planning system toward a more thorough results-based approach.24 Table 3.2
sets out the key M&E activities for Phase II.

               Table 3.2 Phase II (2005–09): Key M&E Frameworks and Activities
     M&E
                   M&E activities
     framework
     SEDP 2006–
     10
                   M&E framework for Socio-economic Development Plan 2006–10,
                   comprehensive targets including specific Poverty Reduction and Social
      Decision 555 Development Targets by 2010, to implement commitments by the president at
       Framework   the UN Millennium Summit.
                   Results chain that links main overall goals to clear and specific objectives,
                   and each objective is linked to specific input, output, and outcome indicators.

The Overall M&E System Structure

M&E champions
There were three M&E champions during this process: the Ministry of Planning and Investment,
the legislative branch of the government, and donors.

Ministry of Planning and Investment. Leadership is also seen in the Ministry of Planning and
Investment, which has responsibility for the planning system, including the administration of
Official Development Assistance projects. This agency led most of the initiatives to strengthen
M&E systems within the Vietnamese government system, although its overall mandate and role
are not fully established. While the ministry can provide guidance on planning systems and is
responsible for preparing the Socio-economic Development Plan, the ministry does not have the
authority to make cross-governmental changes and comprehensively revise the monitoring
framework.

The Legislative Branch of the Government. Despite the continuing dominance of the
executive, the legislative branch of Vietnam’s government plays an increasingly significant role
in the policy process, both at the National Assembly level and in the People’s Councils at lower
levels of government. The National Assembly Committees (which have received technical
support from a number of donors) have been increasingly active in scrutinizing legislation. The
National Assembly also debates and approves the Socio-economic Development Plan and
receives reports on its progress. However, reports have not been made to the National Assembly

23
   See Mackay, Keith. 15 January 2006. “Institutionalization of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems to Improve
Public Sector Management,? ECD Working Paper Series No. 15, IEG, World Bank, Washington, D.C. Mackay
outlines the definition of a M&E system.
24
   The prime minister was expected to set out by May 2009 preparation guidance with a view to getting submissions
by September, and producing a first draft of the Socio-economic Development Plan by December 2009.

                                                                                                              43
using the Decision 555 framework.25 Discussions suggest that National Assembly members—at
least those actively engaged in the main committees dealing with economic and social policy
issues—have a good understanding of the concepts and issues involved in evidence-based policy
and have access to technical support to examine policy issues, and consider whether the available
information is accurate and of high quality. However, the development plan’s M&E information
does not appear to have been used to directly hold government to account, although the system
of questions to ministers allows the Assembly to raise issues of concern that can attract media
prominence. The capacity of the National Assembly to effectively scrutinize policy is
constrained by some procedural factors, such as the very limited time available to review the
budget.

Donors. Donors build demand, increase local capacity, and often provide the framework and
initiate the information gathering and usage to begin an M&E system. In Vietnam, donors
encouraged the renovation of the planning and public expenditure systems, and also continue to
widen the policy discussion and engage the legislative branch of government and civil society
around this issue. Donor accountability requirements have been a main driver of the development
of M&E systems in Vietnam, and the Ministry of Planning and Investment’s initiatives in this
area have responded to donor requirements. Graves (2008) discusses the accountability
arrangements involving donors in Vietnam and identifies four “primary mutual accountability
initiatives? and associated discussion forums:
      The Socio-economic Development Plan and the annual consultative group meeting
      The Hanoi Core Statement on Aid Effectiveness and the Partnership Group on Aid
         Effectiveness
      The Poverty Reduction Support Credit and its technical meetings
      Sectoral and thematic “partnership groups? with shared agendas

All of these arrangements heavily use M&E information, especially in relation to the Poverty
Reduction Support Credit policy matrix.

M&E Information Produced and Main Actors
According to research concluded in late 2009, Vietnam was classified as in the process of
developing an M&E system. Thus far, Vietnam has initiated parallel pilot programs which have
yet to be fully institutionalized, except for the M&E system for Official Development Assistance
projects, which is under the Ministry of Planning and Investment’s implementation authority.
Vietnam has parallel systems for Poverty Reduction Support Credit monitoring, since the Socio-
economic Development Plan monitoring framework is not institutionalized within government.
Policy attention and performance assessment for donors has mainly focused on the Poverty
Reduction Support Credit policy matrix. The 2011–15 Socio-economic Development Plan
intends to make further progress toward a results-based M&E system, but has not specified how
the system would be implemented. Currently, budget allocations are not clearly linked to any
M&E information, and the Ministry of Finance lacks a system to assess the performance of
public expenditure. Strengthening M&E systems and moving toward a culture of results-based
management is seen as part of a long-term agenda for public finance reform to strengthen core
public finance management and further reform the State Budget Law.



25
     Senior committee members interviewed were not aware of the Decision 555 framework.

                                                                                              44
Surveys
The General Statistics Office produces official statistics. The National Statistical Indicator
System, promulgated by the prime minister in 2005, defines the core list of official statistics for
which the office is responsible (although other government agencies collect additional data).
Following up on the Vietnam Statistical Development Direction from the 2002 Prime Ministerial
Decision, the Director General of the General Statistics Office developed an action plan that
defined seven programs, beginning with improving the legal environment for statistics (covered
in the 2003 Statistics Law and its subsequent implementation).

Various United Nations agencies26 as well as the Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency (SIDA), the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the French
government, the Department for International Development (DfID), and the World Bank have
provided donor support to these programs. The General Statistics Office regards the technical
assistance as useful in building system and individual capacity,27 while a World Bank loan
supported development of an information technology system and technical infrastructure for
statistical activities. Table 3.3 summarizes the programs, progress, and main donors.

The General Statistics Office monitors poverty through the biannual Vietnam Household Living
Standards Survey, under the authority of the 2003 Statistics Law. While the biannual information
is of high quality, its availability is not always timely for policy purposes. Improved coordination
between the General Statistics Office and Ministry of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs
(MOLISA) is needed, as each agency has been producing separate poverty rates since 1993.28
The General Statistics Office focuses on monitoring poverty reduction, whereas MOLISA uses
its information for targeting. Poverty information from MOLISA—based on preparing lists of
households under the poverty line with local communities—is used for short-term monitoring
and targeting. The General Statistics Office claims that MOLISA comes up with a slightly
different poverty estimate at the provincial level that is below that produced by the statistics
office, even if the two agencies produce the same national poverty line and poverty rate, because
the MOLISA poverty line has not been sufficiently adjusted for inflation and for regional
differences in living standards. To overcome this challenge, the Vietnamese government recently
assigned the General Statistics Office to produce provincial-level poverty rates based on
household surveys that MOLISA will use as indicative “quotas? for targeting.29

The Decision 555 framework had a large degree of overlap with the National Statistical Indicator
System, but included some indicators that were not part of the national system, particularly
relating to governance. In the view of the General Statistics Office, the National Statistical
Indicator System,—because it seeks to provide a comprehensive national system—should form
the basis for monitoring the Socio-economic Development Plan, and if additional indicators are

26
   These include the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA),
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO),
and the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP).
27
   For instance, support from United Nations Development Program and the Swedish International Development
Coooperation Agency is judged by the General Statistics Office to have significantly contributed to improving
statistical products and developing statistical methodology and data systems, in addition to strengthening human
resources for statistical activities.
28
   September 2011 conversation with Nga Nguyet Nguyen, Senior Economist in Hanoi, Vietnam World Bank
Office.
29
   September 2011 conversation with Nga Nguyet Nguyen, Senior Economist in the World Bank’s office in Hanoi,
Vietnam.

                                                                                                             45
required for development plan monitoring, they should be incorporated within the National
Statistical Indicator System, rather than collected through a parallel system. Other observers felt
that the General Statistics Office’s capacity was likely to be overloaded and it was not well-
equipped for particular forms of data collection, especially of a qualitative nature.

Vietnamese researchers and other stakeholders noted that they had increasing confidence in the
information provided by the General Statistics Office and that the government’s approach to
M&E is becoming less defensive. They added the office’s information needed to be produced in
a more timely manner, although they saw the office as currently overburdened. The General
Statistics Office needed to be more proactive in anticipating user demand for information; this
should be a key focus of the office’s planning. The office’s activities could be supplemented by
strengthening key information sources outside the office (such as information on the banking
system) and by the use of other approaches (such as commissioning nongovernmental
organizations to undertake qualitative surveys) in areas where the General Statistics Office does
not enjoy a comparative advantage.




                                                                                                46
   Table 3.3. The Summary of Progress in Implementing the General Statistics Office Action Plan

         Program                                               Progress                                         Donor
                                                                                                               support
(1) Improvement and          Completed:
strengthening of the         - Statistics Law issued in 2003, effective in 2004
legal environment for        - Detailed implementation guidance issued in 2004 and 2005
statistics                   - Dissemination program for these legal documents completed in 2005

(2) Improvement of           - Many statistical products (socioeconomic statistical reports, survey       UNDP/DfID
statistical products and     results, etc.) have been improved and standardized                           SIDA
development of               - Mechanisms and policies for statistical information dissemination have     JICA/UNIDO
statistical information      been developed (with active support from donors such as UNDP/DfID,
dissemination policy         and SIDA)
                             - Statistical information dissemination capacity (database/data warehouse,
                             stat. services) have been strengthened
(3) Improvement of           - Statistical methodologies (including indicators) standardized, improved,   UNDP/DfID
statistical methodology      and renovated (leading donor support: UNDP/DfID)                             UNICEF
and data collection          - Statistical data collection (including reporting systems, surveys) have    UNFPA
systems                      been improved and harmonized (with support from many donors:                 JICA
                             UNDP/DfID, UNICEF, UNFPA, JICA, UNIDO, SIDA)                                 UNIDO
                                                                                                          SIDA
(4) Development and          - Information technology infrastructure has been improved for                WB
application of               computerization of statistical activities (lead donor support: WB)           SIDA
information technology       - Statistical website has been developed
in the statistical branch    - Central and regional computer centers have been strengthened

(5) Strengthening of         - Statistical system organization changed and has been improved (by the      UNDP/DfID
statistical organization     General Statistics Office itself)                                            UNICEF
and human resources for      - Many training courses have been conducted, with strong donor support,      UNFPA
statistical activities       to improve the capacity of statisticians conducted                           JICA
                                                                                                          UNIDO
                                                                                                          SIDA
                                                                                                          France
(6) Improvement of           - Working conditions for statisticians have been improved                    WB
technical and material
facilities for statistical
activities
(7) Strengthening of
international
cooperation in statistics
          Source: General Statistics Office



                                                                                                          47
M&E Frameworks

1. The Poverty Reduction Support Credit Policy Matrix
The Poverty Reduction Support Credit policy matrix used by donors organizes 42 indicators
across the following 14 areas (with three indicators for each area): private sector development,
infrastructure, education, health, social protection, gender, land and forests, water, environment,
planning processes, public financial management, legal development, public administration
reform, and anti-corruption initiatives.

2. The Framework for Official Development Assistance Projects
Decision 1248 (in October 2007) set out an action plan for implementing a comprehensive
monitoring and evaluation framework for Official Development Assistance projects. This set
seven strategic objectives:

      To develop a unified information system to ensure the operation of a national system of
       monitoring and evaluation of development assistance programs and projects.
      To select and adopt advanced methodologies and tools in the M&E of development
       assistance programs and projects in conformity with the Vietnamese situation.
      To professionalize staff working on M&E of development assistance programs and
       projects.
      To ensure a budget for M&E of development assistance programs and projects.
      To cooperate with donors on M&E of development assistance programs and projects.
      To use the results of M&E in management for development results.
      To integrate and use tools, skills, and experiences in the M&E system for development
       assistance programs and projects to develop an M&E system for public investment.

The process of developing a common M&E framework for Official Development Assistance
projects is based on the development of the Aligned Monitoring Tool which has been adopted by
the      multilateral and bilateral development banks providing loans to Vietnam although
implementation of the monitoring tool is still in a relatively early stage; the Independent
Monitoring Team (2008) reported initial difficulties with implementation (it was not fully
implemented at the time of the visit for this study). However, the Ministry of Planning and
Investment intends to roll out the system across all government projects, including those not
using Official Development Assistance. Further initiatives highlight the potential for a more
systematic program evaluation, including selected in-depth program or sectoral evaluations with
the support of the Vietnam Australia Monitoring & Evaluation Support Programme. The joint
project is working with Ministry of Planning and Investment on an impact evaluation of rural
electrification programs).

3. The Decision 555 M&E framework for Socio-economic Development Program 2006–10
The M&E framework had a comprehensive set of targets, including specific Poverty Reduction
and Social Development Targets by 2010, to implement commitments by the president at the UN
Millennium Summit. Many donors provided technical assistance to create the Decision 555
framework, including the World Bank, the Asia Development Bank, the Department for
International Development, and the United Nations Development Programme. A 2008 Asia
Development Bank review found that, unlike previous monitoring frameworks, Decision 555 is a
results chain that links main overall goals to clear and specific objectives, and each objective is


                                                                                                48
linked to specific input, output, and outcome indicators. It also summarized and assigned data
reporting responsibilities to each ministry, central agency, and government agency.

4. Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Critical to moving toward a more results-based planning and budgeting process has been a pilot
initiative to develop a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework in four sectors and four provinces.
The Country Financial Accountability Assessment considered this pilot to be a success that could
be gradually scaled up, but that full implementation into the budget process required legal
changes in the Budget Law. A review of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
implementation issues (MTEF, 2008) identified several main challenges for the framework’s
implementation in Vietnam (which can be seen as a necessary step toward results-focused public
expenditures) including:

      The complex nature of intergovernmental fiscal relations with considerable delegation of
       expenditure decisions and discretion given to local governments, depending on their
       revenue generation effort.
      Incomplete budget coverage, budget rigidities, and a dual budgeting system for recurrent
       and capital expenditures.
      A planning process which is based on a fixed five-year period, rather than a rolling three-
       year framework, such as that used for the expenditure framework.
      The lack of aligned decision making on resources within the fiscal framework and the
       general availability of resources.
The Ministry of Finance also identified constraints on the implementation of the expenditure
framework: difficulties in accurate forecasting of revenue and expenditures at the central and
local levels; a lack of incentives for agencies engaged in the expenditure framework process to
focus on it as a core activity rather than concentrating on annual budget negotiations; and a lack
of information and control by budget units over key elements that would be included in an
integrated budget.

5. Renovating Planning and M&E in the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development has undertaken an initiative to “renovate?
the planning process, with a substantial focus on strengthening M&E. The ministry intends to
fully implement planning system reforms to integrate the 2011–15 Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development Five-Year Plan into the Socio-economic Development Plan. Table 3.4 below
shows the specific reforms to the agricultural sector’s M&E system.




                                                                                               49
                Table 3.4: Renovating the Agriculture Sector’s M&E System Plan

                                  Old System                           Renovation
Formulation of           - No M&E plan formulated for          - The renovated five-year plan has
M&E plan                 evaluation of plan                    an indicator set and plan for
                         implementation and no                 evaluation of performance results
                         indicator set determined
Management               - No management information           - M&E system established following
Information              system for the M&E of plan            a transparent monitoring frame with
System for M&E           performance.                          specific indicators
                         - Individuals collect data and
                         fill in tables
Type of M&E              - Most of the indicators and          - There are many indicators for
indicators and data      planned targets were for              evaluation of results of changes in
sources                  monitoring production process,        the sector and impacts on
                         investments, and other regular        beneficiaries
                         operations                            - The Indicator set is determined
                         - Data came from many                  clearly by sources, taking full
                         sources without definition             advantage of available statistical
                                                                sources
Data collection and      - No coordination and clear           - Clearly determined data sources
management               responsibility in data collection     - Collection methods packaged to
methods                  - No database for management          avoid overlapping
                         of common data, limited data          - Data filed in a common M&E
                         sharing between units and                     database
                         individuals
Report templates         - Reports are presented in a          - An annual report template with an
                         document format, described            indicator set is being piloted
                         and listed with less specific
                         and uniform evaluation targets
                         at individual levels
Source: Adapted from a presentation at MARD international workshop (26, February 2009) by Nguyen Van Ha

The ministry has identified more than 300 indicators in relation to its six strategic targets
(operating with 64 programs). This number is considered appropriate since the indicators are
largely focused on internal management requirements, with a smaller subset regarded as critical
indicators for higher level monitoring. Three main sources of information have been identified:
(i) information produced by the General Statistics Office as part of the National Statistical
Indicator System; (ii) information produced from reporting systems within the ministry; and (iii)
additional information to be obtained by supplementary surveys.

A ministerial decision was not sufficient to bring about changes in reporting systems; instead, the
ministry launched a campaign to persuade provincial staff of the desirability of strengthening the
reporting systems. Also, the M&E system only applies to the capital budget because the Ministry
of Finance allocates recurrent and provincial budgets; hence the Ministry of Agricultural and



                                                                                                          50
Rural Development cannot manage the entire agricultural sector budget. The ministry’s
experience illustrates the need for several key factors to move the initiative forward:
     The agency for which an M&E system is developed must fully understand its
        requirements and identify the information needed.
     The agency must optimize its use of collected information because operating a
        comprehensive M&E system is expensive; and clear coordination mechanisms and
        allocation of responsibility are needed from all system users.

Provincial and Local Planning Systems
The main progress in moving toward a results-based M&E was in awareness-raising. The
independent monitoring team review noted the following: “At the sub-national level, outcomes
show that results-based practices are still emerging—54 percent of 48 provinces had developed a
monitoring and evaluation system for the provincial five-year Socio-economic Development
Plan and 49 percent had established monitoring and evaluation practices. The report shows that
84 percent of the provinces have started to use the Aligned Monitoring Tool (2008, 32–33).?
This report also found that financial reporting at the provincial level is weak and focuses on
tracking inputs, rather than tracking outcomes and results. In addition, the report noted that
significant differences in the reporting formats and indicator definitions for data collected at
different levels of government posed problems for establishing an integrated M&E system. The
government tried a number of initiatives using participatory approaches to strengthen and
develop planning systems at the village and commune level, however it has been difficult to
integrate the results with the requirements of the Socio-economic Development Plan’s system.

Accountability Relationships

M&E information can only serve a useful function in the context of effective accountability
relationships. These require:

      The production of relevant and timely M&E information in a form that is accessible to
       potential users.
      The ability of policy and planning stakeholders to use and analyze information and draw
       policy conclusions from it.
      The ability of stakeholders to influence the executive to address issues that are identified
       from the information, a process that requires incentive structures within organizations to
       encourage response to such information and pressures.

The main users of M&E information are donors, the Ministry of Planning and Investment, sector
ministries, and, to an increasing extent, the legislative branch of government. However, M&E
information is not yet linked to budget allocations. While traditional vertical accountability
relationships remain strong, the incentives for using M&E information remain weak. The
exceptions are projects and programs that are heavily dependent on donor funding, where results-
based M&E is needed for continued resource availability.

Accountability within sector ministries. Ministries use M&E information that is produced as a
management tool within the sector and in relation to particular projects and programs. The
integration with results varies by sector. For example, the education and health sectors have the
most systematic approaches to data collection, while data on the power and energy sector are no
longer available after the breakup of the state monopoly in the sector. As discussed earlier, the

                                                                                                51
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development has undertaken an initiative to “renovate? the
planning process with a substantial focus on strengthening M&E. The intention is to fully
implement reforms to the planning system to then integrate the ministry’s 2011–15 Five-Year
Plan into the Socio-economic Development Plan.

The Legislative Branch of Government

The legislative branch’s role has been discussed earlier in the M&E Champion section, detailing
accountability relationships at the level of the National Assembly. For the lower levels of
government, the Hoa Binh case study found that the Provincial People’s Council played an
active role in the planning and budgeting process, with the People’s Council reviewing and
approving the annual Socio-economic Development Plan and the budget plan annually in
December.30 Prior to the meeting session, the Economic Divisions of the Provincial and District
People’s Councils, and the chairman and vice chairman of the Commune People’s Council
review the reports of the People’s Committee before sending the reports to the plenary meeting
session. Members of the People’s Council’s Economic Division are usually knowledgeable on
planning and budgeting issues and work closely with their executive counterparts in developing
the Socio-economic Development Plan and the budget plan. At the district and commune level,
key members of the People’s Council usually play different roles at the same time, for example
serving as a member of party bureau and an executive.

People’s Council divisions are active in overseeing the development plan and budget execution
with diversified methods and increasingly standardized procedures. Previously, the operations of
the People’s Council divisions relied on the direction of the People’s Council Standing
Committee. Recently, the Economic Division and others sectors are more proactive in making
oversight plans. Before plans are made, representatives often organize field visits to obtain better
grassroots feedback. After oversight missions, the representatives send reports to the People’s
Committee for solutions.

Strengths and Weaknesses
As noted earlier, donors are crucial in the early stages because they generating demand for M&E
information and contribute to building capacity. Thus far, Vietnam has arrived at an initial
starting point that can be adopted more broadly across government. First, consensus is needed to
bring about more fundamental changes to the planning system, particularly to the relationship
between planning and finance and how planning and public expenditure management systems
function in Vietnam. The Socio-economic Development Plan’s five-year planning process is
increasingly anachronistic. In addition, while the Ministry of Planning and Investment has been
the main champion for M&E, it lacks the authority to impose progress across government, as
evidenced by its limited success in establishing the Decision 555 M&E framework for the 2006–
10 development plan. In fact, this study found the Poverty Reduction Strategy M&E system from
Decision 555 is not functioning or fostering institutional demand for M&E information. In
addition, capacity remains weak in the lower tiers of government. A case study in the Hoa Binh
province found challenges in the lack of qualified staff and training. Hoa Binh lacked systematic
technical training for public officers, had a shortage of qualified technical training schools, and
had difficulty attracting capable staff because of the lack of incentives for a permanent position
(e.g., low salary and no performance-based remuneration system).
30
   The People’s Council is the elected legislative body and the People’s Committee is the executive body at each
level of government (province, district, and commune) below the center.

                                                                                                             52
While the Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy had a more developed and
integrated M&E system, the strategy existed in parallel to the existing planning system, so it is
unclear to what extent its M&E system (as opposed to the Poverty Reduction Support Credit
policy matrix) influenced government actions. The timetable for the preparation of 2011–15
Socio-economic Development Plan did not provide much scope for reorienting the planning
system toward a more thorough results-based approach. A second challenge was articulated in
The Vietnam Development Report 2007 (World Bank, 2006), which noted that only partial and
uneven progress in reforming the strongly entrenched system of central planning had been made.
The report criticized the “lack of a coherent conceptual and regulatory framework,? as well as
“confusion in ministries, agencies, and provinces on what the government can and cannot
legitimately plan for.? It also noted that there is “no systematic and consistent set of guidelines
that not only is tailored to specific needs of different levels of government but also addresses
coordination among them. Official instructions are regularly issued by the Prime Minister
Directives for the preparation of annual and five-year plans. But they remain relatively general,
which provides room for innovation among those who embrace the new approach, but does not
contribute to change among those who do not.?

The strengths and weaknesses of the Vietnam M&E system are further illustrated in Figure 3.2
below.

                Figure 3.2. Strengths and Weaknesses of Vietnam M&E System




                                                                                                53
Sustainability and Next Steps for Strengthening Results-Based M&E in Vietnam

Vietnam has made a great deal of progress toward a results-based M&E system. M&E capacity
was a priority for both government and donors for better informed policy decision making and to
satisfy donor requirements. The system depends on finance and planning systems that provide
incentives to respond to performance information, by linking resource allocation to performance
and by providing sufficient autonomy and flexibility over resource use so that public sector
managers can genuinely be held accountable for performance. To continue making progress, the
country’s planning system should become more strategic, with a clearer vision of what
government should control and how it can achieve its objectives and focus on a smaller number
of high-level indicators. The government should concentrate on improving M&E quality and
eventually work on evaluation capacity, when M&E information becomes sufficient to support
evaluations.31

In addition, the Ministry of Finance focuses on building capacity for its core fiscal policy
management functions, but does not advocate for using strengthened results-based M&E in its
decisions and processes. However, if the Ministry of Finance used M&E information, it would
greatly strengthen M&E efforts within the country. Other M&E champions and key stakeholders
should engage the Ministry of Finance and address the need for the agency to assess the
performance of public spending and use M&E information in allocating fiscal resources. As
previously mentioned, improved coordination between the General Statistics Office and
MOLISA for poverty monitoring and targeting is also needed.32

Lastly, high-level government support is needed to drive these reforms, especially to build on the
Decision 555 Framework experiment and implement a government-wide results-based system of
monitoring.




31
   September 2011 conversation with Nga Nguyet Nguyen, Senior Economist in World Bank ’s office in Hanoi,
Vietnam.
32
   September 2011 conversation with Nga Nguyet Nguyen, Senior Economist in the World Bank’s office in Hanoi,
Vietnam.

                                                                                                         54
Chapter 4: Building M&E Capacity in the Republic of Yemen

Incentives for Building M&E    - Mainly donor-led efforts to support donor reporting needs
Capacity                       - Support to the government.

Political Economy              - The unrest in the country and the Middle East only a few months later illustrates how progress can be interrupted
                               by instability.

                               - The country had clear plans for the 4th DPPR to better integrate M&E, and we hope that the work will pick up
                               where it ended and continue.

Challenges Faced               - The M&E unit’s relationship with the Central Statistical Organization may challenge progress.

                               - Line ministries lacked access to statistical data and suffered delays in data gathering and reporting.

                               - Key reports had to be approved by the Cabinet before the project could move on to other activities.

Sustainability                 - Unrest following the project hindered progress. Many of the government staff working on this initiative were
                               fired.

Key Activities                 - Government and donors worked closely to develop the M&E master plan and strategy

                               - Government and donors worked closely together to operationalize a M&E unit in the Ministry of Planning and
                               International Cooperation

M&E Champions                  - Former Deputy Prime Minister, Former Minister of Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (and
                               current Managing Director of Social Fund for Development), and Vice Minister of the Fourth Development
                               Program for Poverty Reduction.

Accountability Relationships   - Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation coordinated the monitoring process and reporting to and from
                               other sectors.

Frameworks Used/M&E            - Government of Yemen had agreements with line ministries on what information would be collected and reported,
Information Produced           and had a partially completed indicator database.



                                                                                                                                                55
Ingrid Ivins (Statistician, DECDG) and Helena Hwang (Consultant, PRMPR)33

Lessons Learned from the Yemen Experience

It was very helpful for the process of building M&E capacity to have a Minister of Planning and
International Cooperation who fully and openly gave support to the project. Yemen’s experience
illustrates the importance of having a powerful M&E champion to support such a significant
initiative. This helped move transactions and activities along when delays cropped up, and raised
the level of respect of the M&E Unit with regard to the other ministries and agencies involved.

Study tours allow policymakers to learn from good practices and avoid reinventing the wheel.
The seven-day study tour to Uganda provided Yemen’s government and civil society participants
with a hands-on illustration of what good practices produce, which also motivates staff by
connecting them to their peers and counterparts in other governments that have created solutions
to the challenges they currently face.

Sponsorship from the Prime Minister’s office for the M&E coordination process at the central
level provides the necessary leverage and political collateral to activate different commissions
and structures across government ministries and institutions. This also contributes to ensuring
timely access to data and information for regular reporting by the ministries, as well as
coordination of government performance control functions at the central, ministry, sector, and
local levels.

Connecting accountability with resource allocation provides incentives to activities across
sectors. Yemen’s study tour to Uganda provided lessons learned. In Uganda, the country’s
Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development produces a biannual report on
budgeting performance, with a focus on accountability, resource allocation to achieving certain
results, establishment of a budget control and accountability unit within the Ministry of Finance,
Planning, and Economic Development to supervise activities in the following five sectors:
Education, Health, Water, Transport and Public Works, and Agriculture.

A strong and independent (or quasi-independent) statistics office is a key part of a successful
M&E program. Yemen’s study tour to Uganda provided lessons learned. The development of a
strategic plan to improve statistical activities and that aims to disseminate final results of
censuses and surveys in no more than six months has enhanced usage of such data in Uganda’s
planning and budgeting. Key products of Uganda’s Statistics Bureau included: Population and
social surveys, the private sector and industry, information technology, department surveys and
capacity building, and statistical coordination services. Key surveys, censuses, and publications
include: the household budget survey, a demographic survey, statistical data for state budgeting,
a price index, an industry guide, a construction sector guide, annual summary of statistics, and a
facts and figures book.
M&E efforts are greatly supported by establishing a permanent secretariat in each ministry to act
as a technical bureau responsible for coordinating special tasks for the ministry. This supported




                                                                                               56
the preservation of accumulated technical expertise and its concentration and ensured business
sustainability in each individual ministry.
Inclusion of civil society organizations in the planning process and in M&E outputs, especially
on the central level and policy matters, increases support and is an important part of building
M&E capacity.
The Country Context and Political Economy
The Republic of Yemen is the poorest country in the Middle East and North Africa region, and
the World Bank has cited the fragility of the political and security environment and the social
unrest linked to persisting poverty as one of the key country risks. Most institutions are relatively
weak, due to capacity issues, corruption, over- or understaffing in the civil service (a legacy of
the 1990 reunification when existing civil services were merged without reform), and the
persisting need to clarify institutional mandates and structures. The World Bank has noted that
the Republic of Yemen will not meet its Millennium Development Goals for 2015. The country
will have to overcome serious challenges to achieve its strategic vision, such as the impending
rapid decline in oil revenues, the weak capacity of governance institutions, the pressures of high
population growth, the worsening scarcity of fresh water, and the present challenges resulting
from protests and regime changes.
Following the World Bank’s re-engagement with the Republic of Yemen in January 2012, an
Interim Strategy Note (ISN)1, covering the period FY2013–14, was presented to the World
Bank’s Board of Directors in November 2012. The time frame of the ISN was planned to match
that of the current transition government in the Republic of Yemen, expected to continue through
2014.

The ISN framework is oriented around three main principles: (i) intensifying participation and
inclusion, especially among women and young people; (ii) strengthening institutional capacity,
governance, transparency, and accountability; and (iii) enhancing the operational flexibility of
the World Bank-supported program. Strengthening institutional capacity is essential to the
development/redevelopment of the Republic of Yemen’s M&E program.

The transitional government prepared a development program for the next two years, called the
Transitional Program for Stabilization and Development. The program includes several short-
term emergency priorities, such as security stabilization, peaceful power transfer, and
humanitarian needs. Medium-term priories include economic growth sectors, basic
infrastructure, social protection, and good governance/state building. A joint donor group is
working with the authorities on this program to assist during this fragile transition stage.

The Republic of Yemen’s fragile socioeconomic and political situation and current civil strife
and its suspension of activities with the World Bank have further stalled implementation of the
M&E strategy as well as the most recent Economic Development Program (the Fourth
Development Program for Poverty Reduction, DPPR).




                                                                                                  57
The Three Phases of Building M&E Capacity in the Republic of Yemen

Phase 1: Post-reunification (1995–2005)
For the purposes of this chapter, three phases of M&E development have been identified.
Following reunification, efforts toward promoting good governance and pursuing comprehensive
reforms began in 1995 with the implementation of the Economic, Financial, and Administrative
Reform Program. Efforts continued with the development of the Second Five Year Economic
Plan and Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). The government completed the Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper in 2000, which was followed by the Republic of Yemen’s first Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (2003–5). However, the PRS-related planning was not reflected in
budget lines because the country did not have the required capacity given the weakness of its
financial systems.

In 2003, the Republic of Yemen benefited from a PRSP trust fund grant; the purpose of the grant
was to support the government of Yemen’s implementation of its first PRSP, as wel l as to
strengthen partnership, outreach, and dissemination activities with parliamentarians and civil
society, all of which were identified in the Joint International Monetary Fund (IMF)–World Bank
Staff Assessment of 2002. One of the four components housed in the grant included the
institutional setup of a PRSP Monitoring Unit in the Ministry of Planning and International
Cooperation (MOPIC). Implementation of the program was delayed, however, because the
training and awareness campaigns on the PRSP and PRSP monitoring were not initiated during
the first two years of the program. Although 12 workshops were held between 2003 and 2005 to
improve awareness of the PRSP and help in identifying and gathering information to construct
the monitoring indicators, the M&E unit itself was not established. As a result, there was no
centralized unit within the government to establish a statistical baseline, and no agreement on
indicators or on which agency would lead the data collection, resulting in tensions between
MOPIC and the National Statistics Office (NSO).2 At the time, the priority was not focused on
data gathering. Rather, the focus was on establishing the poverty reduction program as outlined
in the interim World Bank–IMF PRSP monitoring review.

Phase II: Developing M&E Capacity with the German Agency for International Cooperation
(2006–07)
The Republic of Yemen’s “Strategic Vision 2025? is the country’s long-term development plan,
first outlined in 2006, and oriented toward lifting its international ranking from a least-developed
country to one of “medium human development? by 2025. The plan was translated into a series
of successive national plans, including the Third Socio-Economic Development Plan for Poverty
Reduction, which is packaged together with the second PRS as a single program under the
DPPR. The government developed an M&E strategy for the DPPR that included specific
measures to elaborate a poverty monitoring system covering data generation, analysis, storage
and dissemination of information required to track trends in poverty and to help assess progress
toward achieving PRSP goals.

The German Agency for International Cooperation made significant contributions to building
capacity within MOPIC by placing an employee in-house for two years to assist with the
development of the M&E master plan, as well as the M&E strategy for the Third Socio-
Economic Development Plan for Poverty Reduction. The government of Yemen developed the


                                                                                                 58
National Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy as an M&E system for the DPPR. MOPIC led the
creation of this system, which involved a participatory process with line ministries and other key
stakeholders to draft the goals and activities all the way through to the completed M&E
framework. MOPIC’s M&E unit carried out multiple rounds of workshops with line ministries
and other stakeholders to whittle down the number of monitoring indicators. The DPPR stressed
the need to reduce the budget deficit, strengthen national accounts, and improve the country’s
statistical capacity. Also highlighted in the DPPR was the need for sectoral reforms to increase
efficiency and better manage scarce resources as well as expand the still insufficient budgeting
systems.

Training workshops covered a variety of M&E functions, including alignment of outcomes with
related indicators and preparation and implementation of the M&E work programs consistent
with the overall M&E strategy.

Phase III: Operationalizing a M&E Unit with the World Bank (2007–10)
As mentioned earlier under phase I, a PRSP monitoring unit did not yet exist in MOPIC, though
some degree of progress had been made with the training and workshops that took place during
phase II. The World Bank project that began in October 2007 was created in response to the
recommendation to establish and operationalize the PRSP monitoring unit as stipulated in the
M&E strategy. The project supported capacity building for operationalizing an M&E system in
MOPIC to enhance the institutional and individual M&E competencies of staff in MOPIC and
across the line ministries to help operationalize and maintain an M&E system focused on poverty
reduction.

The process of building M&E capacity in the Republic of Yemen entailed a large number of
(often overlapping) activities, which made progress challenging to follow at times. The MOPIC
project coordinator mitigated this challenge with regular communication and document sharing
with the World Bank for terms of references and overall project management, as well as regular
coordination with the World Bank Yemen Country Office on issues related to procurement and
financial management. The project accomplished many of the original goals and made a
significant amount of progress in building M&E capacity.

This initiative consisted of five main activities (see Figure 4.1).




                                                                                               59
Figure 4.1: World Bank project activities to build M&E capacity in the Republic of Yemen
(2007–10)

              Refinement of outcomes and indicators


              Stakeholder consultation on the program interventions


              Study Tour of Uganda (November 1-7, 2009) and
              trainings in the USA and Jordan

              Planning and Strengthening the M&E Implementation
              Process

              Enhance Capacity for planning M&E implementation
              mechanisms


Activity 1: Refinement of outcomes and indicators. First, the relevant outcomes and
development goals were extracted from the DPPR, including sector strategies. Next, a list of
implementation measures and/or programs was constructed and plotted against goals in a matrix
format. Strong and robust indicators—consistent among agencies—were established, and a
simple analysis of monitoring indicators conducted. The project reduced the number of existing
DPPR indicators from 450 to below 200.3 MOPIC held a significant number of workshops with
individual sector representatives to drill down on what information was collected, requiring
many negotiations to reach agreement on which ministry/agency would provide data for specific
indicators. Each line ministry or relevant agency now has a person(s) devoted to M&E, as do the
offices in the governorates. Not every goal was met by the end of the project, as an indicator
database developed in DevInfo4 was not complete at that time. There were also issues with data
collection, as the same data was sometimes reported from multiple agencies.

Activity 2: Stakeholder consultation on the program interventions. With the assistance of
international and national experts, the M&E team from MOPIC finalized the outputs from
Activity 1 for stakeholder consultations. The consultations were open to the government, the
donor community, and civil society.

Activity 3: Study tour to Uganda and training activities in the United States and Jordan
(MOPIC 2009). As part of the project, a delegation from the Republic of Yemen conducted a
study tour to Uganda in November 2009 to learn from the country’s M&E practices and
experiences. Seven staff members from the M&E Unit at MOPIC and from the line ministries
participated, along with three representatives from civil society organizations. The group
discussed many useful topics with their Ugandan counterparts, including the inclusion of civil
society organizations in the planning process and in M&E outputs; the strong sponsorship from
the prime minister’s office of the M&E coordination process to provide the leverage and power
needed to push through the necessary changes; and the importance of establishing a permanent

                                                                                            60
secretariat in each ministry. The main lessons from the Uganda study tour are outlined in box
4.1. To learn from other experiences, Yemeni government members also participated in training
activities at the World Bank in Washington, DC, and in Amman, Jordan.

Activity 4: Planning and strengthening the M&E implementation process. Technical
assistance was provided to distill the M&E strategy document into working plans within the
overall framework of agreed outcomes, indicators, and proposed program interventions. The
training and workshops provided the relevant teams with the skills required to eventually
implement the M&E master plan.

Activity 5: Enhancing capacity for planning M&E implementation mechanisms. This
activity developed a draft plan, defining and establishing the monitoring structures, and
advancing the work into actual implementation. Developing the master plan formed the basis for
implementing a coherent M&E system for DPPR-PRSP programs linked to sector M&E systems.
MOPIC has developed an M&E master plan and put in place an integrated M&E system to
implement the plan, linking it to sector M&E systems and aligning it to agreed outcomes, as well
as adhering to institutional, structural, and technical proposals built into the master plan. MOPIC
is responsible for coordinating the DPPR-PRSP monitoring process and therefore reporting
structures to and from other sectors have been aligned accordingly.

While the World Bank supported the project - it met most of the objectives and made a
significant amount of progress - the M&E Unit was established in MOPIC, however most of the
staff was actually pulled from other departments within the ministry (such that new hires were
not made). The database in DevInfo is not complete, and sometimes receives the same data from
different sources, for example the NSO and the Ministry of Health. Data are often delayed and
have to be requested numerous times.

The project had a slow start—it was approved in March 2007 but did not become effective until
October—however, eventually a fully staffed M&E unit was up and running, supported strongly
by the minister, raising its status and strengthening its mandate. Nonetheless, there were some
challenges regarding low project implementation capacity and political delays because key
reports had to be approved by the Yemeni Cabinet before the project could move on to
subsequent new activities.




                                                                                                61
                                              Box 4.1. Uganda Study Tour1
Participants from the Government of Yemen and Civil Society:
Ministry of Planning and International Coordination
Head, Monitoring and Evaluation Unit
General Manager for Studies
General Manager, Sectoral Policy
Head, Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)-funded projects monitoring unit
National Statistics Office
Three coordinators
Yemen Civil Society
Three representatives
Presentations by and field visits to Ugandan Government, including:
Office of the Prime Minister
Ministry of Public Service
Office of Budgeting at the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Water, Lands, and Environment
Ministry of Local Government
Planning Unit of the General Authority for Development of North Western Areas
National Planning Authority (NPA)

Main lessons learned from the study tour:
       Sponsorship from the Ugandan Prime Minister’s Office for the M&E coordination process at the central level
        provides the necessary leverage and political collateral to activate different commissions and structures across
        government ministries and institutions. This sponsorship also contributes to ensuring timely access to data and
        information for regular reporting by the ministries, as well as coordination of government performance control
        functions at the central, ministry, sector, and local levels.

       Connecting accountability with resource allocation provides incentives to activities across sectors. In Uganda, the
        country’s Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development produces a biannual report on budgeting
        performance, with a focus on accountability, resource allocation to achieving certain results, and establishment of a
        budget control and accountability unit within the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development to
        supervise activities in the following five sectors: education, health, water, transport and public works, and
        agriculture.

       A strong and independent (or quasi-independent) statistics office is the key to a successful M&E program. The
        development of a strategic plan to improve statistical activities with the aim of disseminating final results of censuses
        and surveys in no more than six months enhanced usage of such data in Uganda’s planning and budgeting. Key
        products of Uganda’s Statistics Bureau included: population and social surveys, data on the private sector and
        industry, information technology assessments, department surveys and capacity building, and statistical coordination
        services.

       M&E efforts are greatly supported by establishing a permanent secretariat in each ministry to act as a technical
        bureau responsible for coordinating special tasks for the ministry. This supported the preservation of accumulated
        technical expertise and its concentration and ensured business sustainability in each individual ministry.

       Inclusion of CSOs in the planning process and in M&E outputs, especially on the central level and policy matters,
        increases support and is an important part of building M&E capacity.
Source: Author’s compilation.

                                                                                                                    62
M&E Champions

The champions that were instrumental in moving forward the process of building M&E capacity
included the former Deputy Prime Minister and former Minister of MOPIC (and current
Managing Director of Social Fund for Development) and the Vice-Minister of the DPPR.

The minister of MOPIC fully and openly supported the project. This moved transactions and
activities along when delays cropped up and raised the level of respect of the M&E Unit among
the other ministries and agencies involved. MOPIC led the process of adopting a more
systematic approach to M&E and enhancing the capacity to assess the impact of the Republic of
Yemen’s poverty reduction efforts and progress in achieving its strategic vision. The Social Fund
for Development (SFD) is a local Yemeni agency that is known and respected for its own M&E
processes and was involved in several of the activities. At the end of the project, a large degree
of progress was made, and the objectives remain important for the country, as highlighted in the
Fourth DPPR, published in 2011. Drawing on lessons from the third DPPR and previous PRSPs,
this fourth DPPR is the first plan to have its own M&E framework and mechanism, with a
separate annex solely devoted to M&E.

Conclusions and Next Steps for Strengthening Results-Based M&E in the Republic of Yemen

The objectives of the World Bank project were, and still are, very relevant to the issues facing
the Republic of Yemen. Although the topic of M&E had been raised for several years before
grant approval, implementation of M&E-related policies and activities had not yet taken place.
Figures 4.2 and 4.3 illustrate the main M&E activities, as well as some of the roles and
responsibilities for M&E activities that are laid out in this chapter.




                                                                                               63
                             Figure 4.3: Fourth DPPR M&E Activities34



                                                 Raise
                                               Awareness

                                                                   Revise laws
                             Build
                                                                       and
                            Capacity
                                                                   regulations




                    Produce
                    Data and
                                               M&E                              Analyze
                                                                               policy and
                  Information                  Tasks                             data




                             Ensure
                                                                     Assess
                           Implementa
                                                                     Effects
                              tion
                                                 Include
                                                 Citizen
                                                  Voices




34
  Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (Government of Yemen), Annex 1: “The Fourth DPPR M&E
Framework, Towards a Results-Based M&E.? Version released on 3 April 2011.

                                                                                                      64
                    Figure 4.4: Examples of Fourth DPPR Roles and Responsibilities35
 MOPIC




                                     Governorates and Districts




                                                                                             Line Ministries
         •Receives and revises                                    •Ensures availability of                     •Proposes objectives
          reports and data from                                    the data and                                 and general policies for
          central and local                                        information related to                       sector development.
          ministries and                                           economic, social, and                       •Sets programs to
          government bodies.                                       cultural development                         implement DPPR
         •Organizes data,                                          projects.                                    policies and programs
          information and                                         •Follows up on annual                         at the sectoral level
          indicators to improve                                    development plan                             and sectoral branches.
          sector and governorate                                   implementation and                          •Prepares, assesses,
          performance.                                             derive statistical                           proposes, and
         •Submits regular reports                                  indicators for the                           distributes
          on progress, obstacles,                                  progress level.                              development projects
          and solutions to the                                    •Prepares monitoring                          in the sector plan.
          Cabinet to support                                       and progresses reports                      •Submits proposals
          DPPR objectives.                                         for DPPR projects and                        related to amendments
         •Prepares final report of                                 submit to relevent                           to be made to the
          development plans and                                    bodies.                                      sector's plan in light of
          achievements at                                                                                       any developments
          national level.




During the process of building M&E capacity, it became clear that more cooperation with the
NSO was needed. Line ministries occasionally complained of data issues between themselves
and the NSO, including a lack of access to NSO data, or, duplicative and inconsistent results.
This led to some delays in data gathering and reporting. To address this issue, a Cabinet
resolution was passed in 2010 (Cabinet Resolution No. 314) to reinforce and frame the
involvement of the NSO in the development of the M&E process between MOPIC, the line
ministries, and other agencies. Implementation of this resolution is in progress, though arguably
at a slow pace. The government does not yet have a centralized online system that links the
statistics office and line ministries to the M&E unit to allow for regular updating of all
indicators. The Republic of Yemen also has a statistical master plan to be implemented by the
NSO, which brings some coordination challenges. As the official state statistical agency, the
NSO is key to many, if not most, of the monitoring indicators.

Although the infrastructure for a monitoring system has been established within MOPIC, the
practical measures of identifying indicators and implementing a system for systematic M&E has
not advanced further. After the grant closed, the next step was to be implementation of the M&E
master plan. However, shortly after grant closing, social unrest began, stalling further progress,
which serves to illustrate the additional challenges faced in fragile and conflict-affected country
settings.


35
  Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (Government of Yemen), Annex 1: “The Fourth DPPR M&E
Framework, Towards a Results-Based M&E.? Version released on 3 April 2011.

                                                                                                                                            65
Chapter 5: Conclusions

The experiences of Mexico, Rwanda, Vietnam, and Yemen serve as useful examples of how
M&E capacity building advancements can take different paths, according to the country context.
This meta analysis aimed to illustrate that the process is flexible and works in different contexts,
although it will be different in each country. The comparisons across these four countries are
summarized into two useful frameworks to help policymakers and other colleagues that work on
the daunting and important task of building M&E capacity in young systems: mechanics and
process of building M&E capacity.

The first framework revolved around the mechanics of building M&E capacity: documenting and
comparing main activities, M&E champions, accountability relationships, and what information
was produced. Country examples highlighted in this paper stressed the importance of utilizing
whatever capacity already exists, and building upon it. Comparing the main activities across the
country examples illustrated how different key areas of progress can be, but all are advancing.

The second framework is a comparison across the process of such an initiative, from the
incentives and political economy issues through to challenges faced and assessment of
sustainability. As shown in this report, while much of the M&E capacity-building process is
donor-driven in the beginning, without country governmental support, the process will not really
become entrenched, no matter how many resources donors pour into the effort. In addition,
political and technical advancements should be made simultaneously, or else M&E capacity
building will only serve donor reporting requirements, and once projects end, the advancements
will not be retained. Also, advancements that have the consensus of line ministries and those that
capture and report information are critical, to ensure that the M&E system develops in a useful
way and also is sustainable beyond the tenure of specific M&E champions, donors, projects, and
programs.

In particular, the issue of how to sustain M&E advancements—especially progress that has been
interrupted, such as the case of Yemen—will be particularly important. Documenting
achievements from this and other conflict-affected countries will be useful. Additional areas for
future work in this area could include further analysis of the continued progress of the profiled
countries, or comparisons between the profiled countries and countries that have similar
contexts.




                                                                                                 66
References

Abrami, R., E. Malesky, and Yu Zheng. 2008. “Accountability and Inequality in Single-Party
   Regimes: A Comparative Analysis of Vietnam and China.? HBS Working Paper 08-099,
   Harvard Business School, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Asia Development Bank. March 2008. “Highlights of Vietnam Country Case of MfDR Capacity
   Development,? Cooperation Fund in Support of Managing for Development Results, Asian
   Development Bank.

Baudienville, G. et al. 2009. “Monitoring and Evaluation in Fragile States: Building M&E
     Systems to Support State-Building Process.? Preliminary Review Paper. Overseas
     Development Institute, London.

Bedi, T., et al. 2006. Beyond the Numbers: Understanding the Institutions for Monitoring
Poverty Reduction Strategies. Washington DC: World Bank.

Booth, D., and H. Lucas. November 2001. “Desk Study of Good Practice in the Development of
   PRSP Indicators and Monitoring Systems—Final Report.? Report commissioned by the
   Department for International Development for the Strategic Partnership with Africa,
   Overseas Development Institute, London.

Chiche, M. 2007. Putting Aid on Budget: A Case Study of Rwanda. Oxford: Mokoro Ltd.

Country Financial Accountability Assessment. October 2008. “Vietnam: Country Financial
   Accountability Assessment,? Government of Vietnam/World Bank.

Driscoll, R., with A. Evans. September 2004. “Second Generation Poverty Reduction Strategies,
   “Overseas Development Institute, London.

Dudwick, N., and A. Nelsson. April 22, 2009. “Poverty Reduction Strategies in Fragile States: A
   Stocktaking of What We Know.? draft. PRMPR, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Fritzen, S.A. 2006. “Probing System Limits: Decentralisation and Local Political Accountability
    in Vietnam,? The Asia Pacific Journal of Public Administration 21:1 (June: 1–23).

Gorgens, Marelize, and Jody Zall Kusek. 2009. Making Monitoring and Evaluation Systems
   Work: A Capacity Development Toolkit. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Graves, S. 2008. Mutual Accountability at the Country Level: Vietnam Country Case Study, Joint
   Venture on Managing for Development Results, OECD.

Hussain, M., and Hilliard, S. 2009. National Savings Mobilisation Strategy. Kigali: Financial
     Sector Development Secretariat, Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, Government
     of Rwanda.

International Monetary Fund. 1997. “IMF Approves Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance for
      Rwanda.? Press Release Number 97/19, 22 April. IMF, Washington, DC.

                                                                                            67
IMF. 2005. “IMF to Extend 100 Percent Debt Relief to Rwanda Under the Multilateral Debt
     Relief Initiative.? Press Release Number 05/301, 23, December 23. IMF, Washington DC.

IMF. 2007. “Rwanda: Second Review Under the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty
     Reduction and Growth Facility.? Country Report Number 07/233. IMF, Washington DC.

IMF 2009a. “Rwanda: 2008 Article IV Consultation, Fifth Review Under the Three-Year
    Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility.? Country Report Number
    09/58. IMF, Washington DC.

IMF. 2009b. “Rwanda: Sixth Review Under the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty
     Reduction and Growth Facility.? Country Report Number 09/264. IMF, Washington DC.

IMF. 2009c. “Evaluation of Technical Assistance to Post-Conflict Countries: Mozambique and
     Rwanda.? Statistics Department, IMF, Washington DC.

IMF. 2010. World Economic Outlook Database. April 2010.
     http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2010/01/weodata/index.aspx [12 May 2010].

Independent Monitoring Team. December 2008. “Independent Monitoring on the
   Implementation of the Hanoi Core Statements at Sectoral and Sub-National Level in
   Vietnam.? Final Report.

Inter-Ministerial Working Unit. November 2003. “Vietnam Development Goals, IMWU on
    Monitoring/evaluation of the Implementation of the Targets of the Comprehensive Poverty
    Reduction and Growth Strategy (CPRGS) and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).?
    Hanoi.

Japanese International Cooperation Agency. March 2007. “Study Results On Current Socio-
   Economic Development Planning And Budgeting Practice in Three Governmental Levels In
   Hoa Binh,? Japanese International Cooperation Agency, Hanoi.

Kusek, Jody Zall, and Ray C. Rist (2004), Ten Steps to a Results-Based Monitoring and
   Evaluation System. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Lawson, A., and L. Rakner. August 2005. “Understanding Patterns of Accountability in
   Tanzania.? Final Synthesis Report. Oxford Policy Management, Oxford

Lapointe, P. 2010. “Assessment of the Monitoring and Evaluation System and Proposal for
     Governmental Program Reviews.? SETYM International, Montreal.

Lopez Acevedo, G., K. Mackay, and P. Krause. 2012. Building Better Policies: The Nuts and
   Bolts of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Mackay, K. 2006. Institutionalization of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems to Improve Public
  Sector Management. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                                                         68
Mackay, K. 2007. How to Build M&E Systems to Support Better Government, World Bank
  Independent Evaluation Group. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Mackay. K. 2010. Conceptual Framework for Monitoring and Evaluation. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

Marchant, T., and R. Edmunds. 2008. “Official Statistics and Monitoring and Evaluation
  Systems in Developing Countries: Friends or Foes?? Draft.

MARD. June 2007. Planning Templates for 2008 Sector Plan. Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
  Development. Hanoi.

MARD. April 2008a. The Five-Year Plan (2006–2010) of the Agricultural and Rural
  Development Sector, Revised Plan Draft. Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
  Hanoi.

MARD. December 2008b. The Monitoring and Evaluation System for the 5 Year Plan (2006-
  2010) of the Agricultural and Rural Development Sector Plan Implementation. Ministry of
  Agriculture and Rural Development, Hanoi.

MARD, 16 February 2009. The Pilot Monitoring and Evaluation Indicator Set for the 5 Year
  Agricultural and Rural Development Sector Plan Implementation. Hanoi.

Mashinga, T. 2000. Rwanda Case Study: Public Performance and Development Projects—
    Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity Development in Africa. Johannesburg: Development
    Bank of Southern Africa.

May, et al.,(editors). 2006. Towards the institutionalization of monitoring and evaluation systems
in Latin America and the Caribbean: Proceedings of a World Bank/Inter-American Development
Bank Conference . World Bank, Washington DC.

McKay, A., et al. (2007) EICV Poverty Analysis for Rwanda’s Economic Development and
    Poverty Reduction Strategy. Oxford: OPM.

McKinley, C. January 2009. “Media and Corruption – How has Viet Nam’s print media covered
  corruption and how can coverage be strengthened? ? Public Administration and Anti
  Corruption, A Series of Policy Discussion Papers. UNDP, Vietnam.

MOPIC (Yemen Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation). 2008. Monitoring and
   Evaluation Strategy for the Socioeconomic Development Plan for Poverty Reduction
   (2006–10). Monitoring and Evaluation Unit. Sana’a, Yemen.

MOPIC (Yemen Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation). 2009. Back to Office
    Report: Exploratory Tour on Monitoring and Evaluation. M&E Unit, November 1–7,
   Kampala, Uganda.




                                                                                               69
MOPIC (Yemen Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation). 2011. The Fourth DPPR
   M&E Framework, Towards a Results-Based M&E. Sana’a, Yemen.

Morra Imas, Linda G., and Ray C. Rist. 2009. The Road to Results: Designing and Conducting
  Effective Development Evaluations. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Mountfield, E. 2006. “Public Expenditure Strengthening in Vietnam.? Presentation for the
  Japanese Ministry of Finance on March 14, 2006. Tokyo.

MPI. March 2006. The Five-Year Socio-Economic Development Plan 2006-2010, Ministry of
  Planning and Investment. Hanoi.

MPI. May 2007. “Decision No. 555/2007/QD-BKH of Minister of Ministry of Planning &
  Investment on Issuing the Results-Based Implementation Monitoring & Evaluation
  Framework for 2006-2010 SEDP,? Ministry of Planning and Investment. Hanoi.

MPI. December 2008. “Results-Based Mid-Term Review Report For Implementation Of The
  Five-Year Socio-Economic Development Plan 2006-2010.? Ministry of Planning and
  Investment, Hanoi.

MTEF. December 2008. “Discussion Paper for High Level Task Force on MTF&EF Model.?

National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda. 2007. Survey of the Informal Sector 2006: Micro and
     Small Enterprises in Rwanda. Kigali: Republic of Rwanda.

National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda November 2008. “Speech by Hon. Minister of Finance
     and Economic Planning on the 2008 Statistics Week.? Kigali, 25 November.

National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda. 2009. National Population Projection 2007–2022.
     Kigali: Republic of Rwanda.

National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda. 2010. Website information
     http://statistics.gov.rw/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=91&Itemid=122
     [12 May 2010].

OPM. June 2008. “Making Aid More Effective Through Gender, Rights and Inclusion: Evidence
  from Implementing the Paris Declaration.? Vietnam Country Study. Oxford Policy
  Management: Oxford.

Organization for Social Science Research in Eastern and Southern Africa. 2006. “Rwandan
     Citizen Report and Community Score Cards.? Addis Ababa: OSSREA.

Rama, M. 2008. “Making Difficult Choices: Vietnam in Transition.? Working Paper No. 40.
  Commission on Growth and Development.

Reporters Without Borders. 2009. http://en.rsf.org/report-rwanda,38.html [12 May 2010]

Republic of Rwanda. 2000a. Rwanda Vision 2020. Kigali: MINECOFIN.
                                                                                            70
Republic of Rwanda. 2000b. Household Living Conditions Survey Household Living Conditions
     Survey (EICVI). Kigali: MINECOFIN, Department of Statistics.

Republic of Rwanda. 2000c. An Approach to the Poverty Reduction Action Plan for Rwanda:
     The Interim PRSP. MINECOFIN: Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2000d. Implementation Strategy for National Decentralisation Policy.
     Kigali: MINALOC, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2002. Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy 2008–2012.
     Kigali: MINECOFIN, Kigali

Republic of Rwanda. 2003. Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Progress Report. Ministry of
     Finance and Economic Planning. Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2004a. A Monitoring and Evaluation System for Rwanda’s PRSP. Ministry
     of Finance and Economic Planning, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2004b. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan of the Poverty Reduction Strategy
     in Rwanda. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2005. Poverty Reduction Strategy Annual Progress Report. MINECOFIN,
     Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2006a. Second Household Living Conditions Survey Household Living
     Conditions Survey (EICVII). MINECOFIN, Department of Statistics, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2006b. Population Growth in Rwanda. Ministry of Finance and Economic
     Planning, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2006c. Rwanda Aid Policy. Kigali: Republic of Rwanda.

Republic of Rwanda. 2007a. Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy.
     MINECOFIN, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2007b. Vision 2020 Umerenge: EDPRS Flagship Program 2. MINALOC
     & MINECOFIN, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2007c. Budget Framework Paper 2008–2012. Ministry of Finance and
    Economic Planning, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2007d. EDPRS Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System. Kigali,
     Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning.




                                                                                        71
Republic of Rwanda. 2007e. The Institutional Framework of EDPRS Monitoring. Ministry of
     Finance and Economic Planning. Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2008a. Budget Framework Paper 2009–2011/12. MINECOFIN, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2008b. Community Development Policy. Ministry of Local Government,
     Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2008. Common Development Fund (CDF) Ubudehe Programme Final
     Report 2007–2008. Ministry of Local Government, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2009a. Budget Framework Paper 2009/10-2011/12. Ministry of Finance
     and Economic Planning, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2009b. Annual Report on the Implementation of the EDPRS 2008. Ministry
     of Finance and Economic Planning, Kigali.

Republic of Rwanda. 2009c. Health Sector Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy. MINISANTE,
     Kigali.

Rubio, Gloria, October 2011. “The Mexican Government’s M&E System. World Bank,
     Washington.

Rubio, Gloria, May 2010. “Integrating Evaluation into Decision Making: The Mexico
     Experience.? Presentation delivered in Accra, Ghana, and accessed on 30 November 2012
     at: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTHDOFFICE/Resources/5485726-
     1256762343506/6518748-1275681412812/7130285-
     1275681441795/9.Case_Mexico_Rubio_ENG.pdf

Rwanda Development Partners. 2010. www.devpartners.gov.rw [12 May 2010].

Sabharwal, G., and Than Thi Thien Huong. July 2005. Civil Society in Vietnam: Moving from the
   Margins to the Mainstream. Global Policy Forum.

Socialist Republic of Vietnam. November, 2003. The Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and
   Growth Strategy (CPRGS). Hanoi, November.

Stroud, M. et al. 2009. “Evaluation of the Implementation of the Paris Declaration: Thematic
     Study—Support to Statistical Capacity Building, Synthesis Report. OPM, Oxford.

Turk, C., R. Swinkels, and Quang Hong Doan (nd), Vietnam: Design/Implementation of Results-
   Based Planning and Monitoring. MfDR Sourcebook, Second Edition.

UN. December 1999. Report of the Independent Inquiry into the Actions of the United Nations
    during the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda. United Nations.



                                                                                          72
UN. 2010. United Nations site for the MDG Indicators
     http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg/Default.aspx [12 May 2010].

UNDP. November 2004. “Taking Stock, Planning Ahead: Evaluation of the National Targeted
  Programme on Hunger Eradication and Poverty Reduction and Programme 135.? UNDP and
  Ministry of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs, Hanoi.

VAMESP. January 2007. Case Study of M&E capacity building in Vietnam, Prepared by
  Vietnam Australia Monitoring and Evaluation Strengthening Project (Phase II). Government
  of Vietnam.

VDR. 2008. Social Protection: Vietnam Development Report 2008, Joint Donor Report to the
  Vietnam Consultative Group, Hanoi, December 6-7, 2007.

World Bank, 2002, A source book for poverty reduction strategies, “Chapter 3 Monitoring and
  Evaluation,? Washington DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2007. Results Based National Development Strategies: Assessment and Challenges
  Ahead. Washington DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 1995. “Rwandese Republic Emergency Recovery Project.? Report Number T-
     6483-RW. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 1998. Rwanda Poverty Note: Rebuilding an Equitable Society: Poverty and Poverty
     Reduction after the Genocide. Washington DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 1999. “Rwanda: Country Assistance Strategy.? Progress Report. IDA/R99-135.
     World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2007a. Rwanda Towards Sustained Growth and Competitiveness. Country
     Economic Memorandum Volume 1: Synthesis and Priority Measures. Washington DC:
     World Bank.

World Bank. 2007b. “Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 2007.? Country Worksheet.
     World Bank, Kigali, Rwanda.

World Bank. 2009. http://www.doingbusiness.org/features/reformers2010.aspx [12 May 2010].

World Bank. 2010. http://data.worldbank.org/country/rwanda [12 May 2010].

World Bank. December 2006. “Vietnam: Aiming High—Vietnam Development Report 2007.?
  World Bank Report No. 38064-VN, 11. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. December 2007. Results-Based National Development Challenges: Assessment and
  Challenges Ahead. Washington, DC: World Bank.



                                                                                        73
World Bank. June 8, 2009. “International Development Association Program Document for a
  Proposed Credit in the Amount of SDR 235.2 Million (US$350.0 Million) to the Socialist
  Republic of Vietnam for an Eighth Poverty Reduction Support Operation.? Report No.
  47908-VN. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2009. Country Assistance Strategy for The Republic of Yemen for the Period FY
  2010–13. Yemen Country Management Unit. Washington, DC, World Bank.

World Bank, 2012. “Interim Strategy Note for The Republic of Yemen for the Period FY 2013 -
  14.? Yemen Country Management Unit. World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                                                            74
Annex A: List of People Interviewed (Rwanda)

Name                              Institution             Position
Emmanuel Ndahimana                Private consultant      Former Minister of State (MINECOFIN)
Jean Paul Rwabiyonza              UNDP                    Country Economist
John Kayemba                      IMF                     Country Economist
Ingrid Mutima                     MINECOFIN/EFU           Aid Policy Coordinator

Godfrey Kabera                    MINECOFIN /Planning     Research expert and planner
Andre Habimana                    MINECOFIN               Head of Development Planning
                                                          Financial Resource Mobilisation
Ronald Nkusi                      MINECOFIN               Coordinator
Jean Paul Rwaboyanza              UNDP                    Economist
Dr. Emillen Nkusi                 MINISANTE               Head of M&E System
Murangwa Mago Yusuf               Ag DG                   NISR
Egide Rugamba                     MINALOC                 Director General
Eric                              MINISANTE
Masterjurb                        MINEDUC                 Consultant
Rogers Mugisha                    NISR                    MDGs and EDPRS
Alex Ndagijimana                  MINAGRI                 M&E Specialist
Ernest Ruzindaza                  MINAGRI                 PS
Marie-Clare Mukasine              MININFRA                PS
Theodore Hakizimana               NISR/UNDP               National Coordinator
Clement Mugabo                    MINEDUC                 Planning and Budget / M&E
Vincent de Boer                   EC                      Economist

Egide Rugamba                     MINALOC/Planning, M&E   DG
Kalisa Mbanda                     SNV                     Capacity building consultant
                                                          Social Protection (VUP, Governance &
Alex Kamurase                     World Bank              Decentralisation)

                                                                                                 75
                                                                   Sector economist (previously statistics
Obald Hakizimana                    MINECOFIN/Macro Unit           department)
                                                                   Director (Economist) – PFM, budget
Stephan Klingebeil and Timo Mahn    KFW                            support, decentralisation, governance
Elias Baingana                      Budget                         Head
Mimi Omowunmi Ladipo                World Bank                     Country manager
Gemma Williams                      MINESANTE                      ODI
Richard Arden / Catherine Howgego   DFID                           Resp. Human development and health
                                                                   Senior Policy Advisor – Social Cluster /
Dr. Okwach Abagi                    President’s Office             M&E Specialist of PSTA
Phillipe Karenzi                    President’s Office             Governance Cluster
Josianne Barebereho                 President’s Office             Economic Cluster
Alexis Ndagijimana                  MINAGRI                        M&E Specialist of PSTA
Anton Delie                         Belgium Embassy                Head of office
Yusuf Mago                          NISR                           Director general
                                    Public Sector Capacity
Stella Mugabo                       Building Secretariat (PSCBS)   Executive secretary

Fabien Majoro                       Office of the Prime Minister   Director General of the Coordination Unit

Vivian Gakire                       Office of the Prime Minister   Local Government Programs Analyst: CU
                                                                   Planning Officer (and M&E and Partner
Benoit Mpambara                     Bugasera District Office       Coordination)

[Name]                              District – Nyamasheke          Data Manager HMIS
Leonard Rugwabiza                   MINECOFIN                      DG National Planning and Research

Ernest Ruzindaza & Alexandra Lowe   MINAGRI                        PS & ODI
Prosper Musafiri                    MINECOFIN                      Former DG MINECOFIN
Isabelle Cardinal                   DFID                           Social protection

                                                                                                               76
List of People Interviewed (Vietnam)
Name               Institution                                                     Position
                                                                                   Vice Chairman of the
                                                                                   Financial-Budgetary
Dr Dinh Van Nha    National Assembly of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam          Committee
                                                                                   Standing Member of the
                                                                                   Financial-Budgetary
Dr Tran Van        National Assembly of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam          Committee
Dinh Xuan Ha       State Budget Department, Ministry of Finance                    Head of Planning Unit
Vu Van Trung       Statistics Unit, State Budget Department, Ministry of Finance   Expert
Cao Man Cuong      Ministry of Planning and Investment                             Expert
Ms Phu Ha          Ministry of Planning and Investment                             Expert
                   Vietnam Australia Monitoring & Evaluation Strengthening
Nguyen Van Phuc    Project                                                         Project Co-ordinator
                   Comprehensive Capacity Building Programme to Strengthen
Phung Van Quan     ODA Management (CCBP)                                           Programme Manager

                                                                                   Director of Department of
Trang Hieu Dung    Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development                   Planning – Project Director


                   Monitoring and Evaluation in Support of Management in the
Nguyen Van Ha      Agricultural and Rural Development Sector, MARD                 Project Coordinator
                   Social and Environmental Statistics Department, General
Nguyen Phong       Statistics Office                                               Director
                   Planning-Finance Department, Ministry of Education and          Head of ODA Investment
Truong Thanh Hai   Training                                                        Division
Dr Pham Vu         Planning-Finance Department, Ministry of Education and
Thang              Training                                                        Expert

Nguyen Xuan                                                                        Director, Centre for Analysis
Thang              Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences                              and Forecasting

                                                                                                                   77
Ms Pham Thuy
Anh               Center for Cooperation Human Resources Development   Director
Phan Van Ngoc     ActionAid Vietnam                                    Country Director
Steve Price-
Thomas            Oxford Great Britain                                 Country Director
                                                                       Assistant Country Director;
Nguyen Tien                                                            Head, Poverty and Social
Phong             United Nations Development Programme                 Development Cluster

Vo Truc Dien      Vietnam Resident Mission, Asian Development Bank     Economics/ Programs Officer
                                                                       Manager, Portfolio and
Alain Barbu       The World Bank, Vietnam                              Operations
Jim Anderson      The World Bank Vietnam                               Senior Governance Specialist
Martin Rama       The World Bank Vietnam                               Chief Economist
Doan Hong Quang   The World Bank, Vietnam                              Senior Economist
Daniel Mont       The World Bank, Vietnam                              Senior Economist
Nga Nguyet
Nguyen            The World Bank, Vietnam                              Senior Economist




                                                                                                      78
List of People Interviewed (Yemen)

Name                         Institution                   Position
Ali Dahhaq                   MOPIC                         M&E Unit Head

Wilfried Engelke             MENA PREM, The World Bank     Senior Economist
Wael Zakout                  The World Bank                Yemen Country Manager

                                                           Deputy Prime Minister and former Minister of
Abdulkarim Al Arhabi         Social Fund for Development   MOPIC/Managing Director

Mutahar Alabassi             DPPR                          Vice Minister




                                                                                                          79
