                                                                       89621




  DIAGNOSTICS AND POLICY ADVICE FOR
SUPPORTING ROMA INCLUSION IN ROMANIA




 Prepared by the Human Development and Sustainable Development Teams
                       Europe and Central Asia
                        The World Bank Group




                          February 28, 2014
.




Standard Disclaimer:

.

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

.

Copyright Statement:

.

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                              ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In June 2013, the Romanian Ministry of Labor, Social Protection, Family and the Elderly
requested the World Bank to assist in developing national policies and identifying cost-effective
programs to promote the integration of Roma, by providing diagnostics and policy options in key
areas of poverty and social safety nets, employment, education, housing and habitat upgrading,
health, combatting discrimination, and institutional mechanisms for effective local service
delivery and use of EU instruments. The purpose of this study is to respond to this request and
inform policy makers and other readers of the overall living conditions and main challenges
faced by Roma, and to recommend options for solutions to these challenges. The results will be
made available to relevant stakeholders, so that they can be incorporated in:
    - Proposals for the 2014-2020 EU programming period;
    - The new national Roma inclusion strategy (NRIS);
    - Sector-specific strategies;
    - New legislation;
    - Ministerial and municipal budget allocations.
This report presents a comprehensive diagnostic of living conditions among the Roma in
Romania, including separate chapters on education, employment, social protection, health,
discrimination, housing, and an overview of institutions and policies available to address Roma
inclusion. The report combines quantitative and qualitative evidence, and outlines a set of policy
measures to foster productive participation and contributions of Roma, as well as to improve
their wellbeing. The study will be accompanied by a summary report titled Roma Inclusion –
What It Takes for Romania, which focuses on priority interventions and policy measures on the
basis of the key messages from sectoral diagnostics. The report draws on comments and inputs
provided by representatives of the Romanian civil society, academia and government agencies in
the course of two consultations (September 24-25, 2013 and November 21-22, 2013).
The report was prepared under the direction and guidance of Mamta Murthi, Ana Revenga,
Alberto Rodriguez, Laszlo Lovei, Elisabetta Capannelli, Omar Arias, Elisabeth Huybens,
Christian Bodewig, Roberta Gatti, Ismail Radwan, Katarina Mathernova, and Ines Fraile-
Ordonez. The development of the report was coordinated by task team leaders Kosuke Anan
(kanan@worldbank.org) and Sandor Karacsony (skaracsony@worldbank.org). The chapters
were prepared, in alphabetical order, by Simona Anton, Magda Balica, Florin Botonogou, Aida
Catana, Adrian Dan, Plamen Danchev, Dana Farcasanu, Celine Ferre, Richard Florescu, Vlad
Grigoras, Sorin Ionita, Ana Ivasiuc, Barbara Kits, Adam Kullman, Joost de Laat, Mihai
Magheru, Ashna Mathema, Cristi Mihalache, Mariana Moarcas, Larisa Ofiteru, Iulius Rostas,
Claudia Rokx, Manuela Stanculescu, Rob Swinkels, Lea Tan, Dikshya Thapa, and Michael
Weber. Oana Maria Caraba, Sujani Eli, Sophia Georgieva, Corina Grigore, Camelia Gusescu and
Isadora Nouel contributed to the team’s work and provided support.
The team is grateful for the comments received from the report’s peer reviewers, Dena Ringold,
Ana Maria Munoz Boudet and Eva-Maria Szavuj (European Commission, DG Regional Policy).
The report also benefitted from further constructive comments by Koen Delanghe and Enrica
Chiozza (European Commission, DG Regional Policy), Soraya Goga and Siobhan McInerney-
Lankford. The team appreciates the feedback and support provided by Ms Marie-Jeanne Ghighea
from the Ministry of Labor, Social Protection, Family and the Elderly throughout the
development of the report.

                                                2
                                                             CONTENTS

1   Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 4

2   Education .............................................................................................................................. 16

3   Employment .......................................................................................................................... 65

4   Social Protection ................................................................................................................. 126

5   Health .................................................................................................................................. 152

6   Addressing Discrimination – Challenges and Opportunities .............................................. 195

7   Housing ............................................................................................................................... 230

8   Institutional mechanisms for effective local service delivery and use of EU instruments . 262




                                                                     3
                                         1    INTRODUCTION
1.1    ROMA INCLUSION: SMART ECONOMICS, BUT NOT YET A REALITY
Romania’s long-term economic sustainability and the long-term viability of the country’s
social protection system crucially depend on the success of Roma inclusion. During the 2011
Census, 621.573 Romanians (approximately 3% of the population) declared Roma ethnicity,
making Roma the second largest ethnic minority in Romania (after Hungarians). Expert
estimates place the number of Roma much higher: according to Council of Europe data, the
Romanian Roma population in 2010 was estimated to be between 1,200,000 and 2,500,000 (i.e.
between 6% and 12% of the total population)1. If these alternative estimates are correct, the
Roma would form the largest ethnic minority in the country. Moreover, survey data from the
UNDP/WB/EC (2011) household survey2 indicate that just over 37% - more than one third - of
the Romanian Roma population is under 15 years of age (Figure 1-1), which is in stark contrast
to the ageing demographic profile of Romania’s overall population. Hence, not only do the Roma
form a large ethnic minority group, but due to its demographic characteristics, this group also
accounts for an increasing share of new labor market entrants: currently, by using a population
estimate of 1,800,000 Roma in Romania, the share of Roma among new labor market entrants
reaches 20%. Hence, a large and growing share of new labor market entrants in Romania is
coming from the Roma population. Creating the conditions for a productive inclusion of young
Roma is critical for offsetting the steep projected decline in the country’s working-age
population (30% by 2050): in this respect, the labor contribution achieved through Roma
inclusion should also be considered as an essential component of economic growth and
contribution to financing of future pensions and social services.




1
  Notes: With regard to census based estimates there is a concern that Roma substantially underreport their ethnicity.
An alternative set of expert estimates is commonly reported (e.g. European Commission (2011) Communication
from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and
the Committee of the Regions, An EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies up to 2020 , and United
Nations Development Programme (2002), ‘Avoiding the Dependency Trap’.
2
  The UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011) was designed by the World Bank and UNDP, financed
by the European Commission DG Regional Policy, and implemented by UNDP through IPSOS polling agency.
Interviews were held with a random sample of Roma in Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Slovakia, and the Czech
Republic. In each country, approximately 750 Roma and 350 non-Roma households living in the same
neighborhoods or vicinity were interviewed. The sample focused on those communities where the share of the Roma
population equals or is higher than the national share of the Roma population. This approach covers 88% of the
Roma population in Bulgaria, 90% in the Czech Republic, 78% in Hungary, 89% in Romania, and 83% in Slovakia.
Summary findings were presented in “Roma at a Glance” (UNDP/FRA, 2012).
                                                          4
FIGURE 1-1: POPULATION PYRAMIDS: ROMA (LEFT PANEL) AND NON-ROMA NEIGHBORS (RIGHT
PANEL)

     80+
                                                         80+
70 to 74
                                                     70 to 74
60 to 64
                                                     60 to 64
50 to 54
                                                     50 to 54
40 to 44                                             40 to 44
30 to 34                                             30 to 34
20 to 24                                             20 to 24
10 to 14                                             10 to 14
    0 to 4                                             0 to 4
             15   10   5    0      5     10     15              10      5          0          5         10
                           Percent                                              Percent
                       Male Female                                          Male Female

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
However, the Romanian Roma are poor, vulnerable and socially excluded, severely limiting
their opportunities to contribute to Romania’s economic growth and shared prosperity.
Against this background, data from the Roma household survey paints a bleak picture of the
current status of Roma communities: the vast majority of Roma in Romania and other Eastern
European countries continue to live in poverty, much more so than neighbors living in the same
or nearby communities. The at-risk-of-poverty rate3 of Romanian Roma, at 84%, is almost 3
times higher than among neighboring non-Roma (see Table 1.1)4. The rate of Romanian Roma
households in severe material deprivation5 is alarmingly high (90%), and almost half of Roma
households have very low work intensity6 (see Table 1.1).


3
  The at-risk-of-poverty rate is a key social inclusion indicator in the European Union which indicates the share of
persons aged 0+ with an equivalised disposable income below 60% of the national equivalised median income.
4
  The share of Roma at risk of poverty is comparable to that of the neighboring countries: statistics compiled by
UNDP report rates for Romania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia, ranging from 71% (the
Czech Republic and Hungary) to 87% (Slovakia). The estimate for Romania reported above is slightly higher than
the UNDP estimate for Romania. This is caused by two factors: firstly, the sample used by UNDP differs from the
one used in this chapter. Secondly, the income levels reported by Roma households were decomposed into ‘major
sources of income’ in order to increase the precision of the obtained estimates. The UNDP dataset and the dataset
used in this chapter each made use of a different approach to deal wi th missing values within these ‘major sources of
income’ question items, creating some level of discrepancy: whereas the UNDP estimate excluded missing values
from the calculation, the estimate reported above replaced missing values with the mean reported value by Roma in
Romania for each particular source of income – conditional on receiving any income from that particular source.
The UNDP estimate stands at 74%.
5
  Share of population living in households lacking at least 4 items out of the following 9 items: i) to pay rent or
utility bills, ii) keep home adequately warm, iii) face unexpected expenses, iv) eat meat, fish or a protein equivalent
every second day, v) a week holiday away from home, or could not afford (even if wanted to) vi) a car, vii) a
washing machine, viii) a colour TV, or ix) a telephone.
6
  The indicator 'persons living in households with low work intensity' is defined as the number of persons living in a
household having a work intensity below a threshold set at 0.2. The work intensity of a household is the ratio of the
total number of months that all working-age household members have worked during the income reference year and
                                                           5
TABLE 1-1. EU SOCIAL INCLUSION INDICATORS IN ROMANIA

                                   National, target       National,       Roma actual            Non-Roma
                                      for 2020          actual (2011)                         neighbors actual

 At Risk of Poverty                      21%                22%                84%                   31%

 Living in Severe Material            Unspecified           32%                90%                   54%
 Deprivation
 Living in Household with Very        Unspecified            6%                44%                   22%
 Low Work Intensity
 Employment rate                         70%                64%                30%                   44%

 Share of 30-34 year olds                27%                22%               0.40%                  7%
 having achieved tertiary
 education
Source: EU-SILC (2011) and UNDP/WB/EC regional Roma survey (2011). Authors’ calculations.


Even when important background characteristics are held constant, merely ’being a Roma’
remains a key determinant of living in poverty. Analysis of household survey data shows that
a Romanian individual is 38% more likely to be at risk of poverty if he or she is of Roma origin
compared to non-Roma of similar age, education level, household composition, community
composition and geographic location. The data also shows that age, rural location, predominant
ethnicity in settlement and number of children in household have no impact of a similar
magnitude on the individual’s chances of being at risk of poverty. The analysis shows that
children are 37% more likely to be at risk of poverty if they are ethnic Roma. Education
improves one’s chances of escaping poverty: the analysis indicates that education significantly
correlates with better life chances, with individuals who completed secondary education being
17% less likely to be at risk of poverty. This number jumps to almost 20% in case of Roma,
indicating that secondary education can have a considerable poverty reduction impact in the
Roma communities. Still, ethnicity outweighs education in terms of predicting risk of poverty in
Romania. This maybe a reflection of a myriad of factors, including lower skills of Roma (not
captured by the education level), attitudes, and barriers to access labor opportunities including
discrimination (which is further discussed in Chapter 6 on antidiscrimination).
Poverty leads to dire circumstances in Roma households. A significant gap persists between
Roma and non-Roma households in all key areas of human development. Education outcomes of


the total number of months the same household members theoretically could have worked in the same period. A
working-age person is a person aged 18-59 years, with the exclusion of students in the age group between 18 and 24
years. Households composed only of children, of students aged less than 25 and/or people aged 60 or more are
completely excluded from the indicator calculation. Due to a lack of data on the number of months worked in the
previous year, the indicator used here was simplified, and captures whether or not the share of working age
individuals per household who are actually working over the total number of household members who could have
worked is below 0.2.

                                                        6
the Roma are considerably worse than those of the non-Roma: only 10% of Roma (ages between
25 and 64 years) have completed secondary education, in stark contrast with 58% of non-Roma
living nearby. The education gap starts early: only 32% of Roma children (ages between 3 and 6
years) are enrolled in preschool or kindergarten, against 77% of their non-Roma neighbors.
Significantly more Roma live in slum and overcrowded dwellings than non-Roma, and – likely
as a result – the health status of Roma individuals is significantly worse than that of the non-
Roma (Figure 1-2).
TABLE 1-2. KEY HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

                                         Roma                              Non-Roma Neighbors
 Completed                   secondary   Overall, among age group 25-64:   Overall, among age group. 25-64:
 education                               10%                               58%


                                         12% for men, 6% for women (age    59% for men, 52% for women (age
                                         group 25-64)                      group 25-64)
 Preschool enrollment rate               32%                               77%
 (ages 3-6)
 Chronic disease rate                    See Figure 1.2                    See Figure 1.2
 Individuals living in slum              29%                               5%
 dwellings
 Individuals  living   in                53%                               16%
 overcrowded dwellings
Source: UNDP/WB/EC regional Roma survey (2011).

FIGURE 1-2: AN EXAMPLE: CHRONIC DISEASE RATES AMONG MEN

                  Long-standing Illness or Health
                            Problem
             60                                     54
             50
                                                          40
             40
   Percent




             30
                                          19
             20
                                 9             10
             10      6               4
                         2
              0
                     0-14        15-24    25-54      55+

                             Roma    Non-Roma


Source: UNDP/WB/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
Large gaps persist in labor outcomes between Roma and non-Roma. The vast majority of
Roma express a desire for stable jobs, similar to the responses of non-Roma neighbors. Yet,
employment rates among Roma continue to lag far behind those of the majority populations, as
well as behind the Europe 2020 headline target of 75 percent of the population aged 20–64 to be
                                                                7
employed, and behind the Romania specific 2020 target of 70 percent. While in 2011, 66 percent
of men and 53 percent of women of working age (15-64) in the general population were
employed, only 42 percent and 19 percent of Roma men and women had jobs – including
informal employment.
Labor earnings among Roma are significantly lower than for non-Roma. The surveys show
that employed Roma earn only a fraction of the average earnings among the general population.
As a result of low employment rates and low wages, the labor income of working age Roma men
in Romania is estimated to be only 20 percent of that in the general population (Figure 1-3), and
among Roma women, this is even lower: 12 percent (Figure 1-4).
FIGURE 1-3. GAP IN LABOR INCOME (MEN)7

             100%          100%              100%         100%         100%
      100%
                                81%
                                                                          74%
       80%       64%
       60%                                                   52%
                                                40%
       40%                          31%
                     26%
                                                    15%          20%          19%
       20%
        0%
                Bulgaria    Czech Republic     Hungary      Romania      Slovakia
         General Population             Non-Roma neighbors              Roma


FIGURE 1-4. GAP IN LABOR INCOME (WOMEN)
             100%          100%              100%         100%         100%
      100%
      80%                      71%
                62%
      60%
                                                             35%          36%
      40%                                       26%
                    19%            19%
      20%                                           7%           12%              9%
       0%
               Bulgaria    Czech Republic      Hungary     Romania       Slovakia
       General Population             Non-Roma neighbors               Roma

Source: General Population: EU-SILC (2008) for earnings information. Eurostat (2012) for 2011 Quarter 2.
UNDP/WB/EC regional Roma survey (2011)


1.2    MOVING FORWARD:                                      AN         INTEGRATED      APPROACH   TO    ROMA
       INCLUSION
Roma inclusion is a macroeconomic necessity. About 17 percent of the general population in
Romania is 65 and years or older: by 2040, this is estimated to rise to 28 percent8. The working-
age populations is projected to fall by 30% by 2050. At the same time, the share of new labor


7
  For each country, labor income rates for the general population are normalized at 100%. The corresponding rates
for non-Roma neighbors and Roma are relative to the general populations. Income rates are estimated by
multiplying for each country the average employment rates times the average earnings for those who are employed.
This gives the average earnings for an individual in the working age population. For comparative purposes, values
have been adjusted to 2011 prices using the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (Eurostat, 2012).
8
  UN Population Division (2011)
                                                                              8
market entrants in Romania that is Roma is large and growing; those aged 0-14 years – the new
generation of labor market entrants - make up 36 percent of the total Roma population, compared
to 15 percent for the same figure among the general population. Depending on the total size of
the Roma population9, this means that between 6-20 percent of labor market entrants in Romania
today are Roma. According to a World Bank estimate on the basis of 2008 data 10, assuming an
equal number of working-age Roma men and women and that average wages in the economy
remain unchanged, equalizing labor market opportunities for Roma could result in potential
economic benefits ranging between 887 million Euro up to 2.9 billion Euro in Romania.
Roma currently do not have the opportunities to improve their own welfare and gain access
to the labor market, despite clear and actionable policy entry points. Simple descriptive
indicators on Roma’s desire to work suggest that the latter is very similar to the same desire
among non-Roma neighbors. However, merely being of Roma background increases the chances
of living in poverty, likely a reflection of skills gaps and other barriers to jobs (including
discrimination). In short, Roma currently live in deprivation, and in the vast majority of
circumstances, they do not have access to the tools that could help them escape poverty.
However, the analysis suggests clear and actionable entry points for designing policies that could
help improve the welfare and labor market opportunities of Roma.
Promoting Roma inclusion in Romania should be based on concerted efforts, following a
dual-purpose approach comprising (i) a comprehensive understanding of the ‘dimensions
of exclusion’ faced by Roma; and (ii) improved service delivery within each of, as well as
across these dimensions. In an effort to streamline policy recommendations and to focus on the
most effective areas of intervention, our main focus in this report is on three of these ‘dimensions
of exclusion’: education (Chapter 2), earning opportunities for families (Chapter 3 & 4), and
basic services and living conditions (Chapter 5 & 7). These three dimensions are at the core of
improving opportunities for the Roma, with respect to the current generation and, perhaps even
more importantly, with respect to the next generation. The report demonstrates that targeted
policies and programs across these dimensions can contribute to progress on socio-economic
outcomes among the Romanian Roma. At the same time, service delivery gaps particularly
affecting the Roma must be addressed for this approach to be effective. In this light, it is also
important to examine the role of ethnic discrimination experienced by Roma (Chapter 6), as well
as the various policy initiatives and institutional mechanisms that are currently in place to
address Roma inclusion (Chapter 8).




9
  Estimates range from 535,140 (National Census in 2002) to [730,000-970,000] according to a Romanian
Government and World Bank 2005 survey called "The Roma Communities Social Map" to 1,850,000, according to
the EU Communication "An EU framework for National Roma Integration Strategies up to 2020", based on the data
from of Council of Europe. Source: Strategy of the Government of Romania for the Inclusion of the Romanian
Citizens Belonging to Roma Minority; 2012-2020
10
   Roma Inclusion: An Economic Opportunity for Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Romania and Serbia. (The World
Bank, 2010)
                                                      9
 1.2.1 EXAMPLES OF RETURN ON INVESTMENT OF AN INTEGRATED APPROACH
Synergies between education and employment policies can help in addressing the
intergenerational skills challenge. Facilitating education and improving skills is critical for
improving the labor market outlook for the next generation as well as for the current Roma work
force. Among other recommendations, the report finds that education policies should involve
prioritizing investments in quality early childhood development interventions in communities
with Roma population by improving the infrastructure, working with parents and incentivizing
participation; addressing school dropout through by scaling up school mediation and making
schools more friendly to all students; and improving the quality of education in schools with a
high percentage of Roma pupils through training and incentivizing teachers. These measures will
contribute to closing the skills gap on the long run. At the same time, study findings point to the
need for employment policies to focus on improving skills and employability, e.g. through labor
training programs targeting disadvantaged Roma youth out of work and Roma women, as well as
improving job search incentives and linking them closely with job creation policies, while
improving the efficiency of job search. When designing labor policies, the transformational
effect of employment on the individual and family should be considered, including potential
intergenerational effects: this may further contribute to improved education outcomes among
Roma children.
Access to safety net programs is widespread among Roma households, but these households
remain largely below the poverty line. Nine out of ten Roma households have access to at least
one social protection program in Romania, but three out of five Roma households still remain in
the poorest quintile of the income distribution. While the correlation between high levels of
poverty and high participation of the Roma in social protection programs shows that safety net
programs are reaching the poorest, it raises the question of the effectiveness of social protection
in mitigating poverty in Roma households.

Addressing the health challenges of the Roma is crucial for improving basic living
conditions, and requires cross-cutting efforts. Improving the dire health outcomes among the
Romanian Roma requires policy measures on a number of fronts, including initiatives in other
sectors such as education and housing, and need to be complemented by broader reforms in the
healthcare system. The prevention of risky behaviors, including improvement of diets among the
Roma deserves priority concern, along with increasing access to, and usage of prenatal and early
childhood healthcare. Roma families’ health status is likely to benefit from the removal of
financial barriers, both with respect to healthy diets and with respect to preventative check-ups
and other healthcare visits; as well as a clear policy focus and reliance on the Roma health
mediator program to improve service delivery and awareness raising at the local level.

Interventions in the housing sector, of similar importance for improving living conditions,
need to take account of the heterogeneity of housing conditions. There is no one-size-fits-all
approach, and housing assistance needs to be expanded beyond ‘social housing’. By broadening
the menu of options with such measures as infrastructure upgrading, legalization of property
titles, home improvement and housing microfinance, interventions could be made more cost-
efficient, equitable, sustainable, and suitable to the needs of Roma population. By applying an
integrated approach which links “hard” (infrastructure) measures with “soft” ones aimed at
                                                 10
improving the livelihood, income generation, and capacity of the residents, greater and more
sustainable impacts could be expected through synergies. Additionally, regulations and policies
leading to inefficiencies in the overall housing market would need to be addressed to foster
development of the housing market at large.


1.2.2 CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES: INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS AND
      DISCRIMINATION
A prerequisite of addressing service delivery gaps is effective institutional mechanisms. A
common issue identified across sectors is a lack of coordination, capacity, and resources among
the institutions responsible for implementation of Roma inclusion policies and actions. In order
to enhance the institutional mechanisms for effective local service delivery and use of EU
instruments, the report recommends clarifying institutional responsibilities through more uniform
legislation and clear working arrangements. A framework law could be created to spell out the
functional relations between various structures as well as budgetary sources. Building capacity of
municipalities is essential in accessing EU funds, with broad involvement of NGOs through
establishment of a community-based project facilitation unit. Partnerships with Roma
communities could be strengthened by formulating a methodology for Roma consultations at the
local level, while stakeholder feedback could also be gathered through online platforms. The
report also recommends improving targeting of policies by mapping disadvantaged communities
at the sub-regional and local levels.
The programs of Roma mediators and counselors could be scaled up to support Roma
people in accessing social services, and to enable the delivery of these services in a way that
is more suitable to the circumstances of the Roma population . Roma mediators and
counsellors have produced positive impacts in education, health, and employment by being a
bridge between Roma communities and local facilities, or between the Roma people and public
officials. Evidence shows that mediation can play an important role and contribute to better
access to local services for Roma, as well as a higher level of trust between municipalities and
Roma communities in general. However, the lack of clear implementation arrangements and
resources has impeded scaling-up and continuation of their involvement. Clearer mechanisms
and standards are needed to secure funding for mediators, and to ensure they have a strong
mandate to fulfil their duties. The knowledge and information gathered by mediation could also
be more actively used for developing mainstream policies and programmes.
Discrimination is a cross-cutting issue that needs to be addressed at the level of service
delivery across sectors, and, more broadly, as a key underlying factor of Roma exclusion.
On one hand, discrimination in markets and space prevents Roma from fully participating in
society by reducing their opportunities and aspirations; on the other, discrimination in the service
domain puts Roma at a significant disadvantage in accessing social services, such as education
and healthcare. Discrimination needs to be combated by addressing the drivers of discrimination,
such as negative stereotypes, scapegoating, and distrust, along with discriminatory practices at
service delivery level.
To effectively address discrimination, the report recommends several practical measures.
The application of the law against discrimination could be strengthened by further clarifying how
unlawful acts of discrimination will be sanctioned, making the public more aware of the law, and
increasing the capacity of the enforcement bodies to consistently apply the law. Prioritizing and
                                                11
mainstreaming concrete actions to combat discrimination at the national level could be achieved
by developing a strategy that define clear objectives, targets, a set of concrete actions,
responsibilities, budget and a monitoring framework. Introducing national level programs to
combat discrimination in service delivery, such as mandatory cultural competency training for
teachers, health care providers etc. along with a system of ombudspersons could also contribute
to closing the service delivery gap. Mechanisms that promote interactions and foster mutual
understanding between the Roma and non-Roma – such as funding schemes for projects of
mutual interest to Roma and non Roma disadvantaged groups – could facilitate collaboration and
increased interaction and help foster increased mutual understanding and respect.
1.3   METHODOLOGY AND DATA SOURCES
This report is offering evidence-based policy advice. The assessment relies on three main
sources of information. First, it takes advantage of the 2011 UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional
Roma Survey (RRS), the most comprehensive survey effort to date to capture the situation of
Roma in Central and Eastern Europe. It also includes information from the 2008-2012
Household Budget Surveys (HBS) of Romania (see Box 1), used in the Employment and Social
Protection chapters specifically. Second, this report relies on qualitative information, collected
through field visits and through interviews with key stakeholders from the Government of
Romania, Romanian academics, from civil society and representatives of the Roma communities.
Third, each of the chapters highlights relevant international experiences from which policy
formulation on Roma integration can benefit. Many of the international examples and best
practices from integrating poor and marginalized communities elsewhere provide reasons to be
optimistic that Roma integration does not have to be a distant goal for Romania – if
discrimination of the Roma can be addressed.

The UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey – the main data source for this report --
is a comprehensive survey that is representative of approximately 89% of the Romanian
Roma population, including Roma living in mixed, separated and segregated
neighborhoods. The survey questionnaire was designed by the World Bank and UNDP in
partnership, and implemented by UNDP through the IPSOS polling agency in May-July 2011 on
a random sample of Roma living in communities with concentrated Roma populations in
Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Slovakia, and the Czech Republic (henceforth: the “regional Roma
survey”). The European Commission DG Regional Policy financed the survey. In each of the
countries, approximately 750 Roma households (representing over 3,500 individuals) and
approximately 350 non-Roma households living in the same neighborhoods or vicinity were
interviewed. The sample was purposefully not representative of all Roma in these countries, but
rather focused on those communities where the share of the Roma population equals or is higher
than the national share of Roma population. This covers 88% of the Roma population in
Bulgaria, 90% in the Czech Republic, 78% in Hungary, 89% in Romania, and 83% in Slovakia.
Once identified, a random sample of these areas was drawn, and households were randomly
sampled within these enumeration areas.
The data provide reliable estimates of the conditions in which the vast majority of the
Roma in Romania live, and of the conditions of their non-Roma neighbors. Unless otherwise
noted, the analysis in this report is based on the ‘Roma’ and the ‘non-Roma nearby’ sampled
households as they were identified by the survey enumerators. Comparisons with non-Roma
living nearby provide a crucial frame of reference, since the sampled non-Roma households live
in the same municipalities and thus share local labor markets, community, school, and health
                                               12
facilities as well as other services and collective infrastructure. Hence, if we observe differences
in education, health, housing, and employment between Roma and non-Roma households, these
must reflect particular disadvantages faced by Roma, differences in preferences between Roma
and non-Roma, or both.
For comparison with the general population in Romania, the report uses the EU Statistics
on Income and Living Conditions (EU SILC) survey. The EU SILC does not distinguish
between Roma and non-Roma and provides household survey information that is representative
of the general Romanian population. Since Roma and non-Roma neighbors face the same local
conditions, when gaps are reported between an educational or employment attainment of Roma
compared with non-Roma neighbors in the 2011 regional Roma survey, these gaps will generally
be smaller than between Roma and the general Romanian population in the EU SILC.


        BOX 1-1 – ISSUES WITH DATA COMPARABILITY BETWEEN THE HOUSEHOLD BUDGET
                      SURVEY AND THE UN/WB/EC REGIONAL ROMA SURVEY

Romania’s Household Budget Survey (HBS) is a nationally representative household sample conducted
every year between January and December among 30,000 households or 70,000 individuals. The HBS
questionnaire includes ethnic affiliation that is used to identify “self -declared” Roma individuals.
According to HBS 2012, 3.2 percent of the total population in Romania declares itself Roma.
The UNDP/WB/EC regional Roma survey (henceforth RRS) is a comprehensive survey on the living
conditions of the Roma. It was implemented between May and July 2011 in six Eastern European
countries, including Romania. The sampling framework includes Roma living in mixed, separated and
segregated neighborhoods. In each country, approximately 750 Roma and 350 non-Roma households
living in the same neighborhoods or vicinity were interviewed. The sample is representative of
communities where the share of the Roma population is higher than the national share of Roma
population (89 percent of the Roma in Romania). The survey includes third party identification for
ethnicity.
RRS Roma households are more rural than HBS Roma households. The main difference between
RRS and HBS Roma households lies in their location: RRS Roma live in more rural areas, where the
concentration of Roma households is higher (compact neighborhoods). RRS and HBS Roma do not differ
that much otherwise: RRS households have worse access to sewerage and electric goods (rural bias), but
display similar access to bikes, phones, television, bathroom, toilet, and better access to computers and
internet.




                                                   13
                                                       RRS 2011          HBS 2011
                                                       Mean St. Err.     Mean St. Err.
                  Urban location                       0.39   0.49       0.47   0.50
                  Household size                       4.64   2.52       4.16   2.23
                  Household-head age                   45.7   14.9       45.2   14.2
                  Household-head male                  0.74   0.44       0.78   0.42
                  Household-head secondary education   0.09              0.13
                  Radio                                0.24   0.43       0.45   0.50
                  Color TV                             0.81   0.39       0.91   0.29
                  Bicycle/motorbike                    0.20   0.40       0.24   0.42
                  Computer                             0.16   0.36       0.08   0.27
                  Internet connection                  0.09   0.29       0.06   0.23
                  Phone (cell/landline)                0.65   0.48       0.67   0.47
                  Washing machine                      0.33   0.47       0.44   0.50
                  Number of rooms                      2.39   1.26       2.24   1.04
                  Surface of housing (sqm)             48.7   45.0       36.0   19.3
                  Sewer connection                     0.19   0.39       0.41   0.49
                  Bathroom inside premise              0.18   0.38       0.17   0.38
                  Toilet inside                        0.18   0.39       0.18   0.38
                  Electricity connection               0.84   0.37       0.95   0.23



Finally, and because the RRS social protection module is less detailed than that of HBS, access to SP is
also likely to be underestimated for Roma households




                                                  14
ANNEX


ANNEX TABLE 1-1PREDICTING AT RISK OF POVERTY
(Percent increase in the risk of being poor)
                                  (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)
                                  All Roma and    Roma and non-   Roma               Roma      Children
                                  non-Roma        Roma Children   individuals only   only
                                  individuals
 Roma                             0.381***        0.369***
                                  (0.022)         (0.040)
 Age                              -0.001***       -0.003          -0.001*            -0.004*
                                  (0.000)         (0.002)         (0.000)            (0.002)
 Completed          secondary     -0.168***                       -0.197***
 education
                                  (0.023)                         (0.038)
 Number    of     household       0.051***        0.048***        0.044***           0.038***
 members aged 0-15
                                  (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.003)            (0.004)
 Predominant ethnicity      in    -0.008          -0.009          -0.010             -0.010
 settlement is Roma
                                  (0.014)         (0.018)         (0.015)            (0.018)
 Rural household                  0.081***        0.067***        0.070***           0.058***
                                  (0.014)         (0.020)         (0.016)            (0.020)
 Child is enrolled in school or                   -0.026                             -0.027
 training
                                                  (0.020)                            (0.020)
 Constant                         0.340***        0.374***        0.729***           0.791***
                                  (0.028)         (0.043)         (0.023)            (0.027)


 Observations                     3,419           1,317           2,562              1,155
 R-squared                        0.325           0.210           0.085              0.064
 F                                365.8           44.85           54.53              16.88
 DF                               6               6               5                  5
Source: UNDP/WB/EC regional Roma survey (2011).




                                                      15
                                         2    EDUCATION
Education is one of the three main ‘dimensions of exclusion’ faced by Roma. This dimension is
explored in more concise form in a separate summary report. This chapter provides an analysis
of the considerable gap between Roma and the general population in education outcomes, and
offers policy recommendations to address it. The study recommends, first and foremost, to ensure
universal accessibility of early childhood education, e.g. through prioritizing investments in
quality early childhood development interventions, improving the infrastructure, working with
parents and incentivizing participation. Further, the study recommends that education policies
focus on improving the quality of education in schools with a high percentage of Roma pupils
through training and incentivizing teachers. The findings also recommend addressing school
dropout through e.g. scaling up school mediation, and closing the gender gap in education
outcomes.
2.1 INTRODUCTION
In spite of important reforms in the education sector in recent years, crucial challenges
remain (Box 1), and these affect Roma far more than other groups (Figure 2-1)11. With
respect to Roma, there are still large disparities in access and participation at all education levels
between Roma and their non-Roma neighbors, resulting in extremely large gaps in adults’
education levels. Inequalities start early with too few Roma children in Romania benefitting from
early childhood education and care, despite the evidence that Roma children benefiting from
preschool and parental stimulation has significantly higher cognitive outcomes. In rural areas,
Roma minorities and children with Special Education Needs12 (SEN), tend to lag behind in
participation and to leave school early. The gender gap in enrolment and participation in
education is also significant for all levels of education, Roma females being constantly
disadvantaged compared to Roma males.
Quality of education and classroom segregation hinder progress. While there are concerns
about the overall quality of education in Romania (as evidenced by the suboptimal performance
of Romanian schools in international assessments like PISA), the quality of teaching and
learning is of even greater concern in areas with significant share of Roma population. School
and classroom level segregation have had negative impact on both teaching and learning and
recent studies conducted in 2008 and 2010 suggest that segregation affects between 31 and 60
percent of the schools in areas with higher share of Roma population in Romania. There is also
high correlation between segregation and low quality of education arising from the poor school
infrastructure and learning resources in the segregated schools, the lower qualification of
teachers and their higher turnover. Further, the current policy framework is not conducive to
attracting more good teachers to work in schools in disadvantaged areas. The low participation of
adults in LLL is another challenge that widens the skills gap. In addition, there is a low
correlation between the knowledge and skills provided to students in school, and common socio-
economic demands.



11
  The World Bank’s Romania 2020 study and the World Bank’s analytical advisory services on Early School
Leaving examine the broader challenges of the Romanian education system.


                                                     16
Uneven reforms and an inadequate allocation framework contribute to the widening gap .
Against the backdrop of insufficient resources allocated to the education system in Romania (3.5
% of GDP compared to EU27 average of 5.4%), the per capita funding of schools appears to
have inadequate equity components, thus failing to provide the resources required to address the
needs of disadvantaged schools and the students at risk. Curricular reforms were rather
fragmented and were not associated with appropriate implementation plans, and as such many of
these reforms have not yet been implemented at grassroots schools. Moreover, the reforms in the
education sector were not accompanied by relevant reforms in the social assistance sector or
health sector to help (i) targeting the poor; (ii) targeting the poor Roma; and (iii) targeting Roma
girls.
FIGURE 2-1: SHARE OF ADULTS AGED 24-65 HAVING COMPLETED SECONDARY EDUCATION

             100                                       71
                          68
                                                                       57
   Percent




                                       42
             50
                      6            7              13              14
              0
                   Women, urban Women, rural    Men, urban       Men, rural

                                Roma        Non-Roma


Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).

Lower levels of education among Roma do not reflect preferences: generally, Roma parents
want to see their children achieve the same levels of education as non-Roma parents. An
important share of Roma students and parents report experiencing ethnic discrimination by
educational institutions. Thus, research conducted in one of the largest Roma communities shows
that 25% of Roma students faced discriminatory remarks at school (ERRC 2013:10), whereas
another report signals ethnic prejudice among teachers as one of the main factors opposing
school desegregation (Fox 2012:2). A large share of Roma parents (40%) think that a Roma child
is usually treated worse than a non-Roma child in school (Surdu 2011:89). In spite of these
discouraging signals, Roma parents largely have similar desires regarding their children’s’
education as non-Roma parents: for both boys and girls, the same share of Roma and non-Roma
parents want their children to achieve upper secondary education. At the same time, the share of
Roma parents wanting their children to continue on to post-secondary education is lower than
among non-Roma. Expectations for boys and girls are also largely similar.




                                                            17
FIGURE 2-2 : PARENTS’ DESIRED L EVEL OF EDUCATION FOR THEIR CHILDREN

  60%
                                                                          52%
                                                                            48%     49%
  50%                                                                                 47%                  46%
                                                                                                         43%
  40%

  30%
                                                      23%
                                                    22%                                          23%
                                                                                               23%
  20%

  10%                               5%                         6% 7%
          1% 1%     1% 1%      2%         1% 0%
   0%
          Roma    Non-Roma     Roma      Non-Roma    Roma    Non-Roma      Roma    Non-Roma     Roma    Non-Roma
          Special education   Primary education -    Lower secondary       Upper secondary      Post-secondary
                                   ISCED 1          education - ISCED 2   education - ISCED 3 education - ISCED 4+

                                                      Boys    Girls


Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).

When it comes to education, the vulnerability of Roma children and adults is enhanced by
‘vicious cycles’ in which segregation and discrimination are common. Because lower
educational achievements have a negative impact on Roma’s social as well as labor market
inclusion opportunities, the gap in education between Roma and non-Roma introduces a vicious
cycle. Poverty, low access to the labor market for parents, early engagement in the informal labor
market of young people less than 16 years old, discrimination and the lack of an inclusive school
culture in most of the schools are also major factors contributing to, and perpetuating this gap.
In the context of current demographic trends, with a rapidly aging and shrinking general
Romanian population (see Figure 1-1, Chapter 1) and a young and increasing Roma
population, the education levels, learning achievements and skills of today’s young Roma
have a large and growing impact on Romania’s society as a whole. Current educational
policy should regard targeted measures for increased Roma school participation as an
opportunity for increasing the human capital and for developing a more inclusive society in the
near future. Moreover, it should be recognized that increasing education levels among Roma will
greatly benefit their inclusion on the labor market, with positive impacts for society as a whole,
including a positive impact on governmental budgets.
BOX 2-1: THE QUALITY OF ROMANIAN PUBLIC EDUCATION

Quality of education in Romania remains to be a concern. The country’s average reading
literacy score in PISA 2009 was one of the lowest among the EU member states. Four in ten
students (40%) scored below Level 2 on the PISA reading proficiency scale, compared to 21%
for the EU25 countries on average. This means that a significant share of students in Romania is
functionally illiterate. Low scores in reading literacy, math and sciences in Romania are also
based on significant socio-economic discrepancies between rural and urban schools. The
relatively low spending per student is also correlated with the low PISA performance in
Romania. Quality is further impeded by the dissonance between the fragmented and partial
curricular reforms and the teachers’ training, while the effectiveness of student assessments is
reduced and results distorted by various practices and norms.
                                                18
2.2 LEGAL, INSTITUTIONAL                       AND        POLICY        CONTEXT            FOR       ROMA
    EDUCATION IN ROMANIA
National legislation recognizes the rights of the Roma minority, with access to quality
education being granted by different policy- and legislative documents. However,
education in Romani language is still absent, except for the optional Romani language classes in
schools. In August 2000, the Emergency Ordinance 137/2000 for prevention of all forms of
discrimination was adopted, and the National Council for Combating Discrimination was
established to implement its provisions. A number of provisions in the National Education Law
(2011) reaffirm the antidiscrimination aspects and the principle of equal access to all levels and
forms of education and LLL by recognizing and ensuring the right of the national minority
children to preserve, develop and express their ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity.
One particular anti-discrimination measure that stands out in the educational sector is the quota
for Roma children (Box 2).
BOX 2: RESERVED PLACES FOR ROMA IN HIGH SCHOOLS AND UNIVERSITIES

During 2000-2006, approximately 10,3001 Roma students in Romania have benefitted from
affirmative measures (reserved places for Roma) for secondary and vocational education,
and approximately 1,420 students benefited from the enrolment quota for universities.
While the affirmative measures for Roma children and youth were not systematically monitored
at the national level to provide evidence for their cost-effectiveness, particular interventions
seem to have positive effects on educational achievements of Roma. Still, there is a need to
improve the targeting of these programs, strengthening the focus on those pupils/students who
are Romani language speakers, come from rural areas and live in compact, homogenous Roma
communities. A recent survey reveals that affirmative measures are relatively unknown among
the Roma: only 26% of adult Roma are aware of the existence of reserved places for the Roma in
high schools, whereas only 21% know that this possibility also exists in the case of post-
secondary education (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2013).
In addition, a number of recent measures have targeted segregation in particular. In 2004
the Ministry of Education adopted a desegregation strategy implemented by central and local
actors. In 2007, a Memorandum for institutional cooperation in combating segregation was
jointly signed by the Ministry of Education and Roma organizations. Ministerial Order no. 1540
of 19.07.2007 on desegregation policy explicitly states that “segregation is a major form of
discrimination and has a negative impact on equal access of children to quality education,
representing a violation of human and educational rights”. The order proposes a methodology
and indicators to monitor segregation. While the desegregation strategy monitoring process has
not been followed systematically, monitoring reports commissioned by international agencies
(such as UNICEF) were prepared by civil society organizations. Unfortunately, the
recommendations13 provided by civil society regarding the desegregation strategy was not timely
reflected by the relevant public agencies, resulting in suboptimal implementation mechanisms
and quality framework for the desegregation plans developed at the school level.



13
  See also Iulius Rostas, ed., REF & CEU Press, Budapest and New York, 2012, 392 pages “Ten Years After - A
History of Roma School Desegregation in Central and Eastern Europe”
                                                     19
At the government level, The National Agency for Roma is in charge of coordinating the
policies and measures towards improving the situation of the Roma minority in Romania,
including measures and policies on education. The Agency also acts to ensure a mechanism
for implementation and monitoring of The Decade of Roma Inclusion. In 2007, the Agency
elaborated national action plans for the Decade with specific measures targeting the education
sector.
The National Action Plan on Education for the Decade of Roma Inclusion has five
important objectives, but was never officially adopted by the Romanian government. The
five objectives are: increasing Romani participation in preschool education; encouraging Romani
participation in primary and secondary education (grades one to twelve); encouraging Romani
participation in tertiary education; developing an inclusive educational environment; and
preserving Romani cultural heritage. However, this national action plan was not officially
adopted and no budgetary allocation has been put in place.
School Mediators have recently gained formal recognition in Romania, but remain small in
numbers. In 2000, the Ministry of Education defined the roles and responsibilities of school
mediators as auxiliary didactic staff and in 2001 they became a recognized profession in
Romania, incorporated in the Romanian Occupational Classification. However, it was only in
2007 that the Ministry of Education regulated the school mediators’ activities and their
employment through Order no. 1539/19.07.2007. Extensive training of school mediators was
implemented through the PHARE RO programs in the period 2003-2007, led by the Ministry of
Education with significant support from other international and European projects and civil
society organizations. By 2012 the total number of trained school mediators reached 923 14, but
only about half of them (437) are actually employed in the educational system.
Whereas in other Eastern European countries Roma children are often disproportionally
likely to end up in special schools, this is not the case in Romania 15, which has one of the
lowest shares of Roma children enrolled in special education in the region. In spite of a
number of outstanding challenges, recent improvements in the inclusion of children with
special educational needs (SEN) are remarkable. A major policy reform in 2000 assigned a
leading role to the Ministry of Education in regulating the inclusion of children with SEN.
Following the adoption of methodology that encourages schools to enroll children with SEN
(200416), their number17 in special schools was reduced by half from about 53.000 (2000) to
about 27.000 (2009). Related, the number of children with SEN enrolled in regular schools
increased over 14 times to reach above 14.000 children in 2009. Despite the significant progress,
inclusive education is hampered by a number of outstanding issues18.
Measures for intercultural education aimed at providing opportunities for Roma children to
study the language, history, culture and traditions of Roma have been limited and
unsystematic at the policy level, although good practices are implemented through civil


14 Children's Rights References in the Universal Periodic Review (Second Cycle), 2012
15
   According to UNDP/WB/EC Regional Roma Survey Data, enrolment into special education attendance among
Roma is lower than other countries in the region. In Romania, 3% of the Roma aged 7-18 go to special schools
compared to about 5% for non-Roma living nearby (4% for boys and 5% for girls).
16 Order no. 5379/25 November 2004
17
   Data provided by the National Institute for Statistics in Annual Yearbook on Special Education, 2004-2010
18 2009, Institute of Educational Sciences

                                                    20
society and international initiatives. While there is a specialized Department of Romani
Language Education at the Ministry of Education and designated Roma school inspectors
responsible for the implementation of intercultural education at the county level, the measures
towards intercultural education promoting Roma identity lack coherence and a systematic
approach towards implementation19. The role and impact of the Romani school inspectors
regarding intercultural education is still unclear, and their role varies from county to county,
while their overall number has been decreasing over the recent years. Moreover, intercultural
education should be addressed not only to Roma children, as a discriminated group, but to all
students as a measure to increase the intercultural awareness at the level of the general
population in Romania.
In a bid to overcome the systemic challenges of Roma inclusion, significant efforts have
been made recently (at both EU and national levels) to design better integrated policies,
based on accurate monitoring and data collection systems regarding the most important
aspects of Roma inclusion: in particular, education, employment, healthcare and housing. These
efforts were further encouraged in EU member states by the adoption of the EU Framework for
National Roma Integration Strategies through 2020. The Romanian Government responded to
this initiative by adopting its 2012-2020 National Roma Inclusion Strategy (NRIS) in December
2011. While the strategy includes well defined measures for completion of primary education by
all Roma children, important aspects are completely omitted; for example, increasing Roma
participation in tertiary education and expanding the use of innovative educational approaches
such as ICT-based access to learning and skills. Other weak points of the Strategy include the
lack of baseline data related to key indicators, insufficient clarity regarding the roadmap to
reaching the objectives and envisioned results, and the lack of gender and youth dimensions.
In order to address dropouts and early school leaving, the Romania Ministry of Education
has been implementing the “Second Chance” program whereby both children having left
school and adults in a situation of early leaving from education and training could enroll into
compulsory education. One important limitation of the program, however, is the eligibility,
which allows into the program only individuals who have been out of school and education for
more than 4 years. Article 68 (6) of the ROFUIP20 establishes that a person is eligible for
enrolling into a „Second Chance” program only after having exceeded by four years the age of
the class he / she needs to attend. This definition raises an important question mark regarding the
options of a person having dropped out of school but not having completed yet the four-year
mark of exceeding the age of the respective class. In practice, this means that a person in this
situation does not have any options at all to reintegrate the educational system before the four-
year mark stated by the ministerial document (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011). In turn, this leads to
the increase of disengagement from education and, in parallel, the decrease of the likelihood that
early school leavers will return to the education system after such a long period of time, thereby
reinforcing their exclusion. Modifying the eligibility rules for the Second Chance program as to
include early school leavers from the moment they are declared in a dropout situation might be a
solution to overcome this issue.
The underfunding of education in Romania remains to be a concern. In 2010, public
expenditure on education was at 3.5% of GDP, significantly lower than the EU27 average


19   2009, Study by Roma Centre Amare Romentza, supported by UNICEF
20
     Rules and Regulations of Pre-Universitary Education Units.
                                                   21
of 5.4 percent. Research by Hatos (2007) finds that the financing allocated to the primary,
secondary and tertiary levels in Romania largely privileges the beneficiaries of the tertiary level,
which implies that the system supports to a greater extent students who are already able to reach
this level, thus contributing to the social exclusion of the ones with diminished abilities to reach
the tertiary level, among whom many Roma families.
FIGURE 2-3: PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION (% OF GDP)

     10.0                                                             8.8
      9.0                                                                                                                                        7.9                                                                                                                                                             7.6
      8.0                       6.6                                                                                                                                                      6.7                                                                                 6.8 7.0
      7.0                                                                                           6.5                                                                                                                                                                                         6.2
                                                                                          5.7                         5.9                                                                        6.0 5.9                                               5.7
      6.0   5.4                                                                 5.1                           5.0                                         5.0 5.4 4.9                                                    5.2 5.6
      5.0                                 4.1 4.2                                                                              4.3 4.5                                                                                                                            4.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3.5
      4.0
      3.0
      2.0
      1.0
      0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Iceland
                                                                                                                                                 Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                          Latvia
                                          Bulgaria




                                                                                                                                                                   Lithuania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Romania
            EU (27 countries)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Slovakia


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                               Hungary



                                                                                                                                                                                                               Austria
                                                                                          Estonia




                                                                                                                                         Italy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Portugal
                                Belgium


                                                     Czech Republic
                                                                      Denmark




                                                                                                              Spain




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Finland
                                                                                                                      France
                                                                                Germany


                                                                                                    Ireland




                                                                                                                                                                                         Malta
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Slovenia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                United Kingdom
                                                                                                                               Croatia




Source: Eurostat, 2010.
The equity component of the per capita based funding of Romanian schools seems to be
inadequate to fully overcome the discrepancies between allocations, and the actual needs of
schools located in or serving disadvantaged communities. A recent study21 by the Institute of
Educational Sciences and UNICEF Romania reveals that schools in such communities have
limited resources and usually fail to implement any activities addressing students at risk of
school failure (repetition, absenteeism, dropout, etc.). In 2012, the expenditures of schools in
disadvantaged settings were equal to the core funding allocation covering the schools’ basic
needs (administrative costs and teachers' salaries). Per capita funding of schools needs to be
consistently monitored, as schools situated near Roma compact settlements tend not to have legal
status and be dependent on another – usually larger – neighboring school with legal status,
receiving and administering both budgets. This dependency of “Roma” schools from other
schools increases the probability that resources are allocated unequally, discriminating “Roma”
schools, regardless of the per capita funding rule.
Although there have been various policy initiatives to improve the situation, a
comprehensive strategy is still lacking, and further initiatives would be needed to
holistically address the education gap between Roma and non-Roma. In order to address
those issues, policies, programs and initiatives have been put in place in the last years in
Romania, significantly supported by ESF funds (2007-2013) and other external funding.
Government agencies, EU and international organizations as well as civil society and Roma
organizations in Romania played a major role in designing relevant interventions. The research


21
  Fartușnic, C. at all Financing pre-university education system based on standards cost. Current evaluation from
the equity perspective. Institute of Educational Sciences, UNICEF Romania (under publication).
                                                                                                                                                      22
and accumulation of data on the gaps between Roma and non-Roma have increased in the recent
years, although the lack of a coherent national strategy for policy monitoring, evaluation and
measuring results and impact still persists as a major challenge in designing integrated and
holistic approaches to improving Roma education policies in Romania. The next programming
period for ESF funding (2014-2020) represents a crucial chance for Romania to overcome the
challenges that Roma young people are facing today in their educational achievements. To make
best use of the available funding and achieve the most out of it, the administrative capacity of the
Romanian public institutions to design evidence based strategies with strong monitoring and
evaluated frameworks and effective implementation plans needs to be strengthened.


2.3.            MAIN GAPS AND CHALLENGES IN DEVELOPING AN INCLUSIVE
                EDUCATION SYSTEM FOR ROMA IN ROMANIA

                                         2.3.1     ACCESS AND PARTICIPATION

Enrolment gaps between Roma and non-Roma living nearby are present at all levels of
education starting at preschool level. According to the UNDP/WB/EC Regional survey (2011),
pre-school enrolment rates among Roma children are close to half of the rates among their non-
Roma neighbors. The enrolment gap in compulsory education is slightly lower, but enrolment
rates for Roma are still significantly lower as compared to non-Roma children living nearby: in
the age group 7-15, the enrolment rate of Roma is 78%, and that of non-Roma living nearby is
nearly 95%. At higher levels of education, the gap in enrolment between Roma and non-Roma is
dramatically deeper. In upper-secondary education (ages 16-19), the enrolment rate of non-Roma
is almost 4 times higher than among Roma.
FIGURE 2-4: ENROLMENT RATES AMONG ROMA AND NON-ROMA NEIGHBORS, BY AGE GROUP

               100                  97        86                      100                    93
                               76                                                       81             81
                                                                                   73
                          63
                                                            Percent
     Percent




               50    39                                35              50     36
                                                                                                  29
                                         18                                                                     16
                                                   3                                                        5
                0                                                       0
                     3-6       7-15      16-19     20-24                       3-6      7-15      16-19     20-24

                Roma women          Non-Roma women                          Roma men         Non-Roma men


Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).

Although the state provides free access to education at age 6, a UNDP Report 22 (2012)
asserts that only 54% of 6-year-old Roma children attend preschool education, 3% are
enrolled in primary education and 43% do not attend any kind of educational institution.
The low participation of Roma children in preschool education is particularly challenging in
view of the implementation of the new National Education Law, which makes preparatory


22
  Roma education in comparative perspective. Findings from the UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey -
http://issuu.com/undp_in_europe_cis/docs/education_web
                                                            23
classes compulsory for all 6-year-olds. The regulation might have a positive effect in the years to
come, taking into consideration the transitional role of the preparatory class intended to help
children easily adapt to school environment. Specific measures need to be implemented to
increase the enrolment of 6-year-old Roma children in preparatory classes.
The average number of years spent in school is twice as low for Roma compared to non-
Roma. The share of children having dropped out of compulsory school is also higher for Roma
students: a study conducted in 100 of the most destitute Roma communities reported that over
three quarters of all dropout students reported by schools were Roma (Duminică and Ivasiuc
2010:77). However, statistics reported by schools should be interpreted with caution due to the
ambiguous definition of school dropout in practice, leading to potentially incorrect statistics at
the official level. In turn, since incorrect statistics can potentially inform policy action
incorrectly, or lead to lack of action on phenomena incorrectly accounted for, there is an urgent
necessity to address such issues. Despite signals coming from researchers starting 2010
(Duminică and Ivasiuc 201123), this issue remains currently unaddressed.
As for adults, the share of Roma aged between 25-64 years old with no formal education is
considerably higher than among their Non- Roma neighbors. 31% of Roma adults have
never been enrolled in school, compared to 2% in case of non-Roma24. Gender gaps among
Roma related to enrolment and participation are also significant for all level of education, with
much lower levels of enrolment and completion among girls and women as compared to boys
and men.
Levels of functional illiteracy among the Roma adult population are significantly higher
than in the case of the non-Roma population. Thus, the UNDP/WB/EC Regional survey
indicates an adult literacy rate of 97% among the non-Roma, compared to 75% among the
Roma25. Corroborating data regarding the gender gap in education, functional literacy among
Roma women is higher than among Roma men (79%, compared to 70%). Among Roma youth
(aged 16-24), functional literacy rates are observed to improve compared to the general Roma
adult population. Thus, the overall functional literacy rate among Roma youth is 80%, but the 5
percentage points of gap between women and men are preserved, with 83% for men and 78% for
women. These findings corroborate data from other research reports (Duminică and Ivasiuc
2013:90) which indicate an improvement of the overall education level of the Roma over the last
15 years. A recent report (Tarnovschi et al 2012:184) underlines the fact that the most vulnerable
Roma in a situation of functional illiteracy are adults from compact settlements situated in rural
areas, indicating that literacy policies should target this group primarily. Among Roma children,
functional illiteracy rates are found to be higher in segregated classes and / or schools (15% of
Roma children in segregated settings, compared to 4% of children in non-segregated classes and
schools), as well as poverty-ridden households and Romani speaking families (Fleck and
Rughiniș 2008:168).



23
   The Romanian edition of the research report was published in 2010.
24
   UNDP/WB/EC Regional survey, 2011
25
   The national census data from 2011 finds significantly less functionally illiterate Roma (a little over 14%), while
collecting data on the population aged 10+. At the same time, the census finds among non-Roma aged 10+ that
between 0,8% and 1% functionally illiterate.
                                                          24
While functional illiteracy is an important barrier in accessing the job market, as well as
other public services, the Romanian NRIS does not include specific measures for reducing
illiteracy among the adult Roma. However, “Second chance” programs do provide the
opportunity to improve the education level for adults. The Ministry of Education’s report on the
Second Chance program (MECTS 2007:55) indicates an overrepresentation of the Roma
population accessing the program, with 74.5% at the primary level and 56,1% at the inferior
secondary level, but the coverage of the Second Chance programs could be increased, especially
in compact settlements, in a bid to tackle more effectively adult functional illiteracy among the
Roma.

Determinants of school dropout and non-enrolment among the Roma are mainly economic
in nature. This is confirmed by the data collected within the Roma Observatory initiative of
„Împreună” (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2013), which shows that 78,6% of parents with at least one
child having dropped out of school mention poverty and material deprivation as the main reason
for school dropout. Also, 7,1% of respondents stated that the reason for dropout was the
necessity of involving the child in income generating activities.
Research shows clearly that school dropout is not mainly caused by cultural factors,
contrary to stereotypes generally held by Romanian public opinion regarding school
attendance by Roma. The percentages of parents who state, under different forms, that
education is not important for their children, range from 3% (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011:97) to
6.4% (Surdu 2011:34). Among Roma parents with at least one child in a dropout situation, this
percentage raises to 14,3% (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2013:100). However, qualitative research
(Dobrică and Jderu 2005; Fleck and Rughiniș 2008) shows that there is, among certain Roma
respondents, a certain lack of trust in the long term benefits of the educational system, since the
economic hardships since the post-1989 transition, coupled with the lack of correlation between
the demands of the labor market and the level of preparation to these demands which the current
educational system provides for its graduates accounts for high numbers of unemployed youth,
as well as a difficult access to well-paid jobs. This negative development has in turn diminished
the value parents attach to the educational system, since a high education level does not
necessarily ensure an increase in material and financial capital on the long term. For the
disadvantaged segments of society, among which many are Roma, this may induce a rational
calculus which concludes that the current investment in the education of the children is not
efficient on the long term, thus leading some to prefer a focus on the immediate gains of having
the children involved in income generating activities to cover the daily needs of the household
(Fleck and Rughiniș 2008:149).
Various social norms influence participation in education, such as the prescription to
marry young and to protect the virginity of girls, leading to early school leaving. It is
important to add that, contrary to widespread belief, such norms are not typical for the Roma
(Surdu 2004:3) but pertain to a traditional family model still widespread in rural Romania.
Moreover, social norms have been shown to be influenced by economic constraints (Surdu
2004:4-5), where children are seen as productive resources. In turn, this encourages early
marriages and pregnancies as a result of a strategic rational choice to strengthen the capacity of
families to gather resources. In this respect, it is important to target the relevant factors of
influence on education-related behaviors (the increasingly challenged and evolving rural


                                                25
traditional family model and poverty), rather than assigning it to a certain rigid Roma „tradition”,
to which the public discourse often points.

               2.3.2   THE GENDER GAP IN EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT

As demonstrated in the figures above, a considerable gender gap in educational attainment
also seems to exist. However, the exact patterns and causes of this phenomenon remain to
be difficult to determine. For example, one of the most quoted reasons for girls’ school dropout
among the Roma is, according to teachers and the public opinion at large, the phenomenon of
early marriages. However, qualitative research indicates that this phenomenon is by far less
prevalent than it is thought. For instance, even in cases where teachers name it as main reason for
dropout, they are often unable to find matching evidence in the numbers of cases experienced
recently (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011:88). Qualitative research has also found that this idea
penetrates education curricula, so that Roma girls are taught that the phenomenon of early
marriages is very recurrent in Roma culture, against evidence from their own communities
(Ivasiuc et al. 2011), which in turn is likely to negatively influence the educational aspirations of
girls. At the same time, the reality of early marriages and parents’ perceptions of risks associated
with participation of teenage girls in education remain of concern in traditional, mostly Romani-
speaking communities. Evidence suggests that parents’ attitudes in this respect do influence
negatively the participation of girls in education, starting the lower secondary level, where
teachers report higher school dropout for girls than for boys. Civil society voices have
vehiculated the idea of establishing girls-only schools targeting this type of communities, but
more research is necessary to prove the usefulness of such a measure. Pilot initiatives are an
adequate option in this case.
Although the regional Roma survey data points to a disadvantage of girls in educational
attainment, parental expectations for Roma girls either resemble or exceed those for Roma
boys (UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey, 2011; Duminică and Ivasiuc 2013). In
addition, literacy indicators generally indicate that girls perform slightly better in school than
boys do, except when it comes to computer literacy (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2013).
Cultural factors impact the educational attainment of Roma boys and girls differently, and
this discrepancy should be kept in mind when designing policy measures. For example,
poverty, coupled with traditional gender roles put a higher pressure on boys to privilege income
generating activities above education, while at the same time exerting pressure on girls to
perform household activities (Kocze 2009:32; Voicu and Popescu 2006:34-35).
Regarding the participation of Roma women in remedial education programs such as
Second Chance, lack of consistent data leads to the impossibility of assessing the obstacles
preventing them from participating, as well as possible incentives which could foster
interest and participation. Since Second Chance is not directed only at the Roma, statistics
disaggregated both by gender and ethnicity are unavailable in the only report assessing the
impact of this program (MECTS 2007:8). The only available statistics state that 69% of all
participants in the program (data from 2007) were Roma, whereas 42% were women of all ethnic
backgrounds.




                                                 26
                                    2.3.3    PRESCHOOL EDUCATION

Roma children benefiting from preschool and parental stimulation have significantly
higher cognitive outcomes, consistent with the international evidence26 (Kendall, 2008).
Roma children aged 4-6 years old attending preschool in Romania (as in the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Slovakia and Bulgaria) are more likely to be able to (a) identify ten letters of the
alphabet, (b) read four simple popular words, (c) write their own name, (d) recognize numbers
from 1-10, and (e) know simple sentences in the national language.27 For example, about 77% of
Romanian Roma children aged 4-6 are reported to know simple sentences in Romanian, but the
percentage goes up to approximately 84% among those who are attending pre-school. Similarly,
while 5% of 4-6 year old Roma not attending preschool can identify at least ten letters of the
alphabet, the percentage goes up to 40% if they attend preschool. Likewise, Roma children
whose parents are reported to have taught them letters or how to count in the past three days have
significantly higher cognitive outcomes.
International evidence also confirms that, for disadvantaged groups, attending preschool
increases one’s chance of achieving socio-economic inclusion later in life. “A large body of
international evidence underscores the importance of early intervention –from conception to age
8– on child development. Early childhood development programs are particularly beneficial to
children from disadvantaged backgrounds. As Nobel laureate economist James Heckman argues,
“Investing in disadvantaged young children is a rare public policy with no equity-efficiency trade
off”. A new review of the scientific literature by The Lancet (October 2011) 28 similarly
concludes that “[…] unless governments allocate more resources to quality early child
development programs for the poorest people in the population, economic disparities will
continue and widen.” (Lake, 2011).
Roma children’s enrolment in preschool is considerably lower compared to non -Roma
living nearby. Poor resources in the family but also limited preschool infrastructure and
facilities are considered to be a challenge for increasing participation of Roma children at this
level of education. The pre-school enrolment rate of non-Roma children is almost two times as
high as for Roma – 37% in case of Roma children and 63% for non-Roma neighbors29.
Considerable differences30 between gross enrolment rate of Roma and their direct non-Roma
neighbors against national enrolment rates reported by National Institute for Statistics might be
explained by the specific methodological approach of the UNDP/WB/EC regional survey and
also might suggest that pre-school facilities are underrepresented in localities with higher-than-
average shares of Roma inhabitants.


26Kendall, S et all, Narrowing the gap in outcomes for vulnerable groups. A review of the research evidence, 2008:
http://www.nfer.ac.uk/nfer/publications/LNG01/LNG01.pdf
27
   These results are based on OLS estimations whereby cognitive outcomes are the dependent variables. The
estimations control for enumeration area fixed effects, which effectively means that the outcomes of Roma children
from the same neighborhoods –some participating in the local preschool, while others are not – are compared. The
estimations also control for background characteristics such as the child’s age, gender, hospital birth, general health
states, background characteristics of the child’s primary caretaker (age, gender, whether s/he works, attended
preschool in the past, and secondary school completion), and quintiles of per capita household income.
28
   Lake, Anthony, Early childhood development—global action is overdue, The Lancet, Volume 378, Issue 9799,
Pages 1277 - 1278, 8 October 2011
29
   UNDP/WB/EC Regional Survey, 2011
30
   Roma Education in Comparative Perspective, UNDP, 2012, p.34
                                                         27
FIGURE 2-5: PRE-SCHOOL ENROLMENT RATE (3-6 YEARS OLD) IN ROMANIA – ROMA AND NON-
ROMA


                                                 64%                 63%
    70%                    61%
    60%
    50%                               39%
               35%                                           37%
    40%
    30%
    20%
    10%
     0%
             Roma       Non-Roma Roma girls No-Roma   Roma Non-Roma
             boys         boys                girls children - children -
                                                      Total      Total

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011)

The costs of preschool are not extremely high in Romania, but could still contribute to
exclusion: Roma parents with children in preschool report spending €7.5 per month on
preschool, with lunch being brought from home in more than three-fifths of the cases. The
survey asked parents about the expenses on fees, books, transport, clothes (uniforms), and food.
The table below shows the low actual costs in Hungary (on average €1.3 per month) compared
with Romania, with the highest expenses reported in the Czech Republic (€ 25.6). The majority
of parents in Romania report that children are expected to take their own lunch with them, and in
one-third of the cases, food is covered by a fee charged to the parents. Hungary stands out by
freely providing food to virtually all children (see Table 1 for details).
TABLE 1: MONTHLY PRESCHOOL EXPENSES BY PARENTS WITH CHILDREN IN PRESCHOOL, AND
PROVISION OF FOOD

                                     Bulgaria        Czech         Hungary   Romania   Slovakia
                                                     Republic
 Monthly cost (mean - Euro)          15.4            25.6          1.3       7.5       7.2
 Monthly cost (median - Euro)        17.4            24.7          0.0       2.2       4.0
Provision of food (%)
 Yes, freely provided                23.1            4.9           97.0      33.0      28.0
 Covered by fee                      75.6            92.2          2.4       2.7       72.0
 Children must bring own lunch       1.3             2.9           0.6       64.3      0.0
 Total                               100.0           100.0         100.0     100.0     100.0
Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).

Indeed, most Roma households report not sending a child to preschool because home care
was available and/or because the kindergarten was too expensive. A large share of parents
thought the child was too young. Most parents would consider enrolling their child into
preschool if there were no fees involved, if they received food coupons, or if the school had a
Roma teacher (assistant): when asked if they would reconsider enrolling their child into
                                               28
preschool if it were free or if they would receive a food coupon, more than 50% of Romanian
Roma parents responded ‘yes’, and approximately 20% responded ‘maybe’.
TABLE 2: REASONS FOR NOT SENDING CHILD (3-6) TO PRESCHOOL (I N PERCENT)

                                                                                                    Bulgaria         Czech                     Hungary               Romania        Slovakia
                                                                                                                     Republic
 Child is too young                                                                                 28               26                        49                    46             23
 No need (have home care)                                                                           29               40                        24                    21             37
 Too expensive                                                                                      40               21                        4                     22             5
 Child should stay home                                                                             8                13                        3                     2              7
 Too far                                                                                            4                2                         0                     6              16
 No place                                                                                           3                5                         2                     0              3
 On the waiting list                                                                                1                5                         3                     1              2
 Don't trust teachers                                                                               0                2                         0                     0              1
 Language                                                                                           0                1                         0                     0              2
 Child is ill-treated                                                                               1                2                         0                     0              0
Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
While the majority of Romanian Roma parents with children enrolled in preschool does
feel that their children are welcome, Roma children attend more segregated preschools
than in neighboring countries. According to the regional Roma survey data (2011), Romania
had the second highest share of children attending ‘all’ or ‘nearly all’ Roma kindergartens
(46%), after Slovakia (48%), indicating a high degree of segregation in early education. In
Bulgaria, Czech Republic and Hungary, segregation is much lower (18%, 16% and 21%,
respectively). It should be noted that the high degree of segregation results mainly from
preschools being located in Roma settlements, as 43% of Romanian Roma children in preschool
attend a kindergarten located in the settlement. Although children generally feel welcome at
preschool, the rate of parental dissatisfaction is higher in Romania than in Hungary and Bulgaria.
FIGURE 2-6: SATISFACTION WITH PRESCHOOLS AMONG ROMA CHILDREN AND PARENTS

A. Do Roma children feel welcome in preschools?                                                                     B. Parental satisfaction
 100




                                                                                                         100
                                         % of parents satisfied with preschool
   80




                                                                                                           80
   60




                                                                                                           60
   40




                                                                                                           40
   20




                                                                                                           20
       0




                                                                                                               0




           Bulgaria   Czech Republic   Slovakia                                  Hungary      Romania              Bulgaria   Czech Republic   Slovakia    Hungary        Romania
                              Don't agree                                             Agree                                   Very dissatisfied           Somewhat dissatisfied
                              Completely agree                                                                                Somewhat satisfied          Very satisfied




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
                                                                                                           29
The existing preschool infrastructure is inadequate, especially in communities with higher
share of Roma population, which prevents higher participation rates and leads to
occurrence of discriminatory practices. A study31 conducted by UNICEF in 2012 in
disadvantaged communities with high share of Roma population revealed that often schools and
kindergartens are overcrowded (students go to school in two or three shifts) due to lack of space.
Recent measures regarding rationalization of school infrastructure in Romania based on
demographic changes end up in closing schools and kindergarten in communities with
lower number of children. In some cases, children have to overcome long distances from home
to the nearest kindergarten, which count very often as a barrier accessing the preschool
education. According to a 2013 study by Impreuna Agency (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2013), one of
the external factors of non-enrolment of Roma children in kindergarten is the lack of an
infrastructure which would allow children to travel safely from home to kindergarten. Almost
7% of Roma parents declared that their children are not enrolled in kindergarten because it is too
far. Some of the Roma live on the outskirts of the settlements or in areas where the roads are less
easily accessible, especially during rain or snow; hence, the distance from home to kindergarten
and the lack of transportation facilities, as well as the difficulties to support its associated costs,
represent barriers which can lead to a lower percentage of enrolment of pre-school children in
the education system, even when education is officially free of charge.
A small number of places in kindergarten against higher demands at the national level was
also considered a factor for discriminatory attitudes against Roma children. According to
the Impreuna study (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2013), 6% of the Roma state that they have pre-
school aged children who were not accepted in kindergarten based on the reason that there are
not enough places, which points to the persistence of patterns of ethnic discrimination.
According to the study, not accepting children in kindergarten on ethnic grounds may be in some
cases formally dissimulated by the lack of available places in kindergarten.
In addition to preschool enrolment, many young Roma children could likely benefit from
greater cognitive stimulation at home. Child development depends not just on schooling, but
importantly on the home environment. Roma children face multiple disadvantages in this regard.
With so many children growing up in deep poverty, infants are at higher risk of malnutrition, and
families lack the means to purchase books and other learning tools. Furthermore, the very low
education levels among men and especially among women, is a barrier to effective parenting
support for cognitive development. The 2011 regional Roma survey asked about access to books
at home and several questions on parenting techniques. Indeed, few Roma children aged 3-5
have access to books: a typical Roma child in this age group only has 1 book at home. This is
comparable to the situation in Bulgaria and Slovakia, while Roma families in the Czech Republic
and in Hungary have more books (5 and 4, for a typical family, respectively). Also, only 1 in 8
Roma children aged 3-5 were taught letters or counting by their caregivers in the past three days,
and less than one fifth looked at picture books or read books, or drew or painted with their
caregivers (Table 3).




31
   Jigau, M., C. Fartusnic (coord.) Cohort analysis estimation of the dropout phenomenon , Institute of Educational
Sciences, UNICEF Romania, 2012
                                                        30
TABLE 3: YOUNG ROMA CHILDR EN’S HOME ENVIRONMEN T

                                         Bulgaria        Czech              Hungary           Romania          Slovakia
                                                         Republic
 Number of books at home:
 Mean                                    1.8             7.0                7.2               1.2              2.6
 Median                                  0               5                  4                 0                1


 Activities with children, past 3
 days:
 Look at picture books or read books     23%             50%                57%               17%              44%
 Draw or paint                           21%             51%                42%               19%              45%
 Teach letters or count                  15%             21%                29%               12%              22%
                                                          A
Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).       Limited to households with children aged 3-5 years old.


                                   2.3.4       COMPULSORY EDUCATION

Roma student’s participation to compulsory education is considerably lower compared to
their non-Roma neighbors, with a significant gender gap in favor of boys.32 Enrolment rates
in compulsory education are significantly lower for Roma compared to non-Roma children living
nearby33. In the age group 7-15, the enrolment rate of Roma is 78% and that of non-Roma living
nearby is nearly 95%. Significant gender gap can be noticed in case of Roma students: 76% of
girls are enrolled, vs. 81% of boys in this age group. This gender gap seems to be specific to
Roma: among non-Roma students, girls have higher enrolment rates (97%) than boys (93%).
FIGURE 2-7: GROSS ENROLMENT RATE IN COMPULSORY EDUCATION (AGE GROUP 7-15)




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).



32
   It should be noted that other data sources have found a reversed gender gap, in which girls are both enrolled
relatively more often than boys, and attend school for a slightly larger total number of years in their life (Dum inică
and Ivasiuc 2013; Vincze and Harbula 2011:41).
33
   UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey 2011
                                                          31
A recent study (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2013:100) found that 6.9% of Roma children aged 6 -
16 had dropped out of school in 2012. Additionally, the same source finds that the share of
Roma children who had never been enrolled in compulsory education amounted, in the same
year, to 8,9%. A recent longitudinal study34 by REF Romania shows that a Roma student in
lower secondary education faces a risk of dropping out from school that is six times higher than a
non-Roma student with a comparable socio-economic status. This shows that poor Roma
children are additionally disadvantaged as compared with the poor non-Roma children. The
causes for dropout are related first and foremost to the lack of economic resources to cover the
collateral costs of education, as well as the necessity to involve children in income generating
activities to support the basic needs of the household.
These findings point to the need for integrated interventions aimed at removing (cost)
barriers, e.g. through increasing household incomes, on the one hand, and stimulating
school enrolment and improving educational outcomes with a view of decreasing school
dropout on the other. As long as economic hardship persists in Roma communities, parents are
likely to resort to child labor in order to cover the immediate needs of the household, thereby
impacting negatively the educational path of Roma children in the most destitute settlements.

                                    2.3.5   UPPER-SECONDARY EDUCATION

Beyond compulsory schooling, enrolment differences between Roma and Non-Roma
become even larger, with a significant enrollment gap in the 16-19 age group, which
corresponds to upper secondary school (Figure 2-7). While less than one fourth of Roma 16-
19 years old are still enrolled in school, more than three fourths of their non-Roma neighbors are
still enrolled.
FIGURE 2-8: GROSS ENROLMENT RATE IN UPPER-SECONDARY EDUCATION (16-19 YEARS OLD):
ROMA VS. NON-ROMA

               Fig. 10 Gross enrolment rate in upper-secondary education
                        (16-19 years old) Roma versus Non-Roma


          100%                        81%                 86%                      83%
           80%
           60%
                       28%                                           23%
           40%                                18%
           20%
            0%
                     Roma      Non-Roma      Roma    Non-Roma      Roma       Non-Roma
                             Male                Female                    Total

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).


34
     Ivan, C, I. Rostas, (2013) Equal Opportunities in Education, REF Romania, not yet published


                                                          32
Compared to other countries in the region, Romania has overall the lowest secondary
school completion rates for Roma among those aged 25-64 years old (Figure 2-9). The share
of Roma completing secondary school (12% for boys and 6% for girls) is alarmingly low by
European standards, and considerably lower than for non-Roma (approx. 47 percentage points
lower).
FIGURE 2-9: SECONDARY SCHOOL COMPLETION RATES AMONG ROMA AND NON-ROMA, AGE 25-64

                 A. Roma                                                                B. Non-Roma

                                                                                  90          87 85 88 85
             80                                                                         75 76
                                                                                  70                        59        59
             60                                                                                                            52
   Percent




                                                                                                                 51




                                                                        Percent
                                                                                  50
             40              29
                                  21   21 15    18                                30
                    15 10                            11   12
             20                                                6
                                                                                  10
             -
                                                                                  -10




                            Men        Women                                                Men    Women

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011). ‘Secondary school completion’ is defined as having completed
either a vocational/technical or a general secondary school program, or a higher level of education. Sample restricted to age
group 25-64.

The early school leaving rates for both Roma and non-Roma 18-25 years old are
considerably higher in Romania than its EU counterparts. The UNDP/World Bank/EC
Regional Roma survey (2011) shows that early school leaving rate in case of Roma is close to
95%, with little gender difference, while the share of non-Roma early school leavers is almost
two times lower, with a significant gender gap in favor of men. Survey data suggests that future
measures on reducing early school leavers should be focused on communities with a larger Roma
population, targeting not only Roma, but also the Non-Roma population in these localities.

                                               2.3.6 TERTIARY EDUCATION

Among Roma, achievement of tertiary education among those aged 30-34 is about 1%,
compared to over 20% in the general population. A recent Impreuna study (Duminică and
Ivasiuc 2013) shows that from 1998 to 2012, the share of Roma women with tertiary education
more than doubled, from 0,7% to 1,6%, and in case of Roma men it has remained stable at
around 1%. Indeed, enrolment rates among Roma men and women aged 18-25 are extremely
low, and show a severe gap with non-Roma neighbors in the same age group.




                                                                   33
FIGURE 2-10: SHARE OF YOUNG PEOPLE (18-25 YEARS OLD) ENROLLED IN EDUCATION

               45
                                                   40
               40
               35                                                     31
               30
     Percent




               25
               20
               15
               10                      7
                            5
                5
                0
                    Roma women Roma men        Non-Roma        Non-Roma
                                                women            men

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011)

As mentioned in the introduction, there are discrepancies between Roma and Non-Roma in
terms of aspirations to achieve tertiary education: this aspiration is expressed twice as often
among non-Roma as compared to their Roma neighbors. Although additional evidence would be
needed on this subject, it is likely that lower educational aspirations among Roma are influenced
by discouraging prospects on the job market, as well as by experiences of discrimination (see
Chapter 6).
TABLE 4. EDUCATIONAL EXPECTATIONS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS 35

                                           Lower          secondary    Upper           secondary   Post-secondary
                                           education - ISCED 2         education - ISCED 3         education - ISCED 4+

                                           Roma         Non-Roma       Roma        Non-Roma        Roma       Non-Roma

 Educational aspiration for boys (16+)*    22%          6%             52%         49%             23%        43%

 Educational aspiration for girls (16+)*   23%          7%             48%         47%             23%        46%

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).

                    2.3.7       PARTICIPATION OF ADULTS IN LIFELONG LEARNING (LLL)

At the national level, the participation rate of adults in LLL36 presents one of the most
important gaps in comparison with EU average. In line with the Strategic framework for


35
   Surveyed population (randomly selected adult person from the households (16+)) by educational level that
respondents believe that is sufficient for a boy/girl. This indicator is calculated using the question “What do you
believe is a sufficient level of education for a boy/girl?” from the UNDP -WB dataset. Results are displayed
according to the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED). The values “secondary
vocational/technical/arts” and “general secondary” are summarized as “Upper Seconda ry Education – ISCED 3”.
The values “refused” and “don’t know” were defined as missing.
36
   Eurostat definition of LLL participation indicator: Percentage of the adult population aged 25 to 64 participating
in education and training in the 4 weeks prior to the survey. Life-long learning refers to persons aged 25 to 64 who
                                                             34
European cooperation in education and training (”ET 2020”), the Romanian National Reform
Plan sets a 10 percent target for increasing the participation of adults in LLL. Between 2007 and
2011, Romania has not made significant progress in closing this gap, with participation of adults
aged 25-64 in LLL reaching 1.6% in 2011, leaving a gap of about 15 % to reach the EU 2020
target. The National Survey on Employees Participation in LLL – carried out in 2011 by the
Observatory for Permanent Learning Development – showed that the lowest percentages of
participation to training occur among those with low education levels and professional
qualifications, among those working in small companies (less than 10 employees) and among
those older than 40.
The UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011) shows that LLL participation is
five times higher for non-Roma women (25%) than their female Roma neighbors (5%), and
almost three times higher in case of non-Roma men, compared Roma men. In both groups,
adult women registered significantly lower LLL participation rate compared to men, although at
the national level women are more likely to participate in LLL than men. This reverse gap might
indicate that in communities with higher number of Roma, women are more likely to miss the
LLL opportunities.
FIGURE 2-11: SHARE OF ADULTS AGED 25-64 WHO HAVE EVER RECEIVED ADULT LEARNING
COURSES OR PROFESSIONAL APPRENTICESHIP, ROMA VERSUS NON-ROMA

             35
                                                               31%
             30
                                                  25%
             25

             20
   Percent




                                                                              Women
             15                                                               Men
                             12%

             10
                    5%
              5

              0
                       Roma                         Non-Roma

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).




stated that they received education or training in the four weeks preceding the survey (numerator). The denominator
consists of the total population of the same age group, excluding those who did not answer to the question
'participation to education and training'. Both the numerator and the denominator come from the EU Labour Force
Survey. The information collected relates to all education or training whether or not relevant to the respondent's
current or possible future job.


                                                          35
                  2.3.8   SCHOOL INFRASTRUCTURE AND RESOURCES

School infrastructure and resources correlate with the quality of education, and are
particularly inadequate in many schools with a high proportion of Roma pupils . Several
research reports (OSI 2007:416-420; Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011:49-53; Jigău and Fartușnic
2012) focus on a series of indicators of quality of the educational process, concluding that there
are systemic deficiencies in terms of quality of the education process in schools and
kindergartens with high percentages of Roma children. Thus, the number of specialized
laboratories and facilities and the level of access of students to these facilities decrease with the
increase of the share of Roma students in a school. Also, the number of books in the school
library as well as the level of access of students to the library decrease in schools with high
percentages of Roma students. The research shows there is negative correlation between the
share of Roma students in schools and the number of computers, including computers connected
to the internet. The research also documents the tendency for schools with over 50% Roma
students not to possess the necessary operation permit, attesting their conformity to legal norms
of functioning in terms of sanitation, safety and hygiene conditions: there are twice as many
schools in this situation with over 50% Roma students than the number of schools in the same
category with less than 50% Roma (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011:55). Thus, there is a lower
probability for the so-called ‘Gypsy’ schools to have an indoor toilet (62,7% versus 77,3% in the
case of schools with less than 10% Roma students), as well as a central heating system (60,9% in
schools with a high percentage of Roma, compared to 70% in other schools).

                                  2.3.9 TEACHER TRAINING

Quality of education is also related to the share of unqualified and commuting teachers, as
well as high teacher turnover. Several recent research reports (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011;
Roma Education Fund 2012) found that schools with a higher percentage of Roma students
are more likely to suffer from undertrained and more inexperienced staff, as well as of a
high staff turnover and larger shares of commuter teachers. The research points out that
among teachers, schools with a high percentage of Roma students are not attractive and that
teachers who are allocated to these schools tend not to get involved to a deeper level in the
school activities by investing time in their students, since they try to move to „better” schools,
where they judge that it is possible to reach performance results with the students. Also, the
frequent staff turnover weakens the links between children and the school, impacting negatively
the educational development of students. Qualitative research conducted by means of focus
groups with Roma children in schools with over 90% Roma concludes that teachers in these
schools tend to neglect children, spending less than the stipulated time in class, not providing or
verifying homework and conducting lessons rather formally, without concern whether children
understand and assimilate teachings. Also, low expectations of teachers regarding educational
achievement of Roma children lead to low efforts by teachers. Verbal abuse against Roma
children, which has been noted to occur, reinforces their low self-esteem, lack of motivation in
school and an overall unfriendly environment, while at the same time leading to the progressive
disengagement of children from school, leading in turn to absenteeism and, ultimately, school
dropout. The root of these phenomena in which teachers lower their expectations regarding
Roma children, and consequently make considerably less effort in their work, are to be found in
discriminatory perceptions and attitudes regarding the Roma, as lower expectations of teachers
                                                 36
encourage low achievement of children in education. Educational policies should tackle
discriminatory attitudes of teachers regarding the Roma at the level of pedagogic high schools
and teacher lifelong training.
Among the human resources devoted to improving the educational outcomes for the Roma
population, the school mediator has been identified as an important link within the system.
The role of the school mediator was developed as to close the communication gap between
schools and Roma communities, to bridge the relationship between the two actors and reach the
objective of improving the participation of Roma children in the compulsory education system.
Between 2003 and 2013, through various programs, a total number of 1001 school mediators
have been trained in Romania. Out of these, the number of currently active mediators is about
400.37 A recent “Impreuna” study (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011) shows that 55% of the surveyed
schools lack a school mediator, including schools with over 50% of Roma children.
Qualitative research (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011) shows that school mediators have had a
positive impact on a number of issues, among which the decrease of the number of school
dropout and non-enrolment cases, improvement of school attainment and academic performance
of Roma students, reduction of absenteeism among students, combating the segregation of Roma
students in classes and contribution to the desegregation of schools, improvement of the
communication between the school and the Roma community, improvement of the attitude of
teachers towards the Roma and promoting the overall development of the Roma communities,
outside their role in the field of education.
However, the school mediator policy also has important shortcomings, which need to be
addressed in future policy-making. Teachers and school administrations from institutions
benefitting from the services of a school mediator tend to relegate all activities related to Roma
issues to the school mediator, leading to a deeper disengagement of teachers from the Roma
communities they serve. Further, the lack of sustainability and security regarding employment
has placed some of the mediators in the position of not being able to raise concerns or take
effective measures regarding the discrimination of Roma children in the school environment.

                                   2.3.10 SCHOOL SEGREGATION

The regional UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011) reveals a high level of
classroom-level segregation among Roma. The figure below shows that nearly a quarter of
Roma children currently attending basic education are in classes where most of the children are
Roma. Among their non-Roma neighbors, who were also interviewed, only 9% are in classes
with mostly Roma children. Research studies from 2008 and 2010 suggest that school
segregation is present in between 31% (Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011) and 67% (Surdu L. 2008) of
the studied schools.38 Both reports confirm the high correlation between segregation and low
quality of education arising from the poor school infrastructure and learning resources in the
segregated schools, the lower qualification of teachers and their higher turnover. This is in stark



37
   Information received through a yahoo-group message sent by Professor Gheorghe Sarău on August 17th 2013
(Romania_EU_list@yahoogroups.com). Professor Sarău is active within the Ministry of Education and is
responsible, among other things, for the training of Roma school mediators and Romani teachers.
38
   Difference in percentages is explained by the different methodologies used in the two studies.
                                                     37
contrast with the findings from international studies39 suggesting that students in integrated
schools achieve gains on standardized reading comprehension tests as well as the development of
non-cognitive skills and overall tolerance, both among Roma and non-Roma, disadvantaged and
non-disadvantaged.
FIGURE 2-12: SEGREGATION: PERCENTAGE OF PUPILS REPORTING TO BE IN CLASS WITH MOSTLY
ROMA PUPILS

               25       24
               20
     Percent




               15
                                               9
               10                                                    7
                   5                                                                          3
               -
                       Roma           Non-Roma Nearby             Roma             Non-Roma Nearby
                       Enrolled in Basic Education                    Enrolled in Secondary

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).

Evaluation of desegregation interventions suggest that the obstacles to effective
desegregation policies in Romania often relate to the lack of commitment by school
managers, lack of inter-community solidarity, lack of commitment and barriers to
initiating a culture of respect, opposition from non-Roma, but also from Roma parents and
the differences of academic achievement between Roma and non-Roma children which
hampers the integration of children with low attainment levels (Duminică and Ivasiuc
2011). These barriers call for an integrated approach in the design and implementation of
desegregation interventions, and require that desegregation is coupled with the supplementary
support of remedial education interventions, that would contain the dropout of Roma children
lagging behind in terms of education performance.

2.4            LESSONS LEARNED
The main lessons and best practices from the major Roma education projects and
measures implemented in Romania (overview of the projects and programs is included in
Annex 1 to this report) have been discussed with educational stakeholders, project managers and
civil society representatives with experience in Roma education programs through a qualitative
research based on individual and group interviews. The main findings, lessons learned and good
practices examples from this qualitative research are presented below. Quality of teaching has a
direct impact on children’s learning outcomes, either roma or non-roma – the gap between “good
schools” and “poor schools”
Several research studies show that schools situated in disadvantaged areas with high
number of Roma children have teachers with less professional experience and with lower
levels of qualification40 (Roma Education Fund 2012; Duminică and Ivasiuc 2011). Working



 see Kezdi and Suranyi (2009)
39
40
 Shared opinion expressed by the main stakeholders and project managers of Roma educational projects in
Romania during the qualitative research (group interviews), Bucharest, 7.10.2013
                                                          38
with children from disadvantaged socio-cultural backgrounds requires a higher level of
pedagogical preparation, an appropriate inclusive approach and a powerful commitment to the
teaching profession. In order to increase the quality of teaching in schools, many projects
targeting Roma children included major components of teacher training in the areas of
interactive didactics, intercultural education, and inclusive education. In order to attract more
good teachers to work in schools in disadvantaged areas there is a need for incentives and
valorization for teachers choosing to work in schools located in disadvantaged areas. The
program “Teach for Romania”, inspired from the US program “Teach for America” was initiated
in Romania but stalled due to administrative obstacles.

           A SCHOOL CAN’T FACE THE EDUCATIONAL CHALLENGES ALONE. THERE IS A CLEAR
          NEED FOR INTEGRATED ACTION TOWARDS CLOSING THE EDUCATION GAP BETWEEN
                                ROMA AND NON-ROMA CHILDREN

Increasing participation to education of those children in risk to drop-out early was one of
the major objectives of most of the projects targeting Roma and non-Roma children in the
recent years. Leaving school early is a very complex phenomenon, determined by a complexity
of factors such as socio-economic condition, family background and educational expectations,
school factors and personal determinants of a child. In the view of most participants in focus
group discussions, an integrative approach addressing various determinants of school
participation at the same time is far more efficient than singular interventions.
Integrated approaches might take into consideration the following dimensions:
        Horizontal integration, i.e. the need for cross-sectoral intervention, meaning that
         participation in education has multiple determinants, ranging from adequate financial
         resources to adequate infrastructure in the neighborhood. This requires implementing an
         integrated approach, through which intervention in complementing areas (employment,
         housing, health and education) are carried out to achieve a higher impact.
        Vertical integration – the need to ensure coherent support along the entire educational
         path of an individual: from early education to higher level of education, from school to
         work and from community engagement to wider citizenship.
        Context integration – For many indicators related to education, the WB/UNDP Regional
         Survey shows that in communities with higher shares of Roma, children and adults are
         facing more challenges in participation to education compared to the national average.
         This reality suggests that some measures to increase school participation should be
         addressed not only for Roma in particular, but for the entire population in the community.

             IF CHILDREN FEEL WELCOME AND COMFORTABLE IN SCHOOL, THEY ARE MORE
             LIKELY TO CONTINUE THEIR EDUCATION. AN INCLUSIVE SCHOOL CLIMATE AND
                  POSITIVE TEACHING PRACTICES COULD MAKE A MAJOR DIFFERENCE

Recent studies41 on psychological and social well-being of children showed a positive
association between a country’s educational outcomes and the level of well -being of



Bradshaw, J. and Richardson, D. (2009) An index of child well-being in Europe, Child Indicators Research, 2, 3, pp. 319-351.

                                                              39
children. Different reports and projects based in Romania also found a correlation between
positive feelings of Roma children in school and their tendency to continue on to education at a
higher level. This hypothesis is verified in one recent study conducted by the Roma Education
Fund in Romania (Fig. 15). The degree of perceived school attractiveness also makes a
difference when it comes to school-drop out. The drop-out from schools where children do not
perceive the school as attractive reaches 64.1% while the drop-out from schools where the
children do perceive the school as attractive reaches only 12%. (REF Romania, Claudiu Ivan,
Iulius Rostas, 2013).
FIGURE 2-13: CORRELATION BETWEEN SCHOOL DROP-OUT AND THE PERCEIVED ATTRACTIVENESS
OF GOING TO SCHOOL




 negative feelings in         35,9%
   going to school                  87,7%     students continuing
                                              education
                                              students droping out
    positive feelings                 64,1%
    going to school         12,3%


                        0    50     100


Source: Roma Education Fund Romania, 2013.
Where the child sits in the classroom also makes a difference when it comes to school
participation. If the child sits in the last or before the last bench, the school drop-out is 28.3%,
while if the child does not sit in the last or before the last bench the school drop-out is 15.9%
(REF Romania, Claudiu Ivan, Iulius Rostas, 2013). Other studies conducted in Romania on
school culture, also pointed out that often, Roma children have difficulties coping with the
school environment. Therefore, approaches like friendly schools and teacher training programs
promoting intercultural education, may be considered.

             INVOLVEMENT OF PARENTS IN SCHOOL DIALOGE IS A CRUCIAL FACTOR FOR
                         EDUCATIONAL SUCCESS OF THEIR CHILDREN

Research shows that the role of parents is crucial for children’s development in school.
Family factors, such as educational expectations, the level of trust in education, parental
stimulation at home and also the communication with teachers play an important role in the
educational success of children. Often, negative attitudes of parents towards school are based on
the dysfunctional and unequal relationship with school staff. Many projects implemented in
Romania, targeted at reducing the drop-out of Roma children, had an explicit component on
parental counseling, educational programs such as “Parent’s school” or making the parents
partners in implementing the project. An example of parents’ direct involvement in educational
process is the Ministry of Education project “Implementation Early Childhood Education
alternative community based solution for children from 3 to 6 /7 years old’’ (2011). The project

                                                     40
piloted a community based kindergarten where Roma women were trained to become teachers
for their neighboring children.

        SCHOOL DROPOUT PREVENTIVE MEASURES COULD PRODUCE VISIBLE OUTCOMES IN
         THE LONG RUN AND THEIR IMPACT COULD BE PROPERLY EVALUATED IF PROJECT
                             IMPLEMENTATION IS EXTENDED

The maximum duration of ESF projects was 3 years. In many cases, this was considered a
barrier, especially in the case of affirmative measures that should be provided to students
at least during a school cycle in order to be efficient. Additionally, many administrative
pressures caused by the delays in reimbursement of cost from the national implementation
authorities produced obstacles for the implementation organizations in their effort to support the
target group. Moreover, measuring the real impact of the educational interventions usually takes
a long time.

          CONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFER MEASURES MIGHT HAVE AN IMPACT ON SCHOOL
           ATTENDANCE, BUT ENSURING THE SUSTAINABILITY OF THIS INTERVENTION
                                 REMAINS A CHALLENGE

International evidence from rigorous impact evaluations of conditional cash transfers
(CCT) confirms their positive impact on school attendance among disadvantaged groups.
Romania has implemented a number of CCT programs to tackle the issue of low attendance rates
among Roma in different stages of education, for example, the OvidiuRo’ program to support
kindergarten attendance and the Roma Education Fund’s scholarship scheme for secondary
education. However, none of the Romanian CCT initiatives targeting Roma has been rigorously
evaluated to provide conclusive evidence on their impact on attendance, let alone on more
ambitious results like improving the learning outcomes of participating Roma students. While
the kindergarten attendance CCT program implemented by OvidiuRoconfirms the positive
impact on kindergarten attendance rates, the effect of ceasing the CCT once the child reaches the
age of compulsory education has not been tracked. The REF’s scholarships’ scheme also does
not provide convincing evidence on the CCT impact on attendance, since the scholarships are
complemented by provision of tutoring and mentoring, making it impossible to attribute potential
positive outcomes to any of the three interventions. Hence, the general opinion of many
stakeholders is that caution is needed when using CCT on a large scale, because of the lacking
domestic evidence of CCT effectiveness, the lack of sustainability plan and the risk of creating
dependency on CCTs as opposed to implementing measures that could potentially increase the
non-CCT motivation for school attendance.

             AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IS STILL NEEDED IN ORDER TO CLOSE THE GAPS IN
           PARTICIPATION BETWEEN ROMA AND NON-ROMA, BUT MORE INCLUSIVE AND
         INTERCULTURAL MEASURES SHOULD ALSO BE IMPLEMENTED IN SCHOOLS AND IN
                                          SOCIETY

In the last years, Roma students in Romania have benefited from affirmative measures
(Roma enrollment quota - places reserved for the Roma in high school and university) for
secondary and vocational education, and for universities. While the affirmative measures for
Roma children and youth were not systematically monitored at the national level to provide
evidence on their cost-effectiveness, particular interventions seem to have had positive effects on
                                                41
educational achievements of Roma. According to the interviewed stakeholders, the affirmative
measures should be further supported, but there is an additional need to improve the targeting of
these programs, strengthening the focus on those pupils/students who are Romani language
speakers, come from rural areas and live in compact, homogenous Roma communities.

               NONFORMAL AND INFORMAL LEARNING ACTIVITIES CAN BE A SOURCE OF NEW
              IDEAS AND INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TOWARDS INCREASING MOTIVATION FOR
                             SCHOOL PARTICIPATION OF ROMA CHILDREN

In recent years, non-formal and informal learning activities for children in disadvantaged
areas, including Roma, gained more ground in the Romanian educational system. The role
of these activities is particularly important in the case of Roma children, who often "do not feel
comfortable at school and do not find opportunities in the classroom for personal expression.
After school programs, various summer schools and student clubs are activities where Roma
children have the opportunity to experience interesting and valuable activities, including
practicing their inner talents and potential. Therefore, non-formal and informal learning activities
are a priority for interventions targeting to increase the well-being of Roma children in school.

               INCREASING THE ETHNIC SELF ESTEEM AND CULTURAL IDENTITY OF ROMA
            CHILDREN AND PARENTS ARE A GOOD GROUND FOR EDUCATIONAL INCLUSION AND
                                 WELL BEING FEELING IN SCHOOL

Recent studies42 on the issue of Roma ethnic self-esteem highlighted the role of education in
building a positive self-image of Roma children regarding their ethnic identity. The studies
recommend the need to introduce in the school curriculum elements of culture, history and
language of Roma. Some experiences on bilingual kindergarten in Romania shows an increase of
school participation of Roma children. Similarly, highlighting the existence of successful ‘role -
models’ among the Roma contributed to a more positive public image of the Roma ethnic
identity.

             A COMPREHENSIVE MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM OF ESF PROGRAMS
            REGARDING EDUCATIONAL INTERVENTIONS FOR THE ROMA IS CRUCIAL IN ORDER
           TO CORRECT ERRORS, TO AVOID OVERLAPPING, AND MAINSTREAM APPROACHES FOR
                           THE NEXT PROGRAMMING PERIOD 2014-2020

Monitoring and evaluation of ESF projects implemented in Romania in the period 2007-
2013 was based only on partial internal assessment (per project / per type of action / the
types of funding) and focused outcomes and numerical indicators, rather than impact and
quality evaluation. Moreover, many measures promoted by different projects overlapped, in
many cases leading to overrepresentation of some regions in Romania, while other regions
lagged behind. Also, not making project results visible to the wider community is a weakness
mentioned by the participants.




42
     Grigore, D. at all, Roma …looking for their self esteem, Amare Rromentza, UNICEF Romania, 2007
                                                        42
2.5 RECOMMENDATIONS
2.5.1 POLICY GOAL 1: PROVIDE EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION IN
      COMMUNITIES WITH HIGH ROMA POPULATIONS
Given the high returns to early childhood development and the very large gap that exists
between Roma and non-Roma in Romania, closing this gap should be a high policy priority
area. Achieving this will require a clear policy on increasing enrolment in early childhood
education in communities with a high share of Roma:

         POLICY MEASURE 1A: DEVELOPING EARLY CHILDHOOD (0-6 YEARS) INSTITUTIONAL
                 INFRASTRUCTURE IN COMMUNITIES WITH HIGH SHARE OF ROMA

The limited preschool infrastructure and facilities in communities with high share of Roma
are obstacles to preschool participation of Roma children. The ESF program for 2014-2020
could play a major role in developing the infrastructure for preschool education, especially in
rural areas and in communities with high share of Roma population. Future investments in
infrastructure should be seen according with the needs at local level, taking into consideration
the demographic trends in school population.

            POLICY MEASURE 1B: INVOLVING PARENTS IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION
                  PARTNERSHIPS, INCLUDING ALTERNATIVE PRESCHOOL SYSTEMS

Recent OECD studies43 on PISA results show an association between higher student
performance and the involvement of parents in their daily activities. The support of parents
in the first years of childhood development (preschool and primary education) possibly has the
highest impact on the future opportunities of children. This is confirmed by several research
projects, in Romania as well as internationally. Many ESF projects aimed at decreasing school
drop-out implemented different initiatives on parent’s involvement such as Parents School,
counseling, or even direct assistance of parents in different school activities. The UNICEF
National Attendance Campaign in Romania has had strong parents component44 whereby schools
benefited from training for parenting education, with a high emphases on parent-child
communication. Further, a program of Ministry of Education in Romania supported by the
World Bank stimulated higher involvement of parents in pre-school education in communities
without preschool infrastructure, whereby Roma mothers, instead of professional teachers, were
recruited and trained to develop learning activities with children below the age of 6.
Although there are no systematic evaluations on the impact of parent’s involvement in
education on their children at the national level, engaging the parents early on could have a
great impact on developing human capital in disadvantaged communities with high share
of Roma, and could serve as a means to promote flexible employment of women in community.
Involving parents in early childhood education partnerships can takes different forms:
    Organize parent support groups in Roma communities;


43
   What can parents do to help their children succeed in school?, PISA in focus, OECD, 2011
http://www.oecd.org/pisa/49012097.pdf accessed on October 2013
44
   Cojocaru, S., Parental Education in Romania, UNICEF, 2011
http://www.unicef.ro/wp-content/uploads/educatia-parentala-in-romania.pdf accesed on October 2013
                                                      43
   Create opportunities for the participation of Roma parents in school activities daily (in school
    or after school hours). During those activities parents might engage in observation, support
    the teacher in preparing activities, or supervise children during activities;
   Educational activities for children lead by parents.

             POLICY MEASURE 1C: IMPLEMENTING INCENTIVES FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD
                                      PARTICIPATION

Several studies on Roma households show that the lack of financial resources of the family
is one of the main barriers to send their children to preschool education. Removing
preschool costs barriers for the poorest parents and providing incentives to poor parents to enroll
their children into preschool at an early age (as early as 3 years old) conditional on meeting good
attendance might be considered as a priority. The incentives may take different forms, according
to the real needs of the community and the profile of the population:
       Conditional cash transfers on clothing, food or other basic needs;
       Vocational training and counseling vouchers for parents in the view of employment,
        based on sending their children to kindergarten regularly;
       Annual subsidies for families, conditional on preschool attendance of children aged 3-4
        years, covering the tuition and meal costs of kindergarten for families with multiply
        disadvantaged children.
2.5.2 POLICY GOAL 2: PREVENTING SCHOOL DROPOUT
Measures on reducing early school leavers should be focused on communities with higher
number of Roma population, targeting not only Roma, but also non-Roma population
resident in those localities. 2009 research shows that, in Canada, the cost of early school
leaving to the government and society as a whole is estimated to be more than $37.1 billion per
year. Structural reforms to Romania’s education system such as monitoring systems, curriculum
changes and improving the school climate to encourage engagement and wellbeing of all
students should be considered in this respect. In addition, there are a few specific measures that
could help prevent dropouts in Roma communities:

          POLICY MEASURE 2A: SETTING UP AN EARLY WARNING SYSTEM OF STUDENTS AT
                                     RISK TO DROP OUT

Defining the profile of students at risk of dropping out of school is the first step in view of
setting up a warning system. Several research reports identify the symptoms of school dropout
as being: an increase in the number of absences, low grades, behavioral difficulties and the lack
of motivation to achieve academic results (Hatos 2007; Chipea 2007). Defining school dropout
as a progressive disengagement from school, with clear symptoms preceding the event, requires
involving school psychologists to much greater extent in identifying which children are at risk,
and setting up support mechanisms tailored to the needs of every child. However, the current
system allows only for large schools to employ a school psychologist, thereby leaving uncovered
large numbers of schools serving compact Roma settlements. Possible steps in developing an
early warning system for school dropouts is presented in Annex 2 to this chapter.


                                                44
               POLICY MEASURE 2B: MAKING SCHOOLS MORE FRIENDLY FOR ALL CHILDREN

The concept of child-friendly45 schools was promoted in the last decades by UNICEF in the
view of supporting children all over the world to learn what they need to learn to face the
challenges of the new century, to enhance their health and well-being and to guarantee
them safe and protective spaces for learning, free from violence and abuse. This principle is
making a direct link with the school environment, teacher’s morale and motivation, as well as
community support for education. According to the child-friendly schools concept, a school
should actively identify excluded children to get them enrolled in school and included in
learning, acting in the best interests of the child, leading to the realization of the child’s full
potential in an integrative manner. Moreover, a child-friendly school must reflect an environment
of good quality characterized by several aspects: inclusiveness, effective for learning (including
good quality teaching and learning processes, structured content and good quality materials and
resources), a healthy and protective environment, which is gender-sensitive and involved
with children, families and communities.
In order to promote a positive school culture that valorizes full potential of every child,
specific measures can be taken in schools with high share of Roma population:
       
       Teacher training programs on friendly school approaches and practices, with a focus on
       inclusive education and the history, language and culture of Roma;
     Counseling and mentorship activities addressed to students at risk of drop-out;
     Community learning approaches of the curriculum, as a means of adapting the curriculum
       to cultural and context-relevant factors;
     Learning activities that promote Roma role-models in order to increase the ethnic self-
       esteem of children;
     Making the voice of children heard in the school’s decision making process, by activating
       student councils, including representatives of Roma children, in schools.
The European structural funds in the 2014-2020 period may be a great opportunity for Romania
in implementing the above type of measures targeted to schools situated in disadvantaged
communities.

             POLICY MEASURE 2C: DEVELOPING COMPLEMENTARY FORMAL AND NON-FORMAL
                          EDUCATION MEASURES BEYOND SCHOOL HOURS

In the last years, a large set of extracurricular activities were implemented in schools
located in disadvantaged areas in Romania, including localities with large Roma
populations. While these interventions have not been rigorously evaluated to provide solid
evidence for their impact, stakeholders recognize the value of extra-curricular activities for
learning as children progress through school. Extra-curricular activities provide compensatory
learning stimulation for children from marginalized communities at a significant learning
disadvantage relative to their more advantaged peers. Taking into account the budgetary
constraints of schools in disadvantaged areas with large Roma populations, these types of
extracurricular activities require additional financial support in order to be scaled up and
rigorously evaluated.

45
     http://www.unicef.org/lifeskills/index_7260.html, accesed in October, 2013
                                                       45
          POLICY MEASURE 2D: SCALING UP THE SCHOOL MEDIATOR PROGRAM, TO INCLUDE
                       ALL SCHOOLS WITH A HIGH PERCENTAGE OF ROMA

A recent “Impreuna” study shows that 55% of the surveyed schools still lack a school
mediator, including schools with over 50% of Roma children. According to the data of the
Ministry of Education (Sarau, 2013), in Romania there are about 2000 schools with Roma
population over 25% that might need a formally employed school mediator. Consequently, in the
coming years there is a need for continuation of the training programs for school mediators, but
also policy commitments regarding their formal employment in the school should be putting in
place. A national awareness campaign addressed to teachers and school managers from
institutions with high share of Roma population on the role and responsibilities of mediators
would also help to avoid some current practices of schools to relegate all activities related to
Roma issues to the school mediator, leading to a deeper disengagement of some teachers from
the Roma communities they serve.

         POLICY MEASURE 2E: IMPROVING THE TARGETING OF THE AFFIRMATIVE MEASURES
           FOR ROMA CHILDREN AND YOUTH TO ENSURE THEIR PROGRESSION TO HIGHER
                                   EDUCATIONSL LEVELS

To further strengthen the implementation and the results achieved through affirmative measures,
the Government may consider the following:
        Improve the targeting of these programs, strengthening the focus on those pupils/students
         who are Romani language speakers, come from rural areas and live in compact,
         homogenous Roma communities.
        Making the measures more visible for all Roma children and parents, taking into account
         that a recent survey reveals that affirmative measures are relatively unknown among the
         Roma;
        Implementing a systematic monitoring and evaluation methodology in order to accurately
         measure the real impact of the affirmative measures;
        Additionally, transport subsidies may be provided for those Roma children and youth
         from rural areas that continue their education in a different locality.
2.5.3 POLICY GOAL 3: INCREASING THE QUALITY OF EDUCATION IN SCHOOLS
    WITH A HIGH PERCENTAGE OF ROMA46

         POLICY MEASURE 3A: PROVIDING INCENTIVES FOR EXCELLENT TEACHERS TO WORK
                     IN SCHOOLS WITH A HIGH SHARE OF ROMA CHILDREN

Several countries in Europe have implemented performance-based pay for teachers, and
currently, about half of OECD countries reward teacher performance in different ways.
For example, in the Czech Republic, England, the Netherlands, Sweden and Turkey, outstanding
teaching performance is a criterion for decisions on a teacher’s position on the base salary scale.
In the Czech Republic, Denmark, England, Estonia, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland


46
  The World Bank’s Romania 2020 study contains in-depth discussion on the quality of education with high share
of Roma students
                                                      46
and the Slovak Republic, it is a criterion for deciding on supplemental payments that are paid
annually. In Austria, Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark, England, Estonia, Hungary, the
Netherlands, Poland, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Turkey and the United States, outstanding
teaching performance is used as a criterion for awarding supplemental incidental payments.
The experiences of countries implementing performance-based pay of teachers shows that
if correctly implemented, this might be a viable policy option. The Romanian Agency for
Quality Assurance in Pre-university Education (ARACIP) already proposed an evaluation of
teachers based on progress improvements in its Second Declaration of Principles standards for
schools, including teaching standards for schools located in disadvantaged areas with a high
share of Roma. These standards may be a starting point for a differentiated pay for teachers.
Another possible model for improving teaching in schools located in disadvantaged areas
might be the program Teach For America (TFA): the goal of this program is to make both
short-term and long-term impact by allowing students to reach their full potential and to become
lifelong leaders for educational equity. The program “Teach for Romania”, inspired by the US
TFA program, was initiated in Romania but stalled due to administrative obstacles. Several
independent studies have shown that the TFA program tends to have a positive effect on student
test scores relative to students instructed by non-TFA teachers, including those who are certified
in-field. Such effects exceed the impact of additional years of experience and are particularly
strong in math and science."47

               POLICY MEASURE 3B: ADAPTING LEARNING FACILITIES (MATERIALS AND
            CURRICULUM) AND MAKING IT CULTURALY RELEVANT FOR ROMA CHILDREN AND
                  PILOTING SOCIO-EMOTIONAL LEARNING PROGRAMS IN SCHOOLS,]

Based on recent pilots in training programs for teachers in schools with high share of children in
dropout risk (e.g. the UNICEF ZEP project), teacher training may be geared to promote the
following principles:
         Establishing achievable learning objectives for each child, according to its own level of
          skills and competences;
         Communicate the learning objectives to students to increase the awareness of its own
          progress;
         Provide meaningful learning experiences, close to students real life in family and in
          community
         Address culturally relevant learning experiences for all children
         Celebrate any learning progress of each student, no matter how small the progress seems
          at first sight;
         Promote positive approaches in learning and support any child to believe in its potential
          of school success.
         Promote ‘learning to learn’ strategies for children. According to OECD studies48, in most
          countries, differences in reading performance between advantaged and disadvantaged
          students can be partly explained by how well students have learned how to learn by the


47
     Urban Institute http://www.urban.org/education/evaluations.cfm?page=2
48
  OECD (2010), PISA 2009 Results: Learning to Learn: Student Engagement, Strategies and Practices, OECD
Publishing.
                                                    47
        time they are 15 years old. Parents and teachers can help to close this performance gap by
        ensuring that all students know how best to approach learning.
It is also worth considering the pilot implementation of school programs that improve socio-
emotional learning, including self-regulation and social skills49.

          POLICY MEASURE 3C: REVISING THE INITIAL AND CONTINUOUS TRAINING SYSTEM
             FOR TEACHERS IN THE VIEW OF PROMOTING INCLUSIVE AND INTERACTIVE
                                   LEARNING APPROACHES

Currently, the initial training system for teachers in secondary education in Romania is
organized in universities, as an optional pedagogical module. Studies50 on teacher training
system in Romania show that the programs are mostly theoretical, with little practical experience
of students. Motivation of students engaged in the pedagogical module is also a challenge, as
most of them see the teaching career as rather unattractive. Moreover, the curriculum lacks a
systematic approach of inclusive education or specific didactical approaches for children coming
from disadvantaged socio-economic background.
Continuous training of teachers suffers from the same theoretical approach, and usually no
follow-up activities of training are implemented in order to evaluate the real impact of the new
skills acquired by teachers in the classroom.
The main revision of the current teacher training system in Romania should be focused on the
followings:
        Selection of students based on clear motivation and commitment for a career in teaching;
        Practical and researched approaches to the curriculum;
        Introducing specific modules on inclusive education and interactive teaching approaches
         in the context of disadvantaged students;
        Introducing specific modules in approaches and practices of reducing school drop-out.
2.5.4 POLICY GOAL 4: PROMOTING INTEGRATED APPROACHES TO INCREASE
      PARTICIPATION TO EDUCATION AT THE COMMUNITY LEVEL

            POLICY MEASURE 4A: IMPLEMENTING COMMUNITY GRANTS FOR EDUCATIONAL
                                      INTERVENTION

Many countries already promote integrated educational support for communities, changing the
role of the school as an active institution open to the real needs of the community. Successful
measures that increase the education levels of Roma require large scale integrated interventions
that include interventions related to the socio-economic environment, employment and health.
Cross-sectoral interventions at the level of the community are more efficient than singular
intervention. For example, the concept of community school 51 promoted by a coherent policy
decision in UK in 1996 was seen as a big promise to overcome educational disadvantages among


49
   See recommendations in the World Bank’s Romania 2020 study
50
   Jigau, M. (coord.) Teacher training in Romania, Institute of Educational Sciences, 2011
51
   Blank, M at all, Making the difference. Research and practice of Community schools, Coalition for Community
Schools, Institute for Educational Leadership, 2003
http://www.communityschools.org/assets/1/Page/CCSFullReport.pdf
                                            48
different communities: under this approach the school becomes a center of the community,
promoting better use of school buildings for providing a larger set of community services,
beyond formal education.

               POLICY MEASURE 4B: DEVELOPING INTEGRATED AND MULTIFUNCTIONAL
                                     COMMUNITY CENTERS

Several countries have opted for equalizing extra-curricular opportunities by using their
schools increasingly also as community centers. Many Dutch schools, for example, have been
converted into community schools with a variety of enrichment activities after school hours.
Similarly, the highest performing school districts in the USA have public schools that are open
outside school hours to offer a wide range of sports, arts and other activities, often with the help
of volunteers. It should be noted that relying on volunteers for school-based extra-curricular
activities is not just a way to save money. In most cases, the volunteers are students’ parents or
other family members, so these activities become an important way to reach out to families and
encourage them to participate in school life. Especially when parents are poorly educated, as is
often the case with Roma parents, involving them in non-academic activities may represent the
first step to encourage them to take a more active role in their children’s education.52
The new education law envisions Community Learning Centers as a mean for encouraging
the lifelong learning approach at community level. Unfortunately, the methodology to
implement Community Learning Centers is not yet approved, although a draft of the document is
currently being assessed in public debate.
In Romania, UNICEF and the Step by Step Centre for Education and Professional
Development implemented already established 17 Multifunctional Centers 53 for early
childhood education and care, benefitting children aged 2-4, which offer integrated services
such as education, nutrition, social protection, health and counseling activities for parents. The
support of the community and the cooperation between different institution and services at the
local level are instrumental for the success of this initiative.
2.5.5 POLICY GOAL 5: CLOSING THE GENDER GAP BETWEEN ROMA BOYS AND
    GIRLS IN TERMS OF PARTICIPATION IN EDUCATION

         POLICY MEASURE 5A: INCREASING PARTICIPATION OF ROMA GIRLS AT ALL LEVEL OF
                                        EDUCATION

A significant body of research confirms that the increase of Roma girls’ participation in
education is likely to have a critical impact on future generations. This would require
measures that effectively overcome the known obstacles to education for Roma girls, such as the
great distance from kindergarten or school to home and / or unsafe traveling conditions; the
necessity for girls to partake in income generating activities for the household and / or sibling
caregiving; early marriage, stemming from fears of losing virginity in the case of traditional



52
   See for example: Cataluña Secretaría de Acción Ciudadana. 2007. Good Practice Guide for the Social Inclusion of
Roma in Europe. Barcelona: Secretaria d'Acció Ciutadana.
53
   Anghelescu, C. Multifucntional Centres. Implementation Guide, UNICEF, 2013
                                                       49
communities; teen pregnancies; lack of financial resources to continue at the secondary and
tertiary levels in the case of rural areas.
Mainstreaming measures intended to increase the participation of Roma children in pre-school
and reduce early school dropout can also be applied in the case of Roma girls. In addition,
gender-specific measures also need to be implemented, for example:
   Implementing reproductive and sexual education in schools;
   Piloting all-girls schools in traditional Roma communities;
   Providing childcare facilities to families with girls at risk of dropping out because of sibling
    caregiving;
   Providing scholarships and material support to Roma girls willing to pursue secondary and
    tertiary education.

            POLICY MEASURE 5B: DEVELOPING HUMAN CAPITAL AMONG ROMA WOMEN

Developing human capital among Roma women is very likely to positively impact
educational outcomes of Roma children. Research shows that the participation of women on
the labor market increases the likelihood that they partake in the financial decisions regarding the
household budget, thereby increasing the likelihood that a larger share of the budget is allocated
to the educational needs of girls and boys alike, thereby contributing to reducing the gender gap
of future generations in education. Women’s presence on the labor market provides girls with
positive role-models and increases the educational aspirations of girls, as well as the level of
investment in their education, which, in turn, diminishes dependence on men as income
providers and helps increasing equality both within and outside the household. Higher levels of
education, as well as prospects on the labor market, increase the age of marriage and first
pregnancy, which in turn contributes to better maternal and infant health, as well as continuing
the demographic transition, with less children per family and thus a larger share of the household
budget spent on each child, including in education. Finally, the fact that women participate on
the labor market decreases the financial burden on the future generations, as pensioners already
have a source of income. Investing in Roma women is thus likely to trigger a virtuous circle of
social change, which will also play an important role for the next generations. Effective policies
should first and foremost target women, investing in their education and including and
empowering them on the labor market.




                                                50
2.5.6 IMPLEMENTATION
                                Summary Table of Policy Recommendations
Recommendation              Entity(ies) best         Impact            Time frame   Monitoring indicator
                            placed to implement
                                                     (Critical         Short: < 6
                            the recommendation
                                                     impact; High      months;
                                                     impact;
                                                                       Medium: 6-
                                                     Enabling
                                                                       18 months;
                                                     condition)
                                                                       Long: >18
                                                                       months
Policy Goal 1: INCREASING EARLY CHILDHOOD PARTICIPATION TO EDUCATION IN
COMMUNITIES WITH HIGH NUMBER OF ROMA POPULATION
Policy Measure 1A:          -    Ministry of         Critical impact   Long term     Number of kindergartens
                                 Education                                            and other educational
Develop early childhood
                            -    Local authorities                                    services for children under
(0-6 years) institutional
                                                                                      6 years old in poor
infrastructure in
                                                                                      communities
communities with high
                                                                                     Number of pupils integrated
share of Roma
                                                                                      in kindergarten in poor
                                                                                      communities
                                                                                     Annual rate of participation
                                                                                      in early childhood
                                                                                      education in communities
                                                                                      with high number of Roma
                                                                                      population
                                                                                     Annual rate of pupils
                                                                                      integrated in preparatory
                                                                                      class who attended
                                                                                      preschool education
Policy Measure 1B:          -    Schools             Enabling          Short term    Annual number of
                            -    County Centers      condition                           parents participating in
Involving parents in
                                 of Resources and                                        educational activities in
early childhood
                                 Educational                                             schools with high number
education partnerships,
                                 Assistance                                              of Roma population
including alternative
                            -    Parents                                             Annual number of
preschool system
                                 associations                                            educational activities
                                                                                         involving Roma parents
                                                                                     Number of hours spent
                                                                                         by parents in early
                                                                                         educational stimulation
                                                                                         of their children
                                                                                     Rate of parent’s
                                                                                         participation in regular
                                                                                         kindergarten activities
Policy Measure 1C:          -    Ministry of         High impact       Medium        Annual rate of participation
                                 Education                             term           in early childhood
Implementing incentives
                            -    Ministry of                                          education in communities
for early childhood
                                 Finances                                             with high number of Roma
participation
                                                                                      population
                                                                                     Average per capita

                                                         51
                                                            incentives for early
                                                            childhood participation
                                                           Share of Roma families
                                                            benefiting by different types
                                                            of incentives
Policy Goal 2: PREVENTING SCHOOL DROPOUT RATHER THAN WAITING FOR COMPENSATION
MEASURES
Policy Measure 2A:          -   Ministry of          High impact       Short term       Clear definition of drop-
                                Education                                                out
Setting up an early
                            -   National Agency                                         Methodology for
warning system of
                                for Roma                                                 monitoring and
students in risk to drop
                            -   Schools                                                  evaluation of early signs
out
                            -   County school                                            for dropping out
                                inspectorates                                           Number of pupils in risk
                            -   Local authorities                                        to drop out at the
                                                                                         beginning – at the end of
                                                                                         school year, in schools
                                                                                         with high number of
                                                                                         Roma
                                                                                        Cohort evolution tracking
                                                                                         system for a deeper
                                                                                         analysis of out-of-school
                                                                                         children’s characteristics
                                                                                        Annual drop-out rate
Policy Measure 2B:          -   Schools              Enabling          Medium           Students well-being
                            -   County school        condition         term              index in communities
Making schools more
                                inspectorates                                            with high share of Roma
friendly for all children
                            -   County Centers                                          Ethnic self-esteem
                                of Resources and                                         barometer
                                Educational                                             Annual rate of
                                Assistance                                               participation in schools
                            -   Research                                                 with high number of
                                Institutes                                               Roma
Policy Measure 2C:          -    Ministry of         Critical impact   Medium          Number of pupils
                                 Education                             term             involved in various types
Developing
                            -    County school                                          of complementary
complementary formal
                                 inspectorates                                          education measures (after
and non-formal
                            -    Schools                                                school, summer
education measures
                            -    Local authorities                                      kindergartens, school
beyond school hours
                                 locale                                                 tutoring etc.)
                            -    NGOs                                                  Number and types of
                                                                                        centers (schools, NGOs.)
                                                                                        that have implemented
                                                                                        complementary education
                                                                                        measures, by regions,
                                                                                        counties
Policy Measure 2D:          -   Ministry of          High impact       Medium           Number of school
                                Education                              term              mediators at national
Scaling up school
                            -   County school                                            level and in communities
mediators in all schools
                                inspectorates                                            with high share of Roma
with high percentage of
                            -   Local authorities                                        (over 25%)
Roma
                                locale                                                  Number of school
                                                                                         mediators fully employed
                                                         52
                                                                   in school system
                                                                               
                                                                   Number of school
                                                                   mediators trained trough
                                                                   specific programs
Policy Measure 2E: -        Ministry of       High impact Medium  Number of beneficiaries
Targeting the affirmative   Education                     term     by type of measures
measures addressed to -     Ministry of                           Share of reserved places
Roma children and           Finance                                that are occupied by
youth in order to -         County school                          Roma children and youth
continue their education    inspectorates                         Number of graduate
at the higher levels      - Local authorities                      beneficiaries by level of
                            locale                                 education and education
                          - Universities                           profiles
Policy Goal 3: INCREASING QUALITY OF EDUCATION IN SCHOOLS WITH HIGH PERCENTAGE
OF ROMA
Policy Measure 3A:           -   Ministry of        Critical impact   Medium    Number of qualified
Providing incentives for         Education                            term       teachers in schools with
excellent teachers to        -   Ministry of                                     high number of Roma
work in schools with             Finances                                       Number of teachers trained
high share of Roma           -   NGO-s                                           trough specific programs
children                                                                         relevant for Roma
                                                                                 education
                                                                                Level of pupils results at
                                                                                 national exams in schools
                                                                                 with high number of Roma
                                                                                Number of teachers by type
                                                                                 of incentives


Policy Measure 3B:           -   Ministry of        Enabling          Medium    Relevance of material
Adapting learning                Education          condition         term       facilities in schools with
facilities (materials and    -   Institute of                                    high number of Roma
curricular) and making           Educational                                    Results of Roma children at
it culturally relevant for       Sciences                                        the national exams in
Roma children                -   County school                                   schools with high number
                                 inspectorates                                   of Roma
                             -   Training                                       Types of specific subjects
                                 providers                                       in the national curriculum
                             -   Educational Soft                                relevant for Roma identity
                                 developers                                     Types of specific subjects
                                                                                 in the school based
                                                                                 curriculum relevant for
                                                                                 Roma identity
                                                                                Types of specific modules
                                                                                 and integrated
                                                                                 competencies in the school
                                                                                 subjects at national level
                                                                                 relevant for inclusive
                                                                                 education
                                                                                Types of school books and
                                                                                 other curricular materials
                                                                                 relevant for inclusive
                                                                                 education

                                                        53
                                                                    Number of teachers
                                                                     attending training courses
                                                                     on inclusive education,
                                                                     language, history and
                                                                     culture of Roma minorities
Policy Measure 3C:        - Ministry of     Critical impact Medium  The relevance of the
                            Education                       term     curriculum in initial teacher
Revising the initial and
                          - National Agency                          training
continuous training
                            for Quality                             Number of graduates of
system for teachers in
                            Assurance in                             philology faculties, Romani
the view of promoting
                            Pre-university                           language employed in the
inclusive and interactive
                            and University                           system
learning approaches
                            Education                               Number of teachers trained
                          - County school                            in the field of Roma history
                            inspectorates                            and traditions
                          - Teacher Houses                          Number of teachers trained
                                                                     in the field of inclusive
                                                                     education, intercultural
                                                                     education
                                                                    Number of teachers
                                                                     experiencing exchanges in
                                                                     communities with high
                                                                     number of Roma population
Policy Goal 4: PROMOTING INTEGRATED APPROACHES TO INCREASE PARTICIPATION TO
EDUCATION AT THE LEVELs OF THE COMMUNITY
Policy Measure 4A:         -   Ministry of         Enabling  Number of school grants
                                                                     Medium
Implementing                   Education           condition         term
                                                              relevant for inclusive
community grants for   -       County school                  education
educational intervention       inspectorates                 Number of Roma children
                       -       Local authorities              and parents benefiting by
                       -       NGO-s                          the measures
                                                             Annual participation rate in
                                                              schools with high number
                                                              of Roma
                                                             Number of community
                                                              partnerships
Policy Measure 4B:     - Ministry of       Enabling  Medium  Number of community
Developing integrative   Education         condition term     centers in communities with
and multifunctional    - County school                        high number of Roma
community centers        inspectorates                       Number and types of
                       - Local authorities                    activities developed in the
                       - NGOs                                 community centers relevant
                                                              for education of Roma
                                                              population
                                                             Number of Roma
                                                              community centers
                                                              beneficiaries
Policy Goal 5: CLOSING THE GENDER GAP BETWEEN ROMA BOYS AND GIRLS IN TERMS OF
PARTICIPATION TO EDUCATION
Policy Measure 5A:         -   Ministry of         Critical impact   Long term      number of Roma girls
                               Education                                             continuing education at
Increasing participation
                           -   County school                                         tertiary level
of Roma girls at all
                                                       54
levels of education      inspectorates                                       number of young Roma
                      - Local authorities                                     women entering the
                      NGOs                                                    formal labor market
Policy Measure 5B:    -  Ministry of        Critical impact   Long term      number      of           teen
                         Education                                            pregnancies
Developing human
                      - Ministry of
capital among Roma                                                           number       of      early
                         Labor
women                                                                         marriages
                      - Local authorities
                      NGOs                                                   age at first pregnancy
                                                                             age at marriage
                                                                             number of Roma women
                                                                              entering the formal labor
                                                                              market




                                                55
REFERENCES
Anghelescu, C. (2013). Multifunctional Centres. Implementation Guide. Bucharest: UNICEF
Balica, M., Fartușnic, C., Horga, I., Jigău, M., Voinea, L. (2004). Perspective asupra dimensiunii de gen în educație
[Perspectives on the Gender Dimension in Education]. Bucharest: MarLink
Blank, M at al. (2003). Making the difference. Research and practice of Community schools, Coalition for
Community Schools, Institute for Educational Leadership,
http://www.communityschools.org/assets/1/Page/CCSFullReport.pdf, accesed on Octomber 2013
Bradshaw, J., Richardson, D. (2009). „An index of child well-being in Europe”, in Child Indicators Research, 2, 3,
pp. 319-351
Cataluña Secretaría de Acción Ciudadana (2007). Good Practice Guide for the Social Inclusion of Roma in Europe .
Barcelona: Secretaria d'Acció Ciutadana
Chipea, F. (2007). „Abandonul şcolar-sursă a marginalizării sociale” [School Dropout – Source of Social
Marginalization), in Cultură, dezvoltare, identitate. Perspective actuale, 10 ani de la înfiinţarea secţiilor de
psihologie şi sociologie la Universitatea din Oradea. Bucharest: Expert
Chirițoiu, A., Ivasiuc, A. (2012). Despre noi. Douăzeci de răspunsuri la întrebarea „Ce vrei să te faci când vei fi
mare?” [About us. Twenty answers to the question „What do you want to be when you grow up?”]. Buzău: Alpha
MDN
Cojocaru, S. (2011). Parental Education in Romania, UNICEF, http://www.unicef.ro/wp-content/uploads/educatia-
parentala-in-romania.pdf, accesed on October 2013
Council of Europe, Recommendation No R (2000) 4 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the
education of Roma/Gypsy children in Europe
Diamond, J.B.,Randolph A.,Spillane J.P.(2004). „Teachers’ Expectations and Sense of Responsibility for Student
Learning: The Importance of Race, Class, and Organizational Habitus”, in Anthropology & Education Quarterly
35(1):75–98, American Anthropological Association
Dobrică, P., Jderu, G. (coord.) (2005). Educaţia şcolară a copiilor romi: determinări socioculturale . [Education of
Roma Children: Socio-Cultural Determinants]. Bucharest: Vanemonde
Duminică, G., Ivasiuc, A. (2011). One School for All? Access to Quality Education for Roma Children. Buzău:
Alpha MDN
Duminică, G., Ivasiuc, A. (coord.) (2013). The Roma from Romania. From Scapegoat to Development Engine.
Bucharest: Agenția de Dezvoltare Comunitară „Împreună”
EACEA (Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency of the European Commission) (2010). Gender
Differences in Educational Outcomes. Study on the Measures Taken and the Current Situation in Europe . Brussels:
EACEA
European Commission (2010). Early school leaving - Lessons from research for policy makers,
http://www.youthforum.org/assets/2013/10/0052-08_FINAL_-Early_Education_Leaving.pdf accessed in October
2013
Fartușnic, C. at al. (2013) Financing pre-university education system based on standards cost. Current evaluation
from the equity perspective. Institute of Educational Sciences, UNICEF Romania (under publication).
Grigore, D., Neacșu, M., Sarău, G. (2009). Evaluarea Politicilor Publice Educaționale pentru Rromi [Evaluation of
Educational Public Policies for the Roma] . Buzău: Alpha MDN
Grigore, D. at all (2007). Roma …looking for their self esteem, Bucharest: Amare Rromentza, UNICEF Romania



                                                         56
Hatos, A. (2007). „Educaţie şi excluziune socială în România” [Education and Social Exclusion in Romania], in
Cultură, dezvoltare, identitate. Perspective actuale, 10 ani de la înfiinţarea secţiilor de psihologie şi sociologie la
Universitatea din Oradea. Bucharest: Editura Expert
Horváth, A. (2007). „Affirmative Action at Babeș-Bolyai University”, in Studia Universitatis Babeș-Bolyai,
Sociologia, LII, 1, pp. 36-65
Institutul Intercultural Timișoara [Intercultural Institute Timișoara] (2000). EURROM. Integrarea culturii romilor în
educaţia şcolară şi extraşcolară [EURROM. The Integration of Roma Culture in the Scholar and Extracurricular
Education]. Timișoara: Institutul Intercultural Timișoara
Institutul de Ştiinţe ale Educaţiei [Institute of Educational Sciences] (2008). Influenţa capitalului cultural al familiei
asupra reuşitei şcolare [The Influence of Family Cultural Capital on School Success]. Bucharest: MarLink
Ivasiuc, A., Koreck M., Kovari, R. (2010). Educația interculturală de la teorie la practică. Implementarea educației
interculturale în școli multietnice din România [Intercultural Education from Theory to Practice. The
Implementation of Intercultural Education in Multiethnic Schools from Romania]. Online edition available at
http://www.agentiaimpreuna.ro/uploads/educatia%20interculturala.pdf
Jigau, M. (coord.) (2011). Teacher training in Romania. Bucharest: Institute of Educational Sciences
Jigău, M. (coord.) (2002). Învăţământul rural din România. Condiţii, probleme şi strategii de dezvoltare [Rural
Education in Romania. Conditions, Problems and Developmet Strategies]. Bucharest: MarLink
Jigău, M., Surdu, M. (coord.) (2002). Participarea la educație a copiilor romi: probleme, soluții, actori
[Participation to Education of Roma Children. Problems, Solutions, Actors]. Ministerul Educației și Cercetării,
Institutul de Științe ale Educației, Institutul de Cercetare a Calității Vieții, UNICEF. Bucharest: MarLink
Jigău, M., Fartușnic, C. (coord.) (2012). Cohort Analysis Estimation of the Dropout Phenomenon. Subsample of
Schools from EPA Network, included in School Attendance Initiative „Hai la școală!” . Buzău: Alpha MDN
Kendall, S., Springate, I. Jones, M. et al. (2008). Narrowing the gap in outcomes for vulnerable groups. A review of
the research evidence, http://www.nfer.ac.uk/nfer/publications/LNG01/LNG01.pdf, accesed in Octomber 2013
Kezdi, G., Suranyi, E. (2009), Results from a successful school integration program: Evaluation of the OOIH
program, Hungary, CEU, http://www.cedu.ro/ro/program/20.html, accessed in August 2013.
Kocze, A. (2009). Missing Intersectionality. Race / Ethnicity, Gender and Class in Current Research and Policies
on Romani Women. Budapest: Center for Policy Studies, Central European University
Lake, A. (2011). “Early childhood development – global action is overdue”, in The Lancet, Volume 378, Issue 9799,
pp. 1277-1278
Ministry of Education (2005). Regulamentul de Organizare și Funcționare a Unităților de Învățământ
Preuniversitar, available at www.edu.ro
Ministry of Education (2006). Programul PHARE 2003 005-551.01.02 – Acces la educaţie pentru grupurile
dezavantajate – Raport intermediar 4 [Fourth Interim report, EuropeAid/118970/D/SV/RO, Access to Education for
Disadvantaged Groups]. Bucharest: WYG International
Ministry of Education (2009). Programele PHARE Acces la educație pentru grupuri dezavantajate. Studiu de
impact [PHARE programmes Access to Education for Disadvantaged Groups. Impact Analysis]. Ulrich C. (coord.).
Bucharest: MERI
Ministry of Education (2012). Rules and Regulations of Pre-Universitary Education Units
Ministry of Education (2004). Order no. 5379/25 November 2004
OECD (2010), PISA 2009 Results: Learning to Learn: Student Engagement, Strategies and Practices , OECD
Publishing
OECD (2011). „What can parents do to help their children succeed in school? ”, in PISA in focus, No. 10/2011,
http://www.oecd.org/pisa/49012097.pdf, accessed on October 2013


                                                           57
OECD (2012). “Does performance-based pay improve teaching?”, in PISA in focus, No. 5/2012,
http://www.oecd.org/pisa/50328990.pdf, accessed on October 2013
Open Society Institute (2007). Equal Access to Quality Education for Roma, Monitoring Report. Vol I. Budapest:
EUMAP, ESP, RPP
Open Society Foundation (2012). Review of EU Framework National Roma Integration Strategies,
http://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/reports/review-eu-framework-national-roma-integration-strategies, accessed
on October 2013
Roma Education Fund (2012). Inequity and Inequality. Teacher Absenteeism, Romani Pupils and Primary Schools
in Romania. Bucharest: Roma Education Fund
Rus, C. (2006). La situation des médiateurs et assistants scolaires roms en Europe [The Situation of Roma School
Mediators and Assistants in Europe]. Strasbourg: European Council
Surdu, L. (2008). Monitorizarea aplicării măsurilor împotriva segregării școlare în România [Monitoring the
implementation of measures against school segregation in Romania]. UNICEF, Romani CRISS. Bucharest: MarLink
Surdu, L. (coord.) (2011). Roma School Participation, Non-Attendance and Discrimination in Romania. Bucharest:
Vanemonde
Surdu, M. (2002). Desegregating Roma Schools. A Cost-Benefit Analysis. Budapest: Open Society Institute
Surdu, M. (2006). „Segregare școlară și reproducerea socială a inegalităților” [School Segregation and the Social
Reproduction of Inequalities], in O noua provocare: Dezvoltarea Sociala [A new challenge:
Social Development]. Iaşi: Polirom
Surdu, M. (2004). Sarcina și căsătoria timpurie în rândul tinerelor roma [Teen Pregnancy and Early Marriage
Among Young Roma Girls]. CEDU 2000+
Surdu, M., Szira, J. (coord.) (2009). Analysis of the Impact of Affirmative Action for Roma in High Schools,
Vocational Schools and Universities. Bucharest: Roma Education Fund, Gallup Romania
TFA (2012). Research, http://www.teachforamerica.org/our-organization/research accesed ob Octomber 2013
Tufiş, P.A. (2008). „Predictors of School Success in Romania. Family Background, School Factors, Community
Factors”. Calitatea vieţii, XIX, nr. 3–4, pp. 389–405
Ulrich, C. (2009). Programele PHARE. Acces la educație pentru grupuri dezavantajate. Studiu de impact.
[PHARE Programs. Access to Education for Disadvantaged Groups. Impact Study]. Bucharest: Ministry
of Education
UNDP (2002). The Roma in Central and Eastern Europe. Avoiding the Dependency Trap . Andrey Ivanov
(coord.). Bratislava: UNDP
UNDP (2012). Roma Education in Comparative Perspective. Findings from the UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional
Roma Survey, http://issuu.com/undp_in_europe_cis/docs/education_web, accesed on October 2013
UNESCO (2003). Gender and Education for All. The Leap to Equality. Global Monitoring Report 2003-2004. Paris:
UNESCO
UNESCO (2005). Education for All. The Quality Imperative. Global Monitoring Report 2005 . Paris: UNESCO
Urban Institute http://www.urban.org/education/evaluations.cfm?page=2, accesed on 2013
Voicu, M., Popescu, R. (2006). Viața de familie și poziția femeii în comunitățile de romi [Family Life and the
Position of the Woman in Roma Communities] in Femeile roma. Ce știm și ce nu știm despre ele . [Roma Women:
What Do We Know and Not Know About Them]. OSF
Vrasmaş, E., T, Vrasmas (2012), Educaţia incluzivă în grădiniţă: dimensiuni, provocări şi soluţii . UNICEF
Romania

                                                       58
Walker, A. (2010). „Inclusive Education in Romania: Policies and Practices in Post -Communist Romania.”
International Journal of Intercultural Education14 (2): 165–181
World Bank (2011). World Development Report 2012. Gender Equality and Development . Washington: The World
Bank
Children's Rights References in the Universal Periodic Review (Second Cycle), 2012, Child Rights International
Network




                                                     59
ANNEX 1
OVERVIEW OF MAIN ROMA EDUCATION PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS
IMPLEMENTED IN ROMANIA
In the last decade, Romania implemented a significant number of national, regional and
local programs and project supported by the EU and other international organizations. The
first large scale projects were implemented by the Ministry of Education under EU pre-accession
PHARE RO program between 2002 and 2006. The PHARE Multiannual Project “Access to
education for disadvantaged groups” is a starting point for building capacity at national and
local level for inclusion of Roma in terms of education. The establishment of the school
mediators’ network and the implementation of the “Second chance” programs are major
outcomes of the program.
The total number of students enrolled in primary and secondary "second chance"
programs has risen from 3361 students in 2007/2008 to 9108 in 2011/2012, with more
students enrolled in the secondary than in the primary second chance programs. The
"Second Chance" program began in school year 1999-2000 and was expanded at national level
through European Structural Funds projects. Originally the program covered only lower
secondary education, but it was subsequently enlarged to include primary education as well.
Specific elements of the program include (i) the implementation of a modular curriculum, (ii)
assessment and recognition of prior learning (formal, non-formal and informal) in compliance
with the curricular standards for basic and vocational education standards, and (iii) providing
customized training programs. School inspectorates and schools have benefited from support
provided by the Ministry of Education through periodic review of the methodology for
implementation of the program. Extensive training was provided to inspectors, county
coordinators of the program, school directors and teachers. A number of evaluations of the
program emphasized the need for a more flexible learning approach, better adaptation of the
program to the learners’ needs, continuous methodological support for teachers involved in this
program and removal of the constraint that beneficiaries must have been out of school for 4
years.
The Ministry of Education coordinated the implementation of significant number of ESF
funded projects addressing quality of education, teacher training, school participation and equal
chances in education over the period 2007-2013. One such project is "All in the kindergarten, all
in first grade!" aimed at increasing the access to education and preventing early school leaving of
children aged 5-8 years from disadvantaged communities. The project served 420 disadvantaged
communities with high share of Roma population; 8,400 rural children at risk of early school
leaving participated in summer kindergartens before entering the first grade in the formal
education system and 6000 pupils participated in the ” after school” program. An important
component of the project was the involvement of over 10,000 parents, out of which 5,000
attended the program "School for parents".
The Ministry of Education has also advanced the inclusive early childhood education (ECE)
agenda with World Bank support through the Social Inclusion Project. Key policy
documents were developed including the development of the ECE Curriculum for children ages
3 to 6/7 and associated Good Practices Guide, the ECE Curriculum for children ages 0 to 3 and
associated Methodological Guide, Quality standards for ECE programs, Quality standards for
                                              60
Teaching and Learning Materials, as well as a Normative for Minimal Supplies in Kindergartens.
About 2,200 teaching staff working in about 100 kindergartens (from 27 counties) benefited
from training mainly focused on inclusive education. Training and counseling for parents was
provided in resource centers set up, equipped and endowed in eight counties. Children and
teachers in 100 kindergartens are benefiting from new teaching learning materials. At the same
time, children in 27 localities with a majority Roma population have access to new or renovated
pre-school facilities.
The project Every child in a kindergarten, jointly implemented by the Ministry of Education
and OvidiuRo has piloted since 2010 the provision of preschool attendance conditional cash
transfers, complemented by measures to inform, mediate and built partnerships between parents,
teachers, local community and companies in Romania. The project has involved 2,100 children
in 38 kindergartens in 12 counties and has led to significant growth of regular attendance to 83%
– almost double the attendance rates before the program.
In the last three years the National Agency for Roma implemented six ESF funded projects at
the national level, providing measures to link LLL to job search, preventing early school leaving
and promoting social inclusion. The projects were implemented in 541 communities with a
significant number of Roma populations, in partnership with 21 institutions and representative
organizations, including 4 transnational partners from Italy, Spain and Hungary. The
beneficiaries were over 37,000 people belonging to disadvantaged groups, out of which 70% was
Roma. These projects provided 2,300 scholarships to students; over 1400 students benefitted
from ”school after school” programs; 4,000 students attended "second chance" program; more
than 6,000 beneficiaries received qualification and nearly one third of them secured a job; 400
teachers were trained in inclusive education and intercultural approaches.
In view of improving the quality of education in all schools, including those with high
percentage of Roma, National Agency for Quality Assurance in Pre-university Education
introduced recently new standards and criteria for school’s evaluation with specific indicators on
inclusive education approaches, intercultural practices and respecting ethnic minorities’ rights to
quality education.
In the last decade, UNICEF Romania implemented an impressive number of projects for
disadvantaged groups, including Roma, promoting desegregation measures, increased
participation in education, quality assurance in the education of disadvantaged groups, training
for mediators, inclusive education and school management. In 2010 UNICEF Romania launched
the School Attendance Campaign to assist national and local authorities to get the estimated
300,000-400,000 out of school children back in the classroom. UNICEF Romania contributed
also to the evidence based policy formulation, constantly providing expertise and support in
conducting relevant research papers, comprehensive studies and policy evaluation with regard to
participation of all children to education. The Institute of Education Sciences and UNICEF
jointly developed several action-research projects focused on children of primary and lower
secondary age not attending school or at high risk of dropping out due to a socially and
economically disadvantaged background, currently involving more than 240 schools located in
disadvantaged areas of Romania and 50,000 students, including Roma.
Roma Education Fund Romania implemented ESF and community grants supported
interventions (“after school” programs, scholarship grants, mentoring and tutoring activities,
                                                61
counseling and guidance services) aimed at expanding the access and participation of Roma in
all levels of education, the integration of Roma graduates on the labor market, and developing
alternative educational services for Roma children.
A constant support for participation to education of all children was also provided by Save the
Children organization in Romania, establishing a network of educational centers to prevent
school dropout and support social and educational reintegration of children involved in child
labor. Save the children developed “second chance” education programs, “school after school”
programs and lobby activities promoting children rights, including the right to education for all
children.
Another set of projects initiated by Roma civil society addressed the issues of cultural identity of
Roma children and aimed to implement measures for increasing ethnical self-esteem of Roma
children as a means for a better educational inclusion. Roma Center "AMARE Romentza"
implemented projects focused on recovering and strengthening the linguistic and cultural identity
of Roma and their transmission to the new Roma generations through provision of bilingual
education and promotion of intercultural and cultural diversity in pre-schools education. The
center evaluated the public education policies for Roma (2009), putting particular emphasis on
valuing ethnic identity in formal and informal learning and proposing strategies and policies for
Roma.
Civil society organizations (CSO) increasingly promote non-formal and informal learning
activities for children at risk of dropping out the school. Alternative students clubs, informal
remedial activities provided by volunteers, and innovative teaching practices and methodologies
meant to support the learning motivation and personal development of students at risk of
dropping out of school are just a few examples of interventions implemented by CSOs.
Gender-differentiated projects in the field of education are scarce but have been known to
take place. An example is the project „Roma girls go to school too!” implemented by the CE DU
association between 2005-2006.54 The same association also implemented in 2004 the project
„Let us build together the image of our daughters!” aiming at fostering school participation
among Roma girls aged 12-18.
In the recent years, a great effort of both governmental and nongovernmental organization
was put into developing bilingual or Romani language textbooks, didactical guides, video
and different learning materials, addressing the issues of history, language and cultural of
Roma minority. However, those learning materials are not present in every school and a great
share of teachers is not trained to use these in the classroom.
There have been, in recent years, a large numbers of teacher trainings on preventing and
tackling discrimination in school. Several large scale programs55 included anti-discrimination
trainings and many non-governmental organizations have also implemented projects in this
respect. As a result, the teachers discourse has shown a tendency to shift towards political
correctness, while discriminatory attitudes against the Roma persist (Ulrich 2009:38). Class
practices reveal the re-enactment of the social distance between Roma and non-Roma, as well as


54
     http://www.cedu.ro/ro/program/20.html, accessed in August 2013.
55
     PHARE RO 01 04.02 „Access to education for disadvantaged groups”.
                                                       62
between different social strata found in Romanian society at large (segregation within the class,
positioning of children, preferential treatment manifested in subtle or blatant forms etc.).
Other activities implemented through projects addressing Roma were awareness campaigns
on the role of education, adult education programs addressed to specific categories of population
such as women, young unemployed, imprisoned youth and adults or specific training on
intercultural approaches for teachers, public administration employees, medical students and
staff.




                                               63
ANNEX 2
DEVELOPMENT OF A SCHOOL DROP-OUTS EARLY WARNING SYSTEM
The main areas of intervention in building up an early warning system can be (Jigau and
Fartusnic, 2012).
      Clarifying the definition of school dropout and drawing up guidelines for completing
       school participation in completing statistical questionnaires (SQs) administered by NIS.
      Collecting and reporting drop-out data at the school and inspectorates level. A better
       training of the school staff holding relevant responsibilities and more efficient monitoring
       and checking instruments should be in place both at the level of County School
       Inspectorates and of each school.
      Developing a school cohort evolution tracking system for a deeper analysis of out-of-
       school children’s characteristics (for example, family’s living conditions, engagement
       in circulatory or work migration, sibling influence, academic failure record, etc.), a long-
       term school cohort evolution tracking system needs to be developed and implemented. A
       national representative sample (of minimum 5,000 children) could be surveyed in various
       stages of the educational pathway, with research repeated every four school cohorts
       (Voicu, 2010). Alternatively, an electronic matriculation register could be created
       allowing for the real-time monitoring of each student’s school pathway. In this case, for
       every child that a school identifies to be most at risk of dropping out basic information on
       risk factors must be collected.
      Strict school monitoring of truancy, drop-out and children never attending school.
       Public awareness campaigns on the importance of education must equally target parents,
       the public opinion and all school stakeholders: students, teachers, management, and
       support staff. Moreover, schools and local authorities also need to be made accountable
       while local cooperation organizations should be consolidated to also involve school and
       health mediators, informal community leaders, child protection structures, and
       representatives of NGO’s that run relevant local projects (Sarău, 2011).
      Monitor the situation of children caught in circulatory migration. At national level, it
       is time to introduce a fly grade book/academic passport for those children who often
       accompany their parents to work in other European countries or in their home countries
       in order to recognize the grades attended/finished and some courses followed during the
       respective school year (even marks). With certificates issued to document the school
       record of the leaving/arriving/returning student, s/he can easily move from one education
       system to another (Sarău, 2011).




                                               64
                                         3     EMPLOYMENT
Employment is a crucial enabling component of Earning Opportunities for Families, the second
‘dimension of exclusion’ (after education) faced by Roma in Romania. This dimension is
explored in a more concise form in a separate summary report. This chapter presents the
diagnostic of employment opportunities among Roma in Romania, based on the 2011
UNDP/World Bank/EC Roma Regional Survey, the 2008-2012 Household Budget Survey
(National Institute of Statistics)56 and other available datasets, as well as results of a qualitative
study carried out in October 2013. The findings confirm a significant labor gap between the
Roma and non-Roma, and point to the need for employment policies to focus mainly on
improving skills and employability, especially among disadvantaged youth. This includes labor
training programs targeting disadvantaged Roma youth and Roma women, as well as training on
effective job search. Improving job search incentives and linking them closely with job creation
policies, while improving the overall efficiency of job search, is also important.
3.1 PARTICIPATION OF ROMA IN THE LABOR MARKET
Beyond the already low general employment rates in the country 57, Roma men and women
are employed even far less often than men and women of other ethnic groups, reflecting a
waste of valuable resources to the Romanian economy. As highlighted in the introductory
chapter, higher employment rates among Roma would amount to a valuable increase in
economic activity, government taxes, and inclusiveness in Romanian society.
Reflecting a combination of barriers, including discouragement regarding the potential to
find work, labor force participation58 of working-age Roma has consistently been lower
than that of non-Roma. A large number of studies59 demonstrate that, in Romania, Roma are
most exposed to the risk of poverty and social exclusion, are discriminated against and have
unequal access to education, the job market, decent housing, social services and health care.
These forms of exclusion tend to reinforce one-another: for example, Roma with low levels of
education face more obstacles when entering the labor market. Moreover, Roma may be
discouraged from looking for jobs, as many of their peers who embark on this endeavor are
unsuccessful. Indeed, for the entire 2008-2012 period, 58 out of every 100 Roma aged 15-64
years were economically active (Annex Table 3-1). By comparison, for every 100 non-Roma of
working age, 65 were employed or unemployed.


56
   The HBS datasets for the 5-year period (2008-2012) were merged in a database including 236,441 persons aged
15-64 years, out of which 6,064 Roma and 230,377 non-Roma. In the HBS, ethnicity is self-identified.
57
   According to the Eurostat data for 2012, the employment rate of the working-age population (15-64) was only
59.5%, compared with the EU-27 average of 64.2%. and it is still far from the national target of 70% to be achieved
by 2020, declared in the context of the Europe 2020 strategy.
58
   The ‘Participation Rate’ among a certain population group is defined as: ‘the share of the working age population
that is either employed or looking for work’. The working age population includes all individuals aged 15-64. Those
who are looking for work are also referred to as ‘the unemployed’.
59
   E.g. Zamfir and Zamfir (coord.) (1993), Zamfir and Preda (coord.) (2002), Preda and Duminică (2003), Ionescu
and Cace (coord.) (2006), Bădescu et al. (2007), ERRC (2007), Fleck and Rughiniş (ed.) (2008), Preoteasa, Cace
and Duminică (coord.) (2009), Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010), Vincze (ed.) (2011), Giurcă (coord.)
(2012), Soros Foundation (2012), Soros Foundation (2012), FRA, UNDP and EC (2012), World Bank and EC
(2012), Duminică and Ivasiuc (coord.) (2013).
                                                        65
The gap in labor force participation between Roma and non-Roma is driven by lower
participation rates among Roma who live in urban areas; in rural areas, participation
among Roma is similar to that among non-Roma. Labor force participation among Roma is
higher in rural areas than in urban environments (63% compared with 52% in urban areas),
whereas among non-Roma, participation rates stand at about 65% in both urban and rural areas
(HBS, 2008-2012). It is important to mention that in rural areas self-employment in agriculture
predominates - 60% of the employed Roma are self-employed in agriculture (particularly
working on their own account as daily workers), and only 16% are employees. As such, labor
conditions are very poor among employed Roma in rural areas.
Although already high among Roma men, unemployment rates are particularly high
among Roma women (Figure 3-1 A). Women in the age group 15-25 have an unemployment
rate of 62%, twice as high as among men of the same age group. Overall, working age Roma
women also have much higher unemployment rates than men: 43% vs. 28%. This is a strong
indication that Roma active women have a particularly hard time finding work. However, it is
also important to notice that the overall activity rate is much lower for women than for men both
for Roma and Non-Roma60 (Figure 3-1 B).
FIGURE 3-1: OCCUPATIONAL STATUS AND UNEMPLOYMENT RATE, BY GENDER AND ETHNICITY (%)

                     A. Unemployment rate                                          B. Occupational status
 100%                                                            100%
  90%                                                             90%
  80%                                       38                    80%   43            33
  70%         57                                                  70%                         58      52              50
        72                         66                      64                 66                               73
  60%                  84    79                      76           60%                                                           80
  50%                                                             50%
  40%                                                             40%   42            56
  30%                                       62                    30%                                 32              38
  20%         43                                                  20%         19              34               10
        28                         34                      36                                                                   13
  10%                  16    21                      24           10%   16    14                      17       16     12
   0%                                                              0%                 11      9                                 7
        Men Women Men Women Men Women Men Women                         Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female
          Roma         Non-Roma      Roma            Non-Roma             Roma        Non-Roma         Roma           Non-Roma
                   15-64                         15-24                           15-64                           15-24

                     Unemployed   Employed                               Unemployed        Employed        Out of labor force


Source: World Bank/UNDP/EC (2011). Notes: Occupational status as declared by respondents. Unemployment rate
determined by category as the proportion of unemployed of total active persons (employed or unemployed). Non-
Roma are living in the same neighborhood with Roma. Activity rate is computed by adding the % of unemployed
and of employed in the total population.
Employment rates among Roma are very low (Figure 3-2): 42% of working age Roma men
are employed and as little as 19% of working age Roma women. A recent study representative of
Roma aged 16 or over61 confirms that, in 2011, the overall employment rate among Roma was
only 36%, while other 36% were looking for a job, and 28% were inactive 62. Furthermore,
employment rates among Roma are especially low in the Western and Central regions, both
relative to other regions and relative to non-Roma nearby - Annex Table 3-2.


60
   Still, the gap between the men's activity rate and women's one is much larger for Roma than it is for Non-Roma.
61
   Soros Foundation (2012).
62
   For comparison, at the national level, the employment rate was 58% and the unemployment rate was 7.7% (NIS
data for 2011).
                                                                66
FIGURE 3-2: EMPLOYMENT RATES AMONG ROMA, NON-ROMA NEIGHBORS, AND THE GENERAL
POPULATION

                                   A. Men                                                                       B. Women
 80                                 74 74                                    60                      56              57
                                                                                      52                                  54                       53
         65 66                                                 66 65                                      49                        51
 70                   63 61                      60 61                       50
 60
                                                                             40                                                          37
 50                           42            43                         42                                                                               32
 40                                                      34                  30            26                  26
 30                                                                                                                            19                            19
                 20                                                          20                                                               13
 20                                                                                             9
                                                                             10
 10
     0                                                                           0
         Slovakia Bulgaria          Czech Hungary Romania                             Slovakia Bulgaria              Czech Hungary Romania
                                   Republic                                                                         Republic
         General Population        Non-Roma Neighbors            Roma                General Population Non-Roma Neighbors Roma

Source: General Population: Eurostat 2011 Q2; Non-Roma neighbors and Roma: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional
Roma survey (2011). Individuals are considered employed regardless of the nature of employment; i.e. these figures
include informal employment. Age group: 15-64.
Among the employed Roma, jobs are unstable and informality is abundant. Recent
EC/UNDP/World Bank data (Regional Roma survey, 2011) show that only about 36% of Roma
employment63 is formal (based on a written contract or legal business documents) and covered
by health and pension insurance. In addition, non-Roma who are employed64 predominantly
comprise employees (71%), while the Roma are mainly self-employed, mostly daily workers
without a contract, social insurance or health insurance, and often with a very low standard of
labor conditions. Overall, between 2008 and 2012, the employed Roma were mainly self-
employed in agriculture (39%) and self-employed in non-agricultural activities (33%), while
only 28% of them were employees. At the same time, only 34% of Roma employment is
permanent, which means that 66% of employed Roma work only a few months during the year
or sporadically.
FIGURE 3-3: CONTRACT DURATION AMONG EMPLOYED ROMA AND NON-ROMA NEIGHBORS


     Non-Roma                                                          78                                                       5        7         10




          Roma                          34                             11            12                                    44


                      0            10        20           30           40            50             60          70             80             90         100

                  Permanent                  Temporary                  Seasonal                    Periodically (from time to time)


Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011). Sample restricted to employed subjects (age-group:
15-64).



63
   The employed are defined as those who declared that they have worked at least one hour last week (only 36% of
the working age population).
64
   Employment includes employees and self-employed (in agriculture or non-agricultural activities).
                                                                            67
The high rates of joblessness and unstable employment do not reflect preferences: the vast
majority of Roma express a desire for stable jobs, similar to the responses by non-Roma
neighbors. Consistent with the finding that Roma with jobs report greater levels of happiness
and life satisfaction (Figure 3-4), 74% of Roma men and 76% of women report preferring
“Secure employment but low paid” instead of “Having a higher income but insecure and
irregular”. These responses are similar to the responses by non-Roma neighbors. Comparable
majorities of Roma and non-Roma neighbors similarly prefer “Having secure employment but
having to be at work 8 hours a day, 5 days a week, and not having the freedom to manage your
time” compared with “Having irregular employment but being free to manage your time”65.
FIGURE 3-4: HAPPINESS AND LIFE SATISFACTION: EMPLOYED ROMA ARE HAPPIER THAN OTHERS
OF WORKING AGE, (%)


                       A. Happiness                                         B. Life Satisfaction
     80                         73                            100
                                                                                            86
                61                              64                         79                              81
                                                               80                    75
     60                   53                                                                         63
           43                             46                         58
                                                               60
     40
                                                               40
     20
                                                               20

      0                                                         0
          Unemployed      Employed          Total                   Unemployed      Employed           Total

                   Roma        Non-Roma                                      Roma         Non-Roma

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011). Notes: Figure A. represents: the proportion of
working age Roma and non-Roma, respectively, who report that overall, they are ‘Quite happy’ or ‘Very happy’.
Percentages were calculated separately for those who work and those who do not work. Figure B. represents: the
proportion of working age Roma and non-Roma, respectively, rating their overall life satisfaction as 5 or higher, on
a scale from 1-10, with 1 being the lowest and 10 being the highest. Percentages were calculated separately for those
who work and those who do not work. Sample restricted to one randomly selected adult (16+) individual per
household.
Yet, these trends of low employment rates and unstable jobs among working Roma have
existed since the early 1990’s. A lack of qualifications, combined with discriminatory
stereotyping, has caused a precarious employment situation for Roma since the first years of the
'90s. Already in 1992, 47% of Roma over 16 years old were jobless, while only 3% were
receiving unemployment benefits. Only 23% were employees (mainly unskilled workers), 1%
were employers, 5% were pensioners, and 22% were self-employed66. In the following years, the
share of employees among the Roma population over 16 years old diminished further to only
13% in 1998 and 15% in 200967.



65
   Data for the age-group 16-24 show a very similar pattern.
66
   Zamfir and Zamfir (coord.) (1993).
67
   Data for 1998 from Cace (2002) and for 2009 from Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010).
                                                         68
Low participation and restricted access to stable, gainful employment reinforce precarious
incomes and a high risk of poverty and social exclusion among Romanian Roma . In 1992,
63% of the Roma families lived in absolute poverty. Another 18% had a total income bigger than
the minimum subsistence, but not enough for a decent life68 (Zamfir and Zamfir, coord., 1993).
Since then, both the incidence and the depth of poverty have remained disproportionally high in
the Roma population.69 High rates of joblessness and job instability not only restrict income and
perpetuate poverty among adults, but also take their toll on children (absenteeism and drop-out
from school, malnutrition, chronic diseases, etc.), perpetuating the low levels of labor market
opportunity that Roma currently face. Due to the low and irregular incomes earned from work,
many Roma households end up relying on child allowances and on irregular and low-level
informal income streams.
Moreover, working-age Roma tend to belong to households with many children and low-
work intensity, and are hence subject to higher pressure to provide for their dependents.
Irrespective of age, gender and residency, higher proportions of Roma than non-Roma
individuals of working age belong to households with at least one child (0-14 years).Annex
Figure 3-1 indicates the early age fertility pattern specific to Roma, but it also shows that
considerably more Roma than non-Roma face a significant pressure to provide for children.

Given that Roma desire to work, why are there so many Roma without jobs? The answer to
this question can be split up into two main components: First, there are the major gaps in skills,
arising from the deficiencies in education analyzed in the Education Chapter. Second, there are
structural issues in the Romanian labor market which disproportionally affect Roma as well as
additional barriers related to discrimination and cultural norms. The following section treats
these components in more detail.
3.2 BARRIERS TO ROMA EMPLOYMENT
3.2.1 LARGE GAPS IN EDUCATION AND SKILLS
Among Roma, the level of illiteracy is extremely high: about 25% of Roma cannot read or
write.70 At the same time, only 5-10% of Roma adults have attended high school or higher
education. As much as 81% of Roma (15-64 years) have little or no formal education71,
compared with only 20% of non-Roma. This proportion is even higher for Roma women (83%
for Roma women versus 24% of non-Roma women) and for rural residents (86% among Roma
versus 35% among non-Roma living in rural areas). Statistical models show that education is
indeed a significant predictor of employment among both Roma and non Roma: individuals who
did not complete secondary school are less likely to find employment than those who did, after

68
   The survey respondents mentioned that their incomes were enough only to cover their basic needs but not for
living "a decent life".
69
   Their risk of absolute poverty is sevenfold higher, 31.1% of the Roma versus 4.4% nationwide (data from 2009,
Ministry of Labor).
70
   Data for 1998 indicate that 18% of adult Roma men and 28% of adult women cannot read (Zamfir and Preda,
2002). A more recent survey shows that the situation has not changed much until 2010, when 25% of Roma could
not read or write (Research Institute for Quality of Life, 2010). By comparison, the illiteracy rate of Bulgarian Roma
is almost twofold smaller (12%), data for 2011 (Soros Foundation, 2012).
71
   Have no formal schooling or completed at most gymnasium (1-8 grades).
                                                         69
controlling for background characteristics (Annex Table 3-8). What is worrying is that the
educational gap does not close for younger generations: only 23% of Roma aged 15-24 years are
still in school, compared with 60% of non-Roma. Other indicators of professional qualifications
point in the same direction: computer literacy and participation in vocational training are about
twice as low as among non-Roma neighbors.72
FIGURE 3-5: ADULT LEARNING COURSE / PROFESSIONAL APPRENTICESHIP AND COMPUTER
LITERACY AMONG ROMA

                    A. Apprenticeship                                     B. Computer Literacy
 20                                                       35                            33
                          17                                                28 26
                                                          30
         14                                                     24
 15                  12                                   25         20                             22
                                                                                             19
                                                          20                                             15
 10           7                             7
                                     6                    15
                                 5
     5                                           3        10
                                                           5
     0                                                     0
         Employed    Short-term Long-term   Inactive           Employed     Short-term Long-term    Inactive
                    unemployed unemployed                                  unemployed unemployed

                       Men     Women                                          Men     Women

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011). A. Apprenticeship: “Has s/he ever received adult
learning courses or professional apprenticeship (formal or informal o f any kind?”. B. Computer Literacy: “Is s/he
able to use a computer word processing program?”
Moreover, the generally low levels of education among Roma disproportionately limit their
opportunities to improve employability. Life-long learning is still rare in Romania, which is of
particular concern, as current skills tend to become obsolete rapidly because of technological
change. The participation of Roma in life-long learning is even smaller. Based on the current
legislation (Law on National Education No 1/2011), almost half of the working-age Roma are
not eligible for professional qualification courses that would equip them with an official
certification, because they have not completed compulsory education. Chapter 2 of this study
discusses education outcomes among the Roma in more detail.
3.2.2 STRUCTURAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ROMANIAN LABOR MARKET
      WITH A DISPROPORTIONATE EFFECT ON ROMA AND OTHER BARRIERS
In Romania, labor force participation among youth is significantly lower than that of the
other age groups, disproportionally affecting the Roma. As of 2012, the employment rate for
youth (15-24 years) in Romania is only 24%, compared with an overall rate of 60%73. Even older
workers (aged 55-64) are employed much more often than youth, although they, too, lag behind
compared to the general percentage (41%). Furthermore, youth and older workers suffered the
most significant drop in employment because of the 2008-2011 global crisis. Since Roma have a


72
   A more detailed assessment of the education gap between Roma and non-Roma can be found in the Education
chapter of this report.
73
   The highest employment rate (of about 86%) has been constantly registered for men aged 35-44 years.
                                                       70
much younger demographic structure than the overall population in Romania (56% of working
age Roma are 15-34 years compared with 42% of non-Roma74), low youth employment is likely
to disproportionally affect the Roma.
Working-age Roma (15-64 years old) reside in rural areas to a larger extent than other
ethnic groups, and are therefore more exposed to structural barriers related to the
Romanian rural economy. 51% of working-age Roma live in rural areas, while among non-
Roma aged 15-64 years, only 42% reside in rural communities75. The Romanian labor market has
an oversized agricultural sector and an accentuated seasonal character, limiting the opportunities
for Roma in rural areas. Although the share of agriculture in GDP has declined consistently
during the last years, employment in agriculture still accounts for about 30.6% of total
employment. Additionally, 14% of the employed are active in the sectors of construction,
transportation and storage, and in the hospitality industry, all of which results in a pronounced
seasonality of the economic activity76. Accordingly, overall employment rates are lower in the
first and fourth quarters, and higher in the second and third ones. Seasonality and agriculture-
related work are found mainly in rural areas. Hence, this structural pattern once again
disproportionally affects Roma workers.
FIGURE 3-6: EMPLOYMENT 15 YEARS AND OVER BY SECTOR (% OF TOTAL EMPLOYMENT)

                                                                 % of total employment
                  0         10            20          30        40          50         60          70    80         90   100



 Romania 1989                    28.5                                       45.5                               26




 Romania 2012                     30.6                               28.7                               40.8




     EU-27 2012       5.2          22.6                                                     72.2



                                        Agriculture        Industry and Construction         Services

Data: NIS, Statistical Yearbook for 1989. Regarding 2012, Eurostat data downloaded on August 22, 2013; sectors
according to the NACE rev 2 definition.
Informal employment is widespread, especially in rural areas and among those with low
levels of education, two categories to which many Roma belong. A recent study77 (Voinea and
Albu, 2011) showed that in Romania in general, 63% of the employed work in the formal sector.
The other 37% are active either in the household sector (most of them doing subsistence
farming) or are working as employees and self-employed without a contract. In total, over 1.2
million people work as employees under a verbal agreement or are engaged in unregistered

74
   Source: Roma: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey, 2011; Non-Roma: HBS, 2011.
75
   Source: Roma: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey, 2011; Non-Roma: HBS, 2011.
76
   By comparison, at the level of EU-27, the employment in the four mentioned sectors with a pronounced seasonal
character accounted for only 22% of total employment, in 2012.
77
   SOP HRD project implemented by Blocul Naţional Sindical in collaboration with NIS.
                                                                     71
economic units. A substantial proportion of households combine subsistence farming with
informal occasional work (mostly agricultural labor). As a consequence, a consistent proportion
of the employed have insecure jobs, seasonal or casual, with low and irregular incomes (often in-
kind instead of not cash), and are not covered by social- and health insurances or by
unemployment benefits. This pattern is characterized by a substantial urban-rural gap: while in
urban areas 91% of the employed are employees, in rural areas the percentage is only 38. By
contrast, the self-employed account for 35% of total employment in rural areas compared with
only 6% in urban areas. At the same time, family workers represent 26% of total employment in
rural areas, but only 1% in urban areas. Hence, since the informal- and household sectors are
disproportionally large in rural settings, Roma are more likely to have only very limited access to
formal and stable employment. In addition, the majority of Roma employees do not have any
formal qualifications and work in unskilled jobs such as cleaning personnel, dustmen or green-
space workers. As a whole, 38% of Roma workers aged 15 or over work as unskilled workers,
32% have skilled jobs (workers, salespersons, and traders), 9% are farm workers, and 13% have
traditional Roma occupations78.
FIGURE 3-7: DISTRIBUTION OF TOTAL EMPLOYMENT BY SECTORS (FORMAL, INFORMAL AND
HOUSEHOLDS SECTOR) AND AREAS OF RESIDENCE (THOUSAND PERSONS)



     Total                          5839                               1209             2190

     Urban                   4398                      644 80

     Rural       1441     565        2110

             0     1000    2000      3000      4000      5000      6000      7000      8000      9000     10000

                           Formal sector        Informal sector        Household sector

Source: Voinea and Albu (2011), p. 8.

       3.2.3 FURTHER BARRIERS TO ROMA EMPLOYMENT: DISCRIMINATION AND
                                CULTURAL BARRIERS
Discrimination is likely to affect many job-seeking Roma: the most recent Social Inclusion
Barometer (2010)79 suggests that Roma are ten times more likely to be laid off than the
overall population and indicates that 41% of the Roma in search of a job mentioned that
they were not hired because of their ethnicity. 72% of the Roma looking for a job indicate that
they are prepared to work under harsh working conditions and regardless of contract availability,
meaning that they will most likely not contribute to a pension fund and will miss out on benefits
from social security in the future. Indeed, many Roma report labor market discrimination, both
when they look for work and in the workplace: according to the Roma regional survey, among

78
   Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010). Research conducted in July 2010 on a sample representative for the
Roma population of 15 years or over.
79
   Social Observatory, University of Bucharest (2010). Nationally representative survey on employers and
employees in Romania.
                                                        72
Roma who looked for work somewhere in the past 5 years, 30% report that they have
experienced discrimination because of their ethnicity, while only 11% of non-Roma report the
same. Among those who already had a job in the past 5 years, the corresponding figures are 11%
and 2% for Roma and non-Roma, respectively80.
BOX 3-1: QUALITATIVE EVIDENCE ON DISCRIMINATION AMONG ROMA ON THE LABOR MARKET

 The qualitative research carried out for this study in October 2013 sheds light on the issue of
 discrimination from several angles: (1) discrimination on the side of employers and/or co-workers; (2)
 discrimination regarding the working conditions for Roma; (3) discrimination regarding the wages given
 to Roma comparing with non-Roma; (4) discrimination during firing procedures. The interviews and
 focus group discussions mainly reported cases of discrimination on the side of employers, against
 unemployed Roma who try to find a job. At the workplace, discrimination mainly establishes itself in the
 form of unpaid wages to Roma employees. Other types of discrimination seem to occur more rarely.
 Discrimination against Roma is often not expressed bluntly by employers, but focus group
 participants and NGO representatives mention that Roma are often rejected by employers based
 on an alleged ‘lack of required skills’ or because the position ‘has already been filled’. “There is
 discrimination because you are Roma. It is!” Have you heard of such cases? “Yes, yes. If you are Roma
 you are cannot find work anywhere. [...] It happens. They do not employ you if you are Roma. [...] He
 [the employer] says he does not need you (the position was occupied). Or he says: we’ll call you. And
 they don’t call.” (Focus group participants). Have you encountered difficulties regarding
 discrimination? “Specifically, not, because every employer knows the laws and knows that under Article
 5 of the Labor Code discrimination it is prohibited based on religion, ethnicity and so on, but to be fully
 honest, there is a reluctance comparing to other countries as I have seen elsewhere... the employers are
 reluctant and tell them, when you send them and you know that there is a vacancy, when Roma people
 get there, they are told that the position was occupied or that they do not meet the professional
 requirements.” (NGO representative)
 NGOs do come across cases of discrimination against Roma by employers especially in sectors like
 food industry and apparel, but remark that it is often hard to find evidence for discriminatory
 hiring procedures. When you tried to mediate a meeting between a Roma, who wanted to get a job and
 the employer, have you encountered discriminatory attitudes? “Yes, we have met. In one of our
 centers... a bakery was open in the area and we had qualified persons in the field and my colleagues
 recommended them and unofficially have been told: yes, but you know, they are Gypsies and people do
 not buy bread made by Gypsies. It is very difficult to prove a case of discrimination, but people have
 employment barriers, even if not openly. It's hidden and it's hard to say, yes, there is, because it's hard to
 find evidence. Everything happens behind closed doors.” (NGO representative)Discrimination in the
 form of both hiring procedures and unpaid wages have been observed by NGOs. “An apparel firm
 from Alba (…) wanted to hire women and we had a group qualified in the field... and my colleagues
 went there, so the company was opened by an Italian in a commune nearby... so, they go and said: we
 have 26 women qualified for the job that you need. And he said he does not employ Gypsy. It did not
 matter that they had qualification for the job and that he actually would have employed them as
 unqualified... (…) We [also] had 4 florists hired to some greenhouses and they have not been paid, they
 kept them there and did not pay them. Yes, there is discrimination, especially for women.” (NGO



80
  Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011). Sample restricted to one randomly selected adult
(16+) individual per household. The share of Roma individuals who have looked for work in the past 5 years is
52%; for non-Roma neighbors, this is 24%. The share of Roma individuals who have had a job in the past 5 years is
25%; for non-Roma neighbors, this is 37%.
                                                       73
 representative)
 Discrimination does not seem to be decreasing especially for Roma women.. Is there a change for
 the better? “The people I talked with said that it is a change and now the employers are more
 pragmatic... if someone does his job well it does not matter... When referring to men and to construction
 sector, yes! When referring to the women and, for example, if it is a woman qualified as cook and wants
 to get a job, no!” Yes, we were told at a bakery, as they were trained and were refused... “They said they
 do not want to eat bread made by Roma and... or at dairies... we had an accredited course for meat
 processing... no woman wanted to qualify for this job because they said that, although there are factories
 in the area, they do not think they can be employed there.” (NGO representative)


Roma people have fewer assets for developing an agricultural livelihood. Most Roma own
plots of arable land smaller than half a hectare, and in addition, claim that due to the
discriminatory restitution procedure, they received land located in unfavorable locations and of
lower quality (hence, worthless for cultivation). In turn, according to the local authorities, some
Roma people, particularly the poor, sold part of their land and most of them were reluctant to
cultivate it (Sandu and Stănculescu, 1999). As a result, most of them face precarious
(under)employment either as unpaid family workers or as casual day workers.
Cultural gender norms in many communities where Roma live make Roma women a
particularly vulnerable group. In 2012, Romania’s female employment rate was 52.6%,
compared to 66.5% for men81. Moreover, women represent almost three quarters of all unpaid
family workers and are significantly underrepresented among employers, and certain categories
of self-employed and employees (legislators, senior government officials and corporate
managers). Most employed women are concentrated in the public sector and in low-paid
economic activities: health and social assistance, education, accommodation and the food
industry, trade and other services. In Roma communities, women often marry young, and are at
times expected to stay at home and take care of the children: Roma typically have many children
and a large dependency rate. Thus, Roma households have an average number of household
members approximately twice as high as the total population82. At very young ages, most Roma
women already have many children they need to take care of. Approximately 10% of Roma girls
have their first child when they are 12-15 years old, and 48% at the age of 16-18 years83.
Moreover, the predominant attitudes related to marriage, early fertility, and gender norms
regarding household and childcare responsibilities add additional obstacles to Roma women's
participation on labor market. The general gender-discrepancies found in labor market
opportunities in Romania add to these cultural norms, and make seeking work more difficult for
Roma women in particular.




81
   At the EU-27 level, in 2012, the employment rate for women was 58.6% compared with 69.8% for men.
82
    The average number of persons per household was 6.7 persons at the 1992 Census, 5.6 persons in 1998
(Berevoescu, 2002), and 4.97 in 2012 ( Duminică and Ivasiuc, coord., 2013).
83
   Ibidem.
                                                   74
3.3 WORKING ROMA: TYPES OF JOBS AND WAGES
3.3.1 TYPES OF WORK ENGAGED IN BY ROMA EMPLOYEES
During the 2008-2012 period, employees represented only 13% of the total working-age
Roma population, while the percentage was 42 among non-Roma84. Men, urban residents,
and people aged 25-44 have considerably higher probability of being an employee, both for
Roma and non-Roma85.
Roma employees tend to be concentrated in manual low skilled or unskilled jobs . Figure 3-8
illustrates the substantial gap between Roma and non-Roma employees with respect to
occupation in the main job - unskilled workers represent 46% of Roma employees, compared to
only 8% of non-Roma employees. Moreover, according to the HBS 2008-2012 data, skilled
Roma employees are primarily divided between three occupational groups: service and sales
workers (18%), craft and related trades workers (17%), and plant and machine operators and
assemblers (13%)86.
FIGURE 3-8: OCCUPATION IN THE MAIN JOB, FOR ROMA AND NON-ROMA EMPLOYEES AGED 15-64
YEARS (% OF NON-ROMA OR ROMA)

 50                                                                                                      46
 45
 40                      35              37
 35                                                                                                 30
 30
 25                                                                                 23
            20
 20
 15
 10                                                   8
  5                                                                       1
  0
                     Non-Roma employees                                            Roma employees
                              White colla rs   Grey colla rs    Blue colla rs   Unskilled workers


Data: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: ‘White collars’ include managers, legislators and professionals. ‘Grey collars’
refer to non-manual occupations, technicians and associate professionals, clerical support workers, service and sales
workers. ‘Blue collars’ contain skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery workers, craft and related trades workers,
plant and machine operators, and assemblers.
Among working Roma, the probability of being an employee increases significantly with
level of education. For both Roma and non-Roma who are 15-64 years old and not in school, the
proportion of employees increases steadily from 2-4% among persons with no formal schooling,
to 82-83% among graduates having tertiary education. Graduation from primary education
increases the probability of being an employee by four times for non-Roma and by almost eight



85
  Annex Table 3-7 presents the profile of employees for the period 2008-2012.
86
   Only 6% of Roma employees are employed in other skilled occupational groups. By comparison, the non-Roma
employees distribute by ISCO groups as follows: 3% - managers and senior officials; 16% - professionals; 11% -
technicians and associate professionals; 7% - clerical support workers; 17% - service and sales workers; 1% - skilled
agricultural, forestry and fishery workers; 22% - craft and related trades workers; 15% - plant and machine
operators, and assemblers; 8% - unskilled workers.
                                                               75
times for Roma. Vocational training increases the probability of being employee by 11 times for
non-Roma and by more than 16 times for Roma. Also, Figure 3-9 shows that while Roma and
non-Roma have comparable probabilities of being an employee at the low (gymnasium at most)
and high (tertiary) levels of education, Roma have a considerably lower probability at the
medium levels of education. This might indicate that fewer Roma are employees not only
because of their lower levels of education, but also because difference in skills (resulting from
varying quality of education experienced by Roma and non-Roma) or labor market
discrimination.
FIGURE 3-9: PROPORTION OF EMPLOYEES BY LEVEL OF EDUCATION, FOR ROMA AND NON-ROMA
AGED 15-64 YEARS, NOT IN SCHOOL (% OF NON-ROMA OR ROMA)

                  No forma l schooling              4
                                                2
                   Prima ry, gra des 1-4                7
                                                         8
                    Middle, gra des 5-8                       16
                                                             15
                 Voca tiona l/a pprentice                                              44
                                                                        33
            High school, gra des 9-12*                                                       58
                                                                                  40
 Post-seconda ry or foremen's school**                                                            64
          Tertia ry, short a nd long term                                                                     83
                                                                                                             82
                                            0           10    20   30        40         50   60    70   80         90

                                                        Non-Roma   Roma

Data: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: * High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10. ** Post-secondary
or foremen's school not included for Roma due to the low number of cases.
Being an employee or employer seems to be significantly influenced by education, age,
residency, gender, ethnicity, and pressure to provide for children. In 2008-2012, the
probability of being an employee or employer among working age individuals was 16% for
Roma and 58% for non-Roma. A comprehensive statistical model (Annex Table 3-8) shows that
all mentioned variables are significant predictors. All other things being equal, the odds of being
employee or employer are 2.5 times higher for urban residents, 1.8 times higher for men as
compared to women, and 1.7 times higher for non-Roma as compared to Roma. However, ceteris
paribus, the most influential determinant is education. Thus, the odds of being an employee or
employer (as opposed to self-employed or not employed) are 2.3 times higher for people who
have completed gymnasium and more than 6 times higher for graduates of vocational training or
high school, as compared with the odds of those with only primary education. In other words, the
multivariate analysis indicates that investing in the vocational training of Roma may
considerably increase their chances of gaining access to jobs with adequate labor conditions, for
all age groups, both in rural and urban areas (see Annex Figure 3-2).
Enhancing the level of education significantly increases one’s probability of being a skilled
worker, both for Roma and non-Roma. For Roma employees, vocational training almost
doubles the odds of being a blue collar worker, while the completion of high school increases the
chances of being a skilled worker by more than threefold (holding constant all the other
significant variables). (see Annex Table 3-9 and Annex Table 3-10).
Roma employees have significantly lower wages than non-Roma. HBS data indicate that
average wages among Roma employees are lower than among non-Roma. This is likely to
                                        76
happen because of a combination of background characteristics, and because Roma are
disproportionally likely to end up in low-paying occupations. On average, Roma employees earn
less than € 150 per month, with a range between €133 for unskilled workers and €178 for plant
and machine operators, and assemblers87. The explanatory model presented in Annex Table 3-11
shows that employees' earnings are a combined effect of education, gender, age, residency and
ethnicity. Employees with higher levels of education (compared with those having just primary
school), men (as compared with women), older workers (thus, with greater work experience),
urban residents (as compared with rural residents) and non-Roma (as compared with Roma) have
significantly higher chances of earning higher wages. Again, the significant income gap between
Roma and non-Roma might be due to various unobserved variables: such as differences in skills
(cognitive, socio-emotional skills, or job-specific skills) or discriminatory processes (people with
similar characteristics being paid differently because of ethnicity).

TABLE 3-1: AVERAGE WAGES (IN EURO)                                          OF    ROMA         AND         NON-ROMA         EMPLOYEES,               BY
OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS AND EDUCATION

               Average wages, by occupational groups                                              Average wages, by education
                                                                                                       0      50      100      150      200      250
 Elementary occupations (unskilled                       133
             workers)                                     139                                                                  136
                                                                                 Primary, grades 1-4
  Plant and machine operators, and                             178                                                             134
             assemblers                                          204                                                            145
                                                                                 Middle, grades 5-8
                                                            160                                                                135
     Craft and related trades workers
                                                                190                                                                     180
                                                                              Vocational/apprentice
                                                          139                                                                         168
           Service and sales workers
                                                             163                                                                         191
                                                                                         Highschool
                                                           147                                                                       160
                      All employees
                                                                   216                                                                         216
                                                                                      All employees
                                                                                                                                147
                                        0     50   100   150    200   250

                             Roma           Non-Roma                                                       Non-Roma     Roma

Data: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Note: The table includes only the occupational groups well represented among Roma.
The wages of Roma employees seem to be considerably increased not only by enhancing
their level of education, but also by shifting towards occupations that demand higher
technical skills. For Roma employees, the specific occupation engaged in at the main job has an
additional impact on wages, on top of the effect of training and education. Being a skilled worker
predicts a significantly higher wage compared to unskilled workers or service and sales workers
(Annex Table 1-10). For example, for an 18-year-old Roma man with primary education
working as an unskilled worker in a rural area, the predicted monthly income would be EUR
111. By completing vocational training, his predicted income may increase to EUR 128. His
wage might reach EUR 143 if he found a job as a craft worker, or EUR 154 if he is hired as a
plant or machine operator in a rural community. Furthermore, by moving to an urban enterprise
in the same position of a plant or machine operator, he might achieve a monthly income of EUR
184. Annex Table 3-14 shows that the maximum wage increase could be of 173% from the



87
    National Romanian Bank exchange rate of                                 € 1=lei 4.4287 as at December 2012, available at
http://www.cursbnr.ro/arhiva-curs-bnr-2012-12-31
                                                                            77
position of a unskilled worker with primary education in rural area to the position of a plant or
machine operator with high school education in an urban area.
Roma women face a double disadvantage in the field of employment (O’Higgins 2012:28 -
30), with lower levels of employment, but also lower wages compared to Roma males and
non-Roma females, even when controlling for other influencing factors such as education level.
Thus, the median monthly wage for Roma women is 50% of that of non-Roma men, and 88% of
that of non-Roma women (Box 2).
BOX 3-2: THE DISCOURAGING IMPACT OF LOW WAGES FOR ROMA

 Low wages represent a disincentive for working in the formal sector, especially for women facing a
 long commute to the work place. "It's very difficult with jobs... I met two situations: people who want
 to work but cannot find any and people who find work but outside their community. Let me take an
 example, in Pușcași commune we found women seeking for work. The nearest jobs were available in a
 garment factory from Vaslui city and so they needed to commute. The money that they would get to that
 job was about 5 million, while the transportation related costs were almost 2 million, per month. With
 the remaining 3 million they would have covered the lunch for them and to provide for the family. And
 some have a small child at home who would have remained unsupervised. They have also a small plot...
 a household. So, it's a simple cost-benefit analysis to stay at home instead of commuting for a low paid
 job: better stay and take care of the baby than earning so little money with so much time and effort."
 (NGO representative, Qualitative study, October 2013)


3.3.2 SELF-EMPLOYED ROMA
During the 2008-2012 period, self-employed represented 35% of the total working-age
Roma population, compared with 17% of non-Roma88. Roma self-employed are rather evenly
distributed between agricultural and non-agricultural activities (19% and 16% of working-age
Roma respectively). By contrast, non-Roma self-employed people are concentrated in agriculture
(12% of non-Roma aged 15-64 years).
Men aged 25-44 have the highest probability of being non-agricultural self-employed89,
both for Roma and non-Roma. About 70% of non-agricultural self-employed Roma are
unskilled workers with little or no formal education (gymnasium at most). Out of all Roma
men aged 15-64 years, 26% are self-employed in non-agricultural activities - the proportion is
considerably lower among Roma women (only 6%)90. Non-agricultural self-employment is more
widespread in urban areas for Roma, and in rural areas among non-Roma. Annex Table 3-15
presents the profile of non-agricultural self-employed for the period 2008-2012.
Improving levels of education significantly increases the probability of engaging in skilled
activities as self-employed, both for Roma and non-Roma. Among non-agricultural self-



89
   Estimated from responses to the 2011Roma household survey, where the respondents self-identified as “self-
employed, member of cooperative, family worker – non-agriculture” (not only urban but also rural) and reported to
work without a written contract, and where the same group reported that neither them nor their employer were
paying social contributions for the job.
90
   The corresponding proportions in the non-Roma population of working age are considerably lower both for men
(8%) and for women (2%).
                                                       78
employed Roma, the proportion of unskilled workers declines from 81% (individuals with no
formal education), to 41% (those with vocational training) when education levels increase.
Correspondingly, the share of craft workers among Roma with no formal schooling is twice as
small as the same share among Roma who graduated from vocational or professional education.
The probability of performing other skilled services increases even more with education, as
Annex Table 3-16 in Annex shows.
Less than one in every ten Roma self-employed in non-agricultural activities have legal
business forms or pays social contributions, while the rest are active in the informal sector.
According to the regional Roma survey (EC/UNDP/World Bank, 2011), about 90% of Roma in
non-agricultural self-employment do not have a written contract and do not contribute to any
pension and/or health insurance systems. In addition, only 9% perform their activity on a
permanent basis.
The incomes reported from non-agricultural self-employment are also very low, most likely
due to the specific occupations of business owners and the informal and periodical
character of self-employment. Annex Table 3-17 shows that 42% of unskilled self-employed
Roma do not have regular monthly incomes from this activity (the share for non-Roma is 53%).
The skilled self-employed are in a better situation, with the proportion of those without a regular
monthly income reducing to 8% for Roma and 34% for non-Roma. Accordingly, the average
monthly income per non-agricultural self-employed is a mere €50 for unskilled workers, and
€105-120, for craft workers91 .
Rural residents have a considerably higher probability of being self-employed in
agriculture, which applies to both Roma and non-Roma. Less than five out of every 100
Roma who are self-employed in agriculture have legal business forms and pay social
contributions, while the rest are unregistered. The urban-rural gap is considerable: 33% of
Roma aged 15-64 years from rural areas are self-employed in agriculture, compared with only
5% in urban areas (Annex Table 3-18). Among non-Roma, 27% of rural working-age residents
are self-employed in agriculture, but only 1% of urban ones. Roma men are more prone to
declare themselves self-employed in agriculture than Roma women. This gender disparity is not
registered at for non-Roma. Self-employment in agriculture is associated with lower levels of
education for both Roma and non-Roma (Annex Table 3-19). The regional Roma survey
(EC/UNDP/World Bank, 2011) indicates that a mere 3-4% of Roma self-employed in agriculture
have a written contract and contribute to pension and/or health insurance systems.
Agriculture provides a monthly cash income to only a small part of the self-employed, both
because it is a seasonal activity and because most farmers only engage in subsistence
agriculture and do not sell the surplus. According to the HBS data, the proportion of self-
employed in agriculture without cash income in the previous month is 49% among Roma and
62% among non-Roma (Annex Table 1-18). Among those who do receive cash income, the
average monthly amount is only about €40 per person. However, subsistence agriculture does




91
    National Romanian Bank exchange rate of        €1=lei 4.4287 as on December 2012, available at
http://www.cursbnr.ro/arhiva-curs-bnr-2012-12-31
                                                   79
also provide food essential for poor households' well-being92. The monetary estimates of the in-
kind income from subsistence agriculture are presented in Annex Table 3-21.
3.3.3 ROMA WORKING ABROAD
Roma migration abroad is predominantly of economic nature, in search for work or
income sources, as a study93 carried out by Soros Foundation showed. The preferred
destinations include five European countries: Spain, Italy, France, Germany and Hungary. The
proportion of Roma who went abroad after 200794 at least one time is 15%, while three quarters
never left the country. More than a half of those who have migration experience are young, aged
between 18 and 39. The data also shows that Roma migration abroad follows a pattern of
frequent departures and returns, rather than periods of long stays. Incomes earned abroad are not
high; covering the household’s needs for only a few months, but are still considerably higher
than earnings that could be obtained in Romania, especially in rural areas. A quarter of Roma
aged 16 and over report that they intend to go abroad. 13% are confident that the plan will be
translated into action. Roma people who felt discriminated in their home country are almost two
times as likely to declare an intention to go abroad compared to their non-discriminated peers.
While abroad, most Roma are unskilled workers in agriculture or construction . Almost one
third of the Roma who ever worked abroad declared that they worked in agriculture, 95 while 17%
worked in the construction sector. A large variety of other activities are also performed, such as
home services, services, occasional work, begging, but by smaller proportions below 5%. The
small proportion of Roma working in home services is explained by a lower migration frequency
in the case of Roma women. The same study96 shows that an important share of Roma who
worked abroad (35%) did not give any information on the activity performed, which most
probably relate to the dominant informal (and sometimes illegal) character of their work abroad.
3.4 DESIGNING TARGETED POLICY MEASURES FOR ROMA
3.4.1 EMPLOYMENT PROSPECTS FOR GROUPS AT VARIOUS DISTANCES FROM
      THE LABOR MARKET
Most Roma without a job are either inactive or very long-term unemployed: precisely the
groups that have the lowest chances of getting into employment. Among the entire working




92
   Thus, even the income of households without members who are self-employed in agriculture is enhanced by food
received through a kinship network, with an estimated amount of € 30 -35 per month, in urban areas, and €50 -60 in
rural areas.
93
   Study based on a representative survey of 1,109 self-declared Roma persons aged 16 years or over.
94
   The Roma migration increased after Romania became member of the European Union. In the 1990s and early
2000s the Roma migration was much reduced, while between 2002 and 2006 the proportion of those who migrated
was 8%. (Soros Foundation, 2012)
95
   The high percentage of those employed in agriculture may be overestimated, as it is more likely that the people
working in this sector return home more often (due to the seasonality of this type of work) and therefore had a
higher probability to be interviewed.
96
   Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010) Study based on a representative survey of 1,537 self-declared Roma
persons aged 15 years or over.
                                                        80
age Roma population, shares of “short-term” unemployment (defined here as <2.5 years97) are
low: 6% of men and 4% of women. These proportions are similar for Roma and non-Roma
neighbors. As many as 10% of all Roma men of working age and 10% of Roma women are very
long-term unemployed (>2.5 years). Among non-Roma neighbors, the corresponding rates are
4% for men and 5% for women. In addition to (very) long-term unemployed, there is also a large
group of working age Roma outside the labor force, i.e. inactive: 43% of Roma men and 66% of
Roma women compared with 33% and 58% among non-Roma men and women. It is fair to say
that while ‘inactive’ could be hard to serve (e.g. given up), they may also be ‘closer’ to
employment than for example long-term unemployed given that the definition is broad.
TABLE 3-2: DISTANCE TO THE LABOR MARKET: ROMA AND NON-ROMA NEIGHBORS (% OF
WORKING AGE POPULATION)

                                         Men                         Women                        Total
                                Roma       Non-Roma          Roma       Non-Roma         Roma       Non-Roma
Employed                          42            56            19            34             30             44
Short-term Unemployed             6              7             4             4             5               5
Long-term Unemployed              10             4            10             5             10              4
Inactive                          43            33            66            58             55             46
Total                            100           100            100           100           100             100
N                               1,032          297           1,042          332          2,074            629
Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011). Notes: ‘Short-term unemployment’ is defined as
being unemployed for less than 2.5 years. Within the group of short-term unemployed Roma, the largest group
(66%) has been unemployed for between 1.5 and 2.5 years, whereas a minority (9%) has been unemployed for less
than 1.5 years.
Roma who are long-term unemployed or inactive have very little work experience. Among
short-term unemployed Roma, the average duration of men and women’s life-time work
experience is approximately 10 and 9 years, respectively. For those who are long-term
unemployed, this drops to 2.2 and 2.4 years. For the inactive, rates are at 6 years on average for
men and approximately 3 years for women. As such, those who are at a greater distance from the
labor market in terms of the duration of their unemployment and their activity status are also the
ones with the least work experience, on average. Figure 3-10b corrects these figures for age,
showing the proportion of one’s working life during which the subject has been employed. This
proportion is already low for the employed and short-term unemployed (45% on average), and
drops to 10% among men and women among the long-term unemployed, and 20% among men
and 10% among women among the inactive. In part this reflects that among these groups,
approximately 79% never worked before, compared with 52% among non-Roma neighbors.



97
  The cutoff at 2.5 years rather than more standard cutoffs such as 1 or 2 years was chosen because data were only
available on the year in which a person last worked, i.e. 2009 or 2010. Since the survey was conducted in May/June,
the maximum time duration of unemployment for someone reporting 2009 as the year in which they last worked is
2.5 rather than 2 years. The cutoff was set at 2.5 years rather than 1.5 years because the group of 1.5-2.5 years
unemployed was very small, as was the group of 0-1.5 years unemployed.
                                                        81
FIGURE 3-10: WORK EXPERIENCE: ROMA

                                  A. Average Number of Years Work                                    B. Share of Working Age Life Spent Working
                                             Experience                                             60
                            12   11.2                                                                     50          50
                                               10.3                                                 50
                                                      9.2
     Average no. of years




                            10          8.9                                                                    40          40
                                                                                                    40
                             8




                                                                                          Percent
                                                                         5.8                        30
                             6                                                                                                              20
                             4                                                                      20
                                                               2.2 2.4         2.7                                                 10 10         10
                             2                                                                      10

                             0                                                                      0
                                 Employed      Short-term Long-term      Inactive                        Employed    Short-term Long-term   Inactive
                                              unemployed unemployed                                                 unemployed unemployed

                                               Men          Women                                                    Men        Women

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).


3.4.2 PROFILING OF ROMA NEET (NEITHER IN EMPLOYMENT NOR IN EDUCATION
      OR TRAINING)
The proportion of people neither in employment nor in education or training (NEET)
among Roma aged 15-64 years has consistently been very high and increased during the
economic crisis. During the 2008-2012 period, the share of NEETs in the total working-age
population was as high as 36% for Roma (10% being unemployed and 26% house persons) and
13% for non-Roma (5% unemployed, and 8% house persons). Moreover, the Roma NEETs'
number increased from 34% in 2008 to 39% in 2012 (a similar evolution was registered for non-
Roma as well - from 11% in 2008 to 14% in 2012). The 2013 edition of Education at a Glance
(OECD)98 shows that the same increasing trend of NEETs was registered in many other countries
around the world. Although the proportion of NEETs among the non-Roma youth (15-24 years
old) has remained in line with the EU-27 average (12%), the value of 35% for Roma youth can
be considered extremely high.
A statistical clustering method (latent class analysis)99 indicates that Roma NEETs could be
divided into seven separate groups, many of which require tailored policy responses (Annex
Table 3-23).




98
  http://www.oecd.org/edu/European%20Union_EAG2013%20Country%20Note.pdf
99
  Latent class analysis is a statistical method that identifies unobservable groups within a population by maximizing
the similar characteristics within each group and minimizing the dissimilar characteristics between groups.
                                                                                     82
FIGURE 3-11: POPULATION AGED 15-64 YEARS BY STATUS AND 7 CLUSTERS OF ROMA NEETS (%)

                 A. Occupational status, by ethnicity                          Clusters of Roma NEETs                           %
70



60
     60                                                                        Urban Roma with professional training,           4
                                                                               without children, able to start working
50          48
                                                                               Young individuals, without children, able to     14
40
                                                                 36            start working
30
                                                                               Uneducated older Roma, without children,         16
20
                                                                               not looking for a job
                                        15
                      12                                  13
10                            7
                                                10                             Women, under 45 years old, with children,        7
                                                                               looking for a job
 0
      Employed       In education     Pensioners and         NEET              Women only, under 45 years old, with             39
                                      other inactive    (unemployed and
                                                         house persons)        children, not able to start working
                           Non-Roma      Roma
                                                                               Old individuals, without children, looking for   7
                                                                               a job
                                                                               Men, aged 25-44, looking for a job               13


Data: NIS, HBS 2008-2012.
Note: In order to better distinguish the latent characteristics of the unemployed and house persons we did not include
in the NEET group the pensioners and "the other inactive" (most of the last group are unable to work because of a
disability).
The first two clusters comprise of Roma women, under 45 years, with children. Given the
very low employment rate of Roma women in general, a relevant finding of this cluster analysis
is that the largest group of Roma in NEET consists of women only, under 45 years old with
children (0-14 years), who either self-report that they are unable to start working (39%) or report
that they are looking for a job (7%).
There are no data on the reasons why many of these women report not to be able to start
working: some may be discouraged, others may need child care support and services. However,
interviews revealed that in many of these cases, cultural norms need to be considered. According
to the representatives of the National Agency for Roma, many of these women belong to
traditional Roma communities in which women are not allowed to attend school, participate in
labor market and more generally in society, but only exclusively as mothers and wives.
The policy implications of these results are as follows: (a) almost a half of all Roma with labor
market difficulties are women, aged 15-44 years, with children; (b) only a small proportion of
them are looking for a job, while the majority are either unwilling or unable to enter the labor
market; (c) as the clustering procedure classified these two groups of Roma women separately
from men, they may require different types of employment and support than their male
counterparts.




                                                                          83
Older Roma people (mostly 45 years or over), without children, who are not looking for a
job, form a third group constituting an estimated 16% of all Roma NEETs.100 This group
includes mostly women, poorly educated, and from urban areas. Given the dominant
employment pattern of Roma women in Romania, most probably the majority of these women
have never been employed. Their activation has a low chance of success, if any.
One in every five Roma NEETs is unemployed and actively seeking a job. Two groups are
included here and they differ in terms of age and gender (and probably in other relevant respects,
such as work experience), and hence, they may need different types of activation and
employment-support measures. The first group represents 13% of all Roma NEETs and includes
mostly men, aged 25-44 years, both from rural and urban areas. The second group accounts for
7% of all Roma NEETs, and comprises men (60%) and women (40%), mostly aged 45-64 years.
The last two clusters refer to individuals who could start work within 15 days but are not
necessarily looking for a job. One group of 14% of Roma NEETs consists of youth, mainly
aged 15-24 years (95%), who are mostly women without children (65%) from urban areas
(60%). Finally, the last group comprises mostly individuals with professional education (70%)
from urban areas (100%), both men and women of all ages. These two groups, although different
in several characteristics, include individuals who could start working on short notice, but less
than half of them are actively looking for a job (in Romania). They may have plans for marriage
(in the case of young women) or for leaving for work abroad. For these groups, more data are
needed for designing tailored activation measures.
Overall, an estimated 40-45% of all Roma NEETs (around 15% of all working age Roma)
may represent the target groups of activation and employment-support measures: women
under 45 with children who look for a job, the unemployed jobseekers, and young and skilled
individuals ready for work but not necessarily looking for a job in Romania. However, more data
are needed for developing effective measures for these groups.


3.5 EXISTING LABOR MARKET POLICIES
Most measures and programs aimed at facilitating labor market access in Romania are channeled
through interventions of the public employment services and NGOs.
3.5.1 NATIONAL STRATEGIES FOR ROMA EMPLOYMENT
Actions for increasing Roma access to the formal labor market has been stipulated as a
necessity since the first National Roma Inclusion Strategy (NRIS), adopted in 2001. The
current NRIS 2012-2020, adopted at the end of 2011, includes “the stimulation of employment
growth for persons belonging to Roma minority and increasing investments attractiveness” as
specific objective:. The desired outcome is an increase with 60,000 of the number of employed
Roma, out of which 25,000 women. The strategy implementation for the employment sector
includes 22 measures out of which two are prioritized: (1) adapting the training programs offered
to Roma to the requirements of the labor market and (2) providing professional counseling
services, identifying financing sources for initiating independent activities, offering assistance (in


100
      They represent about 6% of all Roma aged 15-64 years.
                                                         84
drafting a CV, in finding a job), facilitating access to social, public, private housing units. The
action plan provides a large number of responsible institutions such as the National Agency for
Roma (NAR), ministries (of Labor, Economy, Education and Agriculture), decentralized services
of NAR and ministries, local public authorities, social partners, and mobile assistance units.
However, the strategy is currently under revision and, four major issues slow down the
implementation of the strategy. According to the representatives of NAR these are: (i) the
accountability of some involved ministries needs to be enhanced as it has consistently
diminished in the last years; (ii) the NAR does not have any leverage to improve the ministries
involvement, and the ministries have no leverage over the decentralized services or local
authorities; (iii) the envisaged active measures for Roma employment are not budgeted; and (iv)
there is no monitoring and evaluation system attached to the implementation of the strategy.
The National Strategy for Equality of Opportunity between Men and Women 2010-2012101
had a very broad agenda in the field of employment, aiming at reducing the pay gap between
men and women, as well as implementing measures of conciliation between family life and job.
The document did not make any mention of Roma women, their issues remaining thus
outside mainstream preoccupations on the advancement of women in the labor market.
The NRIS 2012-2020 mentions two measures related to the increase of employment among
Roma women. The first measure refers to the „elaboration and implementation of an inclusive
program focusing on employing Roma, in particular Roma women”102. The second measure aims
at creating flexible jobs for Roma women, accompanied by child care facilities. However, in the
opinion of NGO representatives, the strategy links Roma women employment more to the
traditionally gendered roles, specifying the fields of education or health,103 and thereby revealing
a rather unchallenging and inambitious vision regarding the development of Roma women in the
professional field.
3.5.2 PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT SERVICES
In Romania, the main governmental body responsible for activities related to the
implementation of labor market policies is the National Agency for Employment (NAE) .
NAE is an autonomous public institution, which operates under the authority of the Ministry of
Labor, Family, Social Protection and Elderly (MLFSPE) and it is managed by a tripartite
Governing Body. The legal framework to regulate and coordinate the activities of NAE consists
of two laws: i) Law No. 76/2002 on the unemployment insurance system and employment
stimulation and ii) Law No. 202/2006 on the organization and functioning of the NAE.
The NAE implements the labor market policies through its network of county and local
branches, based on a National Action Plan for Employment, which sets the annual strategic
targets to be achieved in the employment area. NAE has a national network including 42 county-


101
    http://www.mmuncii.ro/pub/imagemanager/images/file/Domenii/Egalitate%20de%20sanse/PREZENTARE%20S
TRATEGIA%20NATIONALA%202010-2012.pdf, retrieved in August 2013.
102
     Among the responsible institutions for this measure, the National Agency for Equal Opportunities for Women
and Men was also designated, but without a corresponding budget. Measure E 24 from the Strategy. Government
Decision nr. 430/2001, retrieved at http://www.mmuncii.ro/pub/imagemanager/images/file/Legislatie/HOTARARI-
DE-GUVERN/HG430-2001.pdf in August 2013.
103
     Fields which have already a strongly feminized workforce at the base of the pyramid, as well as low salaries.
                                                       85
level agencies and a separate agency for Bucharest, as well as eight Regional Adult Training
Centers, which have their own budgets and are able to participate in public-private partnerships
at the local level. In the latest years, the NAE’s activity has become highly decentralized, so all
proposals for future activities come from the local level. Thus, the National Action Plan for
Employment is drafted based on proposals from the county agencies and submitted for the
approval to the NAE's tripartite governing body. The MLFSPE adjusts the annual targets (based
on the EU agreements and commitments) and concludes with NAE a contract-commitment based
on performance indicators. The actual implementation of the National Action Plan for
Employment takes place at the local level.
Following the adoption of the European recommendations104 regarding social and
economic inclusion, the labor market policies have been increasingly targeted at vulnerable
groups. However, during the global crisis, the targets related to Roma have become less
and less ambitious. Employers receive incentives if they hire people from special target groups,
such as young graduates of educational institutions, disabled persons, single parents, unemployed
aged over 45, and unemployed who have three years until retirement. Also, The National Agency
for Employment sets targets for employing people from vulnerable groups (Roma people,
disabled persons, young people who leave the child care system and released prisoners, foreign
citizens, and refugees) and from vulnerable communities (rural areas, towns with high
unemployment rates, and communities with a large number of Roma ethnics). However, Roma
women are not considered a distinct group with clearly specified targets associated. What is
extremely important is that while in 2008 (before the global crisis hit Romania) the target for
Roma was more than 11 thousand, in 2012 it declined to less than five thousand105.
TABLE 3-3: EMPLOYMENT TARGETS FOR VULNERABLE GROUPS: NUMBER OF EMPLOYED PERSONS
THROUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL ACTION PLAN FOR EMPLOYMENT

                                                                  2012                       2013
                                                      Targets       Employed      Targets      Employed*
 Roma                                                  4,749             5,274     6,515            978
 Disabled persons                                       592              612           430          147
 Young persons who left the child care system           206               80           190          22
 Persons released from prison                           33                9            15           4
 Foreign citizens                                       25                34           15           8
Source: NAE 2012 and 2013; MLFSPE 2012 and 2013. Note: * Employed persons in 2013 as at June 30th.


BOX 3-3: ROMA ACTIVATION TARGETS DISAPPEARED DURING THE CRISIS

 During the global crisis, the targets related to Roma have become less relevant for the NAE staff
 from local branches. "We do not have target to employ Roma in 2013, there is no specific target.”
 Don’t you have one? “No. There have been in the previous years ... they used to set a national program,



104
      During the pre-accession period and especially after the EU accession in 2007.
105
      Source: Soros Foundation (2012).
                                                             86
 divided by county and each county had to follow, to achieve those targets. And we had for Roma ...
 number of persons included in training, number of people employed... a certain number of those people
 to be Roma ... we had.” So, until this year (2013) you used to have targets for Roma ... “No, it is not only
 this year, since the crisis has begun this matter disappeared, so, I think, 2011 it was the last year when
 we had these targets." (Representative of a NAE local branch)


The NAE registers the ethnicity106 of job seekers, but the registration of Roma is limited by
a number of factors: (i) the NAE representatives claim that only a small part of Roma self-
declare their Roma ethnicity; (ii) the NGO representatives claim that the local and county offices
of the NAE do not always collect data on ethnicity and that there are discrepancies between the
information management systems the different territorial agencies use, as well as their
responsiveness to inquiries on statistic data. Actually, the NAE database includes indicators that
would allow a detailed analysis (including profiling for tailored measures) of the Roma
unemployed (gender, age, residency, region, education, duration of unemployment, type of
unemployment, services provided and outcome, etc.). Nevertheless, the ICT system of NAE
includes among the pre-defined regular reports only few data on Roma, a more comprehensive
analysis of the available database is not performed in a systematic manner but only on special
request or occasions. Therefore, the NAE only partly fulfills its monitoring duties regarding the
implementation of the employment measures directed at the Roma and the progress towards the
assumed targets of the NRIS 2012-2020.
According to the available data, unemployment is much higher among Roma, hence Roma
represent about 10% of all registered unemployed: 49,242 Roma of total 492,427 registered
unemployed as at the end of March 2013107. Similar to the general population, Roma registered
unemployed are mostly men, aged 30-49 years, with low levels of education: 32% have no
formal schooling, 37% incomplete gymnasium, 22% completed 8 classes (5% did not offer
information and only 4% have achieved more than gymnasium). About 58% of them come from
three regions: Centre, North-West and South. The majority (88%) are ‘unpaid’ registered
unemployed, ineligible for unemployment benefits, who register only to obtain the documents
required for the minimum guaranteed income.
Staff reductions and wage cuts represent a big problem for the successful implementation
of active labor market programs, especially those aimed at Roma. The staff caseload within
the NEA is excessively high108: on average, 228 registered unemployed have access to one staff
member, compared with the ILO recommendation of 1:100109. Actually the situation is even
worse in relation to the active labor market programs, given that out of the 2,162 employees,
about 35% provide support services and are not in contact with job seekers and employers.
Furthermore, despite the extended training programs which were implemented for NAE staff, the
professional level of staff at the local employment offices is not satisfactory. According to the


106
    Ethnicity is a distinct item of the registration form.
107
    Data regarding the end of March 2013, which were provided by NAE representatives.
108
    Data for 2013, provided by NAE representatives.
109
    ILO recommendation has to be used cautiously as the optimal staff/client ratio depends on the composition of the
services provided by PES. For example, by including the payment of unemployment benefits, the number of clients
increases considerably, which results in a much higher staff/client ratio.
                                                        87
NAE representatives who participated in the qualitative study conducted for this chapter, the
local offices lack specialized staff for delivering counseling services, Roma mediators or other
employees who know how to deal effectively with unemployed Roma.
3.5.3 LABOR MARKET PROGRAMS IMPLEMENTED IN ROMANIA
The National Agency for Employment (NAE) implements labor market policies including
programs aimed at Roma but without a corresponding budget. NAE, through its network of
local offices, implements labor market policies - employment services, activation measures and
passive measures (Table 3-4), some of them targeted at groups with labor market difficulties.
However, there are neither tailored nor affirmative measures for Roma. Thus, Roma unemployed
benefit of the same labor market policies as any other group of population. Regarding the
financing of labor market policies, "the National Agency for Employment does not have a
separate budgetary allocation for programs aimed at Roma, but for all beneficiaries, thus
ensuring the non-discriminatory access of all interested persons" (Document provided by NAE).
While this non-discriminatory approach is based on the right principles, it results in a lack of
budget and capacity at the local level to deal with issues that are specific to poor, unskilled job-
seekers, including many Roma. Therefore, this chapter argues for complementing the current
approach with an ‘explicit but non-exclusive targeting’ measure for Roma.
TABLE 3-4: LABOR MARKET POLICIES IMPLEMENTED IN ROMANIA

 Labor market policy        Category
 Employment services        Services offered to clients (information, counseling, mediation)
                            Other services (administration of employment                 measures,
                            administration of financial support for employment)
 Activation measures        Training
                            Incentives for employment stimulation
                            Direct job creation*
                            Start-up incentives*
 Passive measures           Unemployment benefits
                            Early retirement benefits
Source: NIS (2012). Note: * Measures no longer available in 2013.
Non-active LMPs dominate the budget allocated to labor market policies; for example, in
2011 they represented 83.8% of the total budget, with the remainder (less than one fifth) being
allocated to other types of measures, including activation policies (NIS, 2012). During the
economic downturn, the total budget for labor market policies was increased, but only in favor of
passive measures, and not for activation measures and services. Actually, a recent evaluation of
employment policies during the economic crisis showed that in Romania the government
responded with ‘weak’ policies, focusing on stabilization measures rather than on crisis exit
strategies110. The report mentions Romania as one of the countries where labor market policies


110
      Metis GmbH & wiiw (2012).
                                                        88
played only a secondary role, as government priorities were centered on restoring economic and
financial stability.
Romania has the smallest Active Labor Market Program (ALMP) expenditure in the
European Union. The budgetary allocation for employment services and active measures in
Romania are small not only by comparison with the expenditures for passive measures, but also
when compared with the effort made by other EU members. Among those, Romania has the
smallest shares of GDP allocated to expenditure on both employment services and on active
measures. In 2011, the expenditure for these two categories of labor market policies were 77
times smaller in Romania than in Denmark (as a percentage of GDP). Also, budgetary
expenditure on active labor market policies is especially low when comparing expenditure per
registered unemployed person. Thus, in 2011, the ALMP expenditure in Romania was only about
US$76 per registered unemployed111.
FIGURE 3-12: PUBLIC EXPENDITURE IN EU COUNTRIES ON EMPLOYMENT SERVICES AND
ACTIVATION MEASURES AS % OF GDP (2011)

       1.8
       1.6
                                                                                            Employment Services
       1.4
                                                                                            Activation measures
       1.2
% of GDP




       1.0
       0.8
       0.6
       0.4
       0.2
       0.0




Source: Eurostat. Note: Data for EU27 and United Kingdom is for 2009; data for Belgium, Greece and Ireland is for
2010.
Employment services receive 9% of the total LMP budget, but only 1.6% (in 2011) of this
budget finances the services delivered to clients, namely information, counseling and
mediation; the difference covers the administrative services. The service with the largest
number of beneficiaries is mediation - for example, in 2011, 908,000 beneficiaries of this service
were registered (NIS, 2012). In fact, all jobseekers registered at the employment offices are
counted as beneficiaries of the mediation service; this is because, according to law, any person
once registered should have an individual mediation plan based on which he/she is to be included
in one or more employment measures (active or passive).
The LMP budget allocates only a very small share to ALMPs (7%, in 2011), but there are
some indicators of the success of ALMP measures. The structure of the budgetary allocation


111
   For comparison, in 2006, the expenditures with active labor market policies per one registered unemployed were
US$ 13 in Serbia, US$ 37 in Macedonia, US$ 93 in Croatia, US$ 1,029 in Czech Republic, US$ 712 in Hungary and
over US$ 15,000 in Sweden (Kudo, 2009: 35).
                                                       89
for active labor market policies112 in 2011 was 56.1% for incentives for employment stimulation,
22% for training, 21.8% for direct job creation, and 0.1% for start-up incentives.113 In 2011,
incentives for employment stimulation had a monthly average of about 24 thousand
beneficiaries, and an estimated 48% of those who exited the program became employed. The
second ALMP according to the budget allocation, namely (re)qualification training, had a
monthly average of more than 15 thousand beneficiaries. The participation in professional
training among unemployed increased from 8% (in 2011) to over 10% (in 2012). However, only
one in every three beneficiaries of training succeeded in finding employment. No outcome data
are available regarding other ALMP measures.
The number of Roma who benefited of ALMPs increased from almost 33 thousand in 2011
to more than 48 thousand in 2012114. Out of them 11% were placed in jobs (in 2012).
Employment services, especially mediation, had the highest contribution to this positive labor
market outcome. The participation of Roma in professional training has been low compared with
that of non-Roma, about 3% of registered unemployed. In addition, only 5 in every 100 trained
Roma succeeded in finding employment (compared with one in every three non-Roma). Two
qualitative studies115 suggest that the main causes for the low participation of Roma in
professional training are: (i) Roma have difficulties in enrolling in training programs, as in most
cases the prerequisite is to have graduated 8 classes or more; (ii) The lack of financial
compensations for course attendance reduces their interest, as many potential trainees have to
financially support their families during the training period; (iii) The qualifications provided by
the courses are not correlated with jobs available for Roma; (iv) Many Roma cannot afford the
costs related to transportation for obtaining the documents required for enrolment; (v) The
intended participants are neither aware nor properly informed about the potential benefits of the
qualifications.
BOX 4: ACTIVE MEASURES IN THE VIEW OF ROMA BENEFICIARIES

 ”They gave us a table [which showed that] (…) there were more jobs for us to choose, as you n eed a
 qualification ... And each of us chose what he thought was best for him. For example, we chose in the
 constructions.’’ (Participant at a focus group with 8 men, ALMP beneficiaries, Oltenita, Calarasi,
 October 2013)
 Have you benefited from any services at the employment agency, counseling, mediation, or other
 services? “It happened only when they had some training courses, then they came up with offers,
 courses for waiter, butcher... Yes, yes, they were. And they proposed... and who could do the course,
 did it, and who could not... because there are among us who receive the Guaranteed Minimum Income
 and have no education and they were not eligible for courses.’’ (Participants at a focus group with 8
 men, ALMP beneficiaries, Oltenita, Calarasi, October 2013)
 ”When I went to get my paper [for the Guaranteed Minimum Income] they asked me, one morning,
 (…): do you want to do other course, training course? Well, yes! Look, a gentleman [a representative of
 the NAE local office] came to us and he needs 7-8 guys... he didn’t need too many, so not many people
 were announced. Those who were there in that morning were selected. I said that I have friends at


112
    Direct job creation and start-up incentives are no longer available in 2013.
113
    NIS (2012).
114
    Source: NAE (2013) Annual Activity Report for 2012.
115
    Mihalache, Preotesei and Doboş (2009); Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010).
                                                        90
 home, some cousins... They said: yeah, but the gentleman does not need too many and we cannot do
 anything else.’’ (Participant at a focus group with 8 women and men, ALMP beneficiaries, Oltenita,
 Calarasi, October 2013).


3.5.4 SPECIAL PROGRAMS AIMED AT ROMA: GAPS, BARRIERS AND EFFICIENCY
The National Agency for Employment has developed few special programs for Roma,
including Open Day116, Job Fairs117, Employment Caravan, and Program 140. As these
programs are not budgeted, they are unevenly implemented at the local level. Each county office
may decide to implement one or more of these programs or not, depending on the local
conditions and needs. Thus, in some counties some of these programs are available, while they
are poorly represented in others. In partnership with civil society organizations, county level
agencies have additionally implemented actions directed at Roma women118.
To the extent that data are available, they suggest that the special programs for Roma have
a poor impact on labor market outcomes. Two qualitative studies119 provide evidence in this
sense. At the general level, this poor impact is caused by: (a) a lack of coherence and continuity
in implementing employment policies for the Roma by the public services; (b) the insufficient
human resources in the local employment services; (c) the lack of monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms. The evaluation of Roma labor market integration measures from the perspective of
county institutional representatives120 concludes that: (a) the county employment agency is an
institution with reduced awareness and accessibility for potential Roma beneficiaries; (b) the
trust in the actual opportunities provided by PES is low (the skills acquired during courses are
considered insufficient121; the chance of getting one of the jobs advertised by the employment
caravan or job fair programs is very low; working methods are considered bureaucratic and
inefficient, with many actions taken only formally); (c) the offer of job market inclusion
programs is unrealistic, and holding professional training or re-training courses for people who
lack basic skills (reading and writing) comes across as a waste of resources; program-advertised
jobs do not match the level of education and skills of the target groups.


                            Employment Caravan and Job Fairs for Roma
BOX 3-4: JOB FAIRS FOR ROMA

 The Job Fairs program was initiated in 2001, and since 2003 it has been organized every year. It
 is based on collaboration protocols signed by ANOFM representatives, Roma experts within the


116
    See for instance http://www.anofm.ro/node/2819: Open Day of the Covasna employment agency, organized in
the Roma neighborhood (Örkő).
117
     See for instance http://www.anofm.ro/ajofm-prahova-organizeaz%C4%83-%C3%AEn-data-de-6-septembrie-
2013-o-burs%C4%83-a-locurilor-de-munc%C4%83-pentru-persoanel: Prahova county employment agency
organizing a Job Fair for Roma beneficiaries.
118
    http://www.anofm.ro/node/3597: Brasov county employment agency organizing a Job Fair for Roma women
within the project Barrabarripen.
119
    Mihalache, Preotesei and Doboş (2009); Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010).
120
    Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010). Research conducted in July 2010 based on qualitative methods.
121
    At the moment there are not training courses tailored for and targeted at Roma.
                                                      91
 Prefectures, and other organizations addressing Roma issues. In 2012, Job Fairs for Roma were
 organized in 9 localities from 6 counties (Arges, Botosani, Brasov, Dambovita, Giurgiu and
 Prahova). Out of the 367 employers contacted, only 58 participated. Roma participation to the
 fairs was of 306 job seekers, out of which 40 were employed (or 13%). The sectors in which
 most Roma found a job were: metallic constructions, services, apparel, printing, civil
 engineering, architecture and engineering, waste collection and treatment, and furniture
 manufacturing.
 "Personally, I find that to organize a job fair for Roma is a disqualification for other social
 categories. This could lead to a boycott. So, I prefer to organize regular general job fairs."
 (Representative of a County Agency for Employment, October 2013)
 Two studies122 based on qualitative research methods showed that the main issues related to
 the Job Fair for Roma include: (i) It has been ineffective in increasing the employment rate
 among Roma as it is perceived as being rather formal; (ii) Even though the participation of the
 employers and potential employees was higher when the program started, in the last years
 participation was considerably lower; (iii) Employers are reticent about participating to the fair,
 because they are reluctant to employ Roma people; (iv) The job description does not match the
 qualifications of the majority of Roma. Even when the qualification requirements are met, the
 Roma participants are not employed due to discrimination or other reasons.


BOX 5: EMPLOYMENT CARAVAN FOR ROMA

 The first Employment Caravan was organized in 2005 by NAE in collaboration with the
 National Agency for Roma and other Roma NGOs. This program is focused on communes and
 towns with large Roma communities. Employment Office specialists, in collaboration with
 local authorities, go to communities where they offer information about available jobs and
 qualification courses, and provide counseling. There are no data on the scale of the Employment
 Caravan activities (how many were organized, location, number of participants, outcome, etc.).
 "No, no, this type of caravan should not be made under the impulse of some indicators. If you
 follow only indicators and some figures, if they are organized only for the sake of organizing...
 are organized when needed... These programs should look at medium and long term. If you look
 only at short term, it is already a failure. These caravans have efficiency when there are jobs
 available, to realize that it is a possibility." (Representative of a County Agency for
 Employment, October 2013)


The main issues123 related to the Employment Caravan for Roma are: (i) The positive effect
brought about through this program is the registration of Roma (who otherwise would not
register) with the employment agencies. In this way, their chances to benefit from counseling
services and active measures are enhanced; (ii) The beneficiaries’ interest is quite low because
they lack confidence that real job opportunities exist; (iii) The success of this program depends


122
      Mihalache, Preotesei and Doboş (2009); Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010).
123
      Idem.
                                                           92
on the cooperation of a Roma leader from the community with the representatives of the
employment agencies in organizing the event and mobilizing the community members; (iv) The
number of participants depends on the period of the year when the caravan is organized. There
are fewer participants in the summer months (especially in May, June, or July) when they can
more easily find seasonal jobs.


                Program 140124 for the communities with a large Roma population
This program is focused on information and personalized actions such as mediation and
counseling, as well as on the development of the collaboration between NAE and local
Roma representatives. For its implementation, NAE established, within the National Action
Plan for Employment, a target of 2,000125 Roma employed in 2012 and 2,100126 in 2013. In
2012, the target was achieved.
BOX 6: PROGRAM 140 FOR THE COMMUNITIES WITH A LARGE ROMA POPULATION

 "There are two aspects: in case of a community included for more years in the program, when
 the counselor from the agency goes there, he is recognized by the people. And they ask: why
 does he come again? What on earth does he want to talk with us? To tell us that the water is
 cold and the air is good? But if you can bring something new, with impact in the community, so
 they will say: have you seen? The people from the agency came and I got a job! […] When you
 have a community newly included in the project you have first to gain credibility. And you can
 do this in two ways: you go with their leader and they listen to you or we discuss with the
 schools representatives and try to reach the parents through their children." (Representative of a
 County Agency for Employment, October 2013)


3.5.5 EUROPEAN PROJECTS FOR ROMA INCLUSION IN THE LABOR MARKET
European Structural Funds represent a real opportunity to improve Roma social inclusion,
particularly also in the labor market. Unfortunately, Romania's absorption of EU funds remained
weak and hence the NAE could not augment its financial resources to support its programs.
To date, the EU funded projects aimed at enhancing Roma's employability have had
limited success. For the current programming period (2007-2013), the European Social Fund co-
financed 102 projects (in social inclusion, education, and employment) targeting vulnerable
groups, including, in some of these projects, Roma beneficiaries127. However, the SOP HRD128
projects that aimed to increase the chances of Roma to obtain qualified jobs have had limited
success. According to the SOP HRD Annual Implementation Report, the participation of Roma


124
    In 2010 this program was designed for 150 communities with large numbers of Roma ethnics (Program 150).
125
    About 42% of the 2012 target shown in table 1-4.
126
    About 32% of the 2013 target shown in table 1-4.
127
    World Bank, 2013. Data available in May 2013. See also http://www.anr.gov.ro/. The total budget for these 102
projects is EUR 253 million. Only a relatively small part of this budget benefits Roma, the rest financing the
interventions for other vulnerable groups. Budget data disaggregated by group of beneficiaries are not available.
128
    EU funded Sectoral Operational Programme for Human Resources Development.
                                                       93
in qualification and re-qualification courses (target group) has been very low between 2010 and
2012; nevertheless, more than two times larger than the Roma participation in training courses
provided by the public employment services (2,635 participants in SOP HRD projects compared
with 1,227 in NAE courses, in 2012).
TABLE 3-5 ROMA PARTICIPANTS IN (RE)QUALIFICATION TRAININGS WITHIN SOP HRD PROJECTS

      Year                           2010         2011         2012         2013        2014         2015
      Target                        12,900       28,000        41,700     56,700       65,000       65,000
      Achieved (number)                55         1,542        2,635
      Achieved %                      0.43        5.51          6.32
Source: Ministry of Labor, Family, Social Protection and Elderly, The Managing Authority for the Sectoral
Operational Programme Human Resources Development Annual Implementation Report, 2012. Note: Data refer to
projects from Priority Axis 6 Promoting Social Inclusion.
The need for rigorous impact evaluation of the EU funded projects already implemented is
stringent for extracting the lessons learnt in the field of employment. The SOP HRD Annual
Implementation Report does not provide explanations of the program results related to Roma.
Furthermore, the report does not distinguish the level of intervention - some projects only require
participants to fill out a registration sheet, whereas others are much more rigorous and require
participants to be trained for 3 weeks. As such, in order to make better use of the EU funds for
the benefit of Roma, there is a need to monitor the impacts of these projects, and to base the
design of future projects on the lessons learned from these evaluations.
The majority of EU Funded projects implemented from 2007 to 2013 whose primary
specific target group have been Roma women are in the field of employment , whether
through job creation, campaigning for the promotion of Roma women in the labor market or
promoting their interests through institutional mechanisms such as influencing law making or
using existing leverages such as trade unions. However, there is no analysis of the impacts or a
centralization of the results of these EU projects, and information is often difficult to find129.


3.6    BEST PRACTICES FOR ROMA COMMUNITIES
The qualitative research conducted for this chapter revealed a possible best practice for
Roma communities in the projects that, based on an integrative framework, address the
employment issue in interplay with education, health and social inclusion. Thus, in larger
Roma communities (rural or urban), a multifunctional center was set up for providing a broad
area of services. Mediators and community workers provided tailored services through the
center, accompanied by awareness- and information campaigns within the community. For
identifying potential beneficiaries, outreach activities or events with children for attracting the
parents were used. This type of projects is highly relevant for the community, as well as for


129
  Moreover, there is no public database with the information on where the funded projects were/are implemented.
The qualitative research suggest that there are municipalities implementing several similar projects financed from
ESF.
                                                          94
individual beneficiaries. This project was implemented by an NGO, local authorities, and public
and private institutions in partnership.130 These projects also used innovative methodologies such
as community monitoring. Within the community monitoring framework, members of a
community affected by a public service or public policy generate demands, suggestions, critiques
and data and then provide feedback to the implementing organization or institution. This
approach enables communities to be more involved in the local decision making process, to be
better informed and more aware of their rights as citizens and human beings. The NGO that has
piloted community monitoring has managed to activate and mobilize the community to identify
gaps and suggested improvement in the provision of public services131.
A second type of EU funded projects that proved successful in integrating Roma on the
labor market relates to social economy, also known as ‘social entrepreneurship’ . These
projects132 aim at: (i) assistance for people who already have a business, to formalize it and/or to
diversify and extend it; (ii) promoting income generating activities among Roma traditional
craftsmen by supporting them in the process of adapting their trade, products and marketing
strategies to the current economy; (iii) supporting the creation of social economy units
(cooperatives). Roma women are involved in the income generating activities related to
traditional crafts (e.g. copper and tin smiting, wood carving, brick lying, etc.), so they are also
among the beneficiaries of these projects mainly within the cooperatives. A common problem of
these projects is sustainability (e.g. in one project only 10% of the set-up businesses survive after
3 years). According to interviewed NGO- and NAR representatives, the key solution to this is
embedded in the Law on social economy, which is currently under review.
The social cooperatives may be a good alternative for social assistance programs
(Guaranteed Minimum Income). Even if the income for people employed in such enterprises are
subsidized, the beneficiaries are integrated and have higher chances to remain in the formal labor
market. Beyond enhanced employability, they also develop abilities to comply with a work
program, to follow a certain work discipline, and to manage the financial resources of their
household from one month to another and not from one day to the next.


3.7 POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
A more holistic approach may be considered to address unemployment and inactivity
among Roma by offering complementary employment services, given the strong correlation
between labor market exclusion (mainly among Roma, but also among very poor non-Roma) and
low skill levels, atypical demographic behaviors, poor health condition, as well as precarious
housing conditions. In Romania, Roma hold a precarious situation on the labor market: the


130
    E.g. SOP HRD projects: Community Resource Center: strategic tools in improving the situation of vulnerable
groups in rural areas, implemented by The Roma Center for Health Policies – SASTIPEN; Establishment and
operation of support structures focused employment - Centers for Social Inclusion for Roma people , implemented
by Pakiv Association Romania.
131
    Dimitrov and Milosheva-Krushe (2012).
132
    E.g. EU funded projects: Roma creates social enterprise for recycling packaging waste ROMA-RE, implemented
by PAEM Foundation; Participation of vulnerable groups in the social economy , implemented by the NAR;
Romano Cher - Casa Romilor (Romano ButiQ), implemented by Key Consulting Management and Coordination.
                                                      95
unemployment and inactivity are very high, especially among Roma women, employment is low,
jobs are generally unstable, low paid and informality is abundant. The working-age Roma belong
to households with many children and low work intensity, hence they face a high risk of in-work
poverty.
The following recommendations to improve employment outcomes among the working age
Roma population are geared toward five main objectives: (1) improve skills by developing
training policies and systems; (2) improve job search incentives and align them with job creation
policies; (3) improve efficiency of job search by strengthening the capacity of the National
Agency for Employment; (4) invest in monitoring and evaluation of specific activation measures,
and systematically share best practices across municipalities; and (5) strengthen the safety nets to
protect the poor in combination with targeted measures to promote health and human capital
investments, especially for children.


3.7.1 POLICY GOAL 1: IMPROVE SKILLS AND EMPLOYABILITY

            POLICY MEASURE 1A: INCREASE ACCESS OF ROMA (ESPECIALLY YOUTH) TO
                                   RELEVANT TRAINING

Given the extremely low education levels and lack of work experience among unemployed and
inactive Roma, job search incentives must be combined with programs that build
employable skills. This could be achieved through second-chance education but also through
other methods. Second-chance education needs to be continued and expanded further in the
Roma communities. The NAE may also increase its efforts in developing and diversifying its
traineeship opportunities that can act as a pathway to employment for job seekers with low levels
of education (courses of level I and II correlated with jobs available for Roma).The program of
certification of skills learned through non-formal means is already available, but need to be
further developed for including a broader area of skills relevant for Roma job seekers (including
for Roma women). Training opportunities need to be better disseminated (through the same
network described under policy measure 2C) and awareness campaign on the potential benefits
of qualifications might facilitate access of Roma to the available programs.
The statistical models presented in the report indicate that the youth are more likely to be
unemployed, housewives or self-employed and not employee or employer, to do unskilled work
as employees and to earn less money even when other relevant variables are similar (residential
area, education, gender or number of children). Moreover, the clustering analysis of the NEETs
indicates that about 14% of them are youth (about half of them women without children, from
urban areas), who could start working on short notice but that only less than half of them are
actively looking for a job - they may be discouraged, looking for a job in another country, have
plans for marriage (all these things negatively also affects their future employability). Given
their high vulnerability, it becomes a priority to tailor specific programs for them function of
their specific needs: increase the incentives to continue education for the youth who are more
likely to drop out of school, to improve the human capital of the individuals who dropped out of
school at early ages (through apprenticeship programs or second change education)), or even
boost the soft skills for the individuals who have all the other needs already met.          The
Government may consider developing trainee, internship and placement programs in central
                                                96
administration, regional and municipal positions (these activities could be complemented by
affirmative measures in employment to counteract the possible negative stereotyping related to
Roma). Again, such programs could be developed in collaboration with NGOs active on the field
of Roma education and employment.
Although a wide range of reports indicate that skills (cognitive, socio-emotional or job-specific
skills) matter133, the evidence shows that their importance in having a 'good' job vary across
countries and across different socio-demographic groups. It is therefore important to further
study the importance of different skills in getting a job and having a higher salary in order
to be able to come with more specific recommendations on the particularities of the training
programs that might be most efficient for different categories of Roma (youth, women, elderly,
rural, with low or high education, etc.).

                     POLICY MEASURE 1B: PROMOTE EMPLOYMENT FOR ROMA WOMEN

According to the cluster analysis presented above, almost half of all working age Roma who
are in NEET are women aged under 45. Employment and income generation by women
triggers a virtuous circle of positive changes. For instance, it has been researched that women
who are income earners have greater leverage in financial household-level decision-making.
When women have more influence on the allocation of resources within the household, it has
been shown that they privilege, to a greater extent than men, the equal education of girls and
boys and investments in the education of children, thereby giving a strong impulse to long term
development (European Commission 2010: 137).
To promote employment opportunities for Roma women, a focus on the social sectors is
particularly relevant as it results in benefits both at the individual and the community
level. Providing training, especially to women, to become community health assistants, or
(kindergarten) teacher assistants is likely to generate a significantly positive impact on the
perception of the Roma among the general population, and of working Roma women among the
Roma communities themselves. In addition, future government plans to hire social workers in
the areas including marginalized Roma communities can also put an emphasis on hiring from the
communities themselves so as to ensure better linkages and communication with community
members.
3.7.2 POLICY GOAL 2: IMPROVE JOB SEARCH INCENTIVES AND ALIGN THEM
      WITH JOB CREATION POLICIES

                POLICY MEASURE 2A: INCENTIVIZE JOB SEARCH IN FORMAL LABOR MARKET

The current system of social benefits is not effective in providing incentives to search for
work in the formal labor market. Roma out of work have a higher registration rate with
employment agencies than non-Roma. However, almost nine of every ten Roma registered as
unemployed mainly to obtain the documents required for the minimum guaranteed income. The
incentives provided through the minimum guaranteed income discourage job search, since this


133
      The World Bank. 2013. Step Skills Measurement Study; Sondergaard, Lars, Murthi, Mamta. 2012
                                                        97
income support (although small) combined with earnings from informal work provide better
livelihood for 'jobless' people compared with people who found work and have access only to
low wage, insecure jobs. The final effect may be a reduced potential earned income, a high level
of informality, an increase in the number of recipients and in the program costs. In recent years,
many countries (i.e. France, the UK, the US) have reformed their social assistance programs
following concerns of high costs and work disincentives. The solution adopted by these countries
was that instead of fully taking into account the incomes from work when computing the benefit
level to use a lower implicit tax rate for them (to disregard a specific percentage of the earned
incomes). The available evidence suggests that this sort of welfare-to-work reforms have
employment effects and also consistently increase the income of the beneficiaries. However, it is
fair to say that it is unclear how this evidence translates to Romania without a proper impact
evaluation of such a reform; such an evaluation would allow the policy makers to identify the
right combination between the level of the benefit and the percentage of earnings to be
disregarded.

                     POLICY MEASURE 2B: PROMOTE JOB CREATION POLICIES

In order to be effective, labor market policies need to be accompanied by job creation
policies, which according to the Global Employment Agenda (ILO) extend from macroeconomic
and fiscal policies, to investment climate, sectoral policies, labor mobility and migration,
community-based rehabilitation, use of ICT for productivity, business development services,
small and medium size enterprises, corporate social responsibility or strengthening cooperatives.

       POLICY MEASURE 2C: INCENTIVIZE JOB SEARCH FOR ROMA WOMEN BY FACILITATING
        THE ACCESS AND PARTICIPATION OF ROMA CHILDREN IN EARLY EDUCATION AND
                                  CHILDCARE FACILITIES

The data shows that family size and inactivity of Roma women are strongly linked. Furthermore,
as shown in Chapter 2 on education, enrolment rates of Roma children aged 3-6 in preschool is
low, reflecting the preference of Roma mothers to raise children at home. From this perspective,
addressing the gap in preschool participation and in childcare facilities is not only essential
to ensure Roma children get an equal start with regards to early learning and succeed in
school later on, but also addresses an important barrier to labor force participation among
Roma women.
3.7.3 POLICY GOAL 3: IMPROVE EFFICIENCY OF JOB SEARCH - STRENGTHEN THE
      CAPACITY OF THE NATIONAL AGENCY FOR EMPLOYMENT (NAE)

        POLICY MEASURE 3A: ENSURE THE ADEQUATE NUMBER AND PROFESSIONAL LEVEL
                                     OF NAE STAFF

In order to improve efficiency of job search, the capacity of the National Agency for
Employment (NAE) need to be strengthened. The data show that the insufficient human
resources in the local employment services negatively affect the effectiveness of the special
employment program for Roma, which are currently available. The Functional Review in the
Labor Market and Social Policy Sector (World Bank, 2011) has already highlighted staffing as a
major problem for successful implementation of active labor market programs. First, what is
                                            98
problematic is the high staff caseload for those working with clients. In addition, the county and
local employment agencies seem to lack the specialized staff for delivering counseling services
or other employees who know to deal effectively with Roma unemployed (i.e. Roma mediators).

                   POLICY MEASURE 3B: IMPROVE AWARENESS AND TRUST OF POTENTIAL
                          BENEFICIARIES IN THE PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT SERVICES

Low awareness of NAE as well as lack of trust in the actual opportunities provided by its county
and local offices reduces further the accessibility for potential Roma beneficiaries. Previous
research shows that these are factors that diminish the effectiveness of the special employment
programs for Roma currently implemented.



                 POLICY MEASURE 3C: ALLOCATE MORE BUDGET TO ACTIVE LABOR MARKET
                                            PROGRAMS

A World Bank review of evaluations of employment services worldwide concludes that
“employment services are generally the most cost-effective intervention: employment and
earnings impacts are usually positive and, compared to other ALMPs, these employment
services are inexpensive.”134 Moreover, to the extent that ALMP’s are successful in matching
Roma candidates with jobs, they contribute to a reversal of negative stereotypes, and possibly, a
reduction in discrimination more generally.

              POLICY MEASURE 3D: DEVELOP TAILORED EMPLOYMENT MEASURES EXPLICITLY
               ADDRESSED TO ROMA MEN AND WOMEN, WITH CLEARLY SPECIFIED BUDGETS

Currently, Roma unemployed benefit of the same labor market policies as any other group of
population. Some special programs aimed at Roma are also available, but without a
corresponding budget, implemented unevenly across the country, and with limited effectiveness.
Lack of coherence and continuity in implementing employment policies for the Roma by the
public services is an additional impeding factor. In order to improve the efficiency of the
employment measures a major change in the current approach is needed: the measures have to
be tailored based on an in-depth profiling analysis of Roma job-seekers. Specifically, the
intensity of support needs to be linked to the job seekers needs and to his or her distance to the
labor market. For example, in addition to regular counseling and based on the specific needs, the
employment office can consider providing soft job search skills such as the ability to write a
good CV, to identify potential employment opportunities, write an application letter, and perform
well in an interview.
Given that discrimination is a barrier to employment prospects, the NAE's key bridging role
between employers and prospective Roma employees eager and able to work can be
improved by reaching out to non-state actors and government entities well known with the
local Roma community so that information about employment – and employee – opportunities
reach both employers and Roma job seekers. The actors that can provide a bridging function for

134
      Betcherman et al. 2004
                                               99
employment services may include municipal authorities, churches, community based
organizations, NGOs, social workers, community mediators, Roma mediators etc. The World
Bank's Functional Review (2011) showed that for increasing efficiency of job search the NAE
may entrust specialized providers with services such as vocational information and counseling,
job-matching, vocational training and pre-layoff services or consultancy and assistance for
starting an independent activity or a business. It is important to set realistic, but ambitious targets
for Roma inclusion in the labor market and provide adequate budget for implementation. The
NAE's accountability in implementing the NRIS 2012-2020 needs to be improved.

              POLICY MEASURE 3E: SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIAL ECONOMY

Social economy should be considered as a component of policies seeking to facilitate the
inclusion of Roma in the labor market. Several successful projects have already been
implemented with good activation results. Although they would need to be improved in terms of
sustainability, these types of experiences should be shared much more broadly across the
different municipalities and among all the relevant actors.

The law on social economy is currently in the approval process. In order to enhance
sustainability of future social economy initiatives, especially aimed at Roma, the new law
needs to fulfill at least the following conditions: (1) subsidize the start-up capital for social
economy units; (2) cover the costs related to the specialized support services for professions in
which Roma are underrepresented (such as management, accountancy, ICT, marketing etc.); (3)
create fiscal facilities for the social economy units; (4) test, campaign and introduce a "social
enterprise label" (similar to the eco label or Made in Romania label) for promoting the
commercialization of the products and services of social enterprises; (5) ensure financing of the
newly established social enterprises for at least two years. The social cooperatives may be a good
alternative for social assistance programs (Guaranteed Minimum Income). Even if the incomes
of people employed in such enterprises are subsidized, the beneficiaries are integrated and have
higher chances to remain in the formal labor market. Also, social cooperatives offer more
opportunities for Roma women to enter the labor market. Besides employment, there are other
benefits: increased skills (including new abilities to comply with a work program, to follow a
certain work discipline, and to manage the household financial resources), increase in well-being
as a result of the work done or of the enlarged social network.
3.7.4 POLICY GOAL 4: INVEST IN MONITORING AND EVALUATION OF SPECIFIC
      ACTIVATION MEASURES, AND SYSTEMATICALLY SHARE BEST PRACTICES
      ACROSS MUNICIPALITIES

            POLICY MEASURE 4A: SET UP A MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM FOR
                    EMPLOYMENT RELATED INTERVENTIONS AIMED AT ROMA

Governments, across Europe and elsewhere, are increasingly using rigorous impact
evaluations to pilot programs and measure their effectiveness, especially in policy areas
designed to address some of the greatest social challenges, such as long-term unemployed,
marginalized groups, Roma. The Romanian government can improve the effectiveness of
employment related interventions and expand the reach of the most effective ones by
                                                 100
systematically piloting and evaluating promising ideas, and by investing more in knowledge
sharing across municipalities. Regarding the employment policies and interventions in Romania,
valuable data are already available but, unfortunately, underused. The NAE have collected data
about beneficiaries of the public employment policies, while the Management Authority of SOP
HRD135 have developed a database regarding beneficiaries of the EU funded projects focused on
employment.136 The NAE's database includes indicators that would allow a detailed analysis
(including profiling for tailored measures) of the Roma unemployed, but the ICT system of NAE
includes among the pre-defined regular reports only few data on Roma. So, there is a good base
for a monitoring and evaluation system, but data analysis, reporting and procedures for
incorporating the results in specific activation measures tailored for different groups of
beneficiaries need to be developed. Regular reports on the status and progress on Roma
employment would also respond to the NRIS 2012-2020.

              POLICY MEASURE 4B: ESTABLISH A KNOWLEDGE PORTAL OF "GOOD PRACTICES"

Progress could be facilitated by establishing a knowledge portal of "good practices",
including of the municipal and non-governmental activation activities and actively
disseminating these among all the relevant actors. As already described in the report there are
NGOs which have experience in applying different innovative monitoring methodologies (such
as community monitoring). These approaches enable communities and local authorities to be
more effective in the local decision making process, to be better informed and more aware of
their rights as citizens and human beings, and should be more broadly shared.
3.7.5 POLICY GOAL 5: STRENGTHEN THE SAFETY NET THAT PROTECTS THE
      MOST VULNERABLE, BUT ALSO ACTIVELY SUPPORT IMPROVEMENTS IN
      WELFARE
             POLICY MEASURE 5A: ENSURE THE INTEGRATIVE NATURE OF INTERVENTIONS IN
                                      ROMA COMMUNITIES

As shown above, "good practices" for Roma communities refer to interventions that, based on an
integrative framework, address the employment issue in interplay with education, health and
social inclusion. One example applicable to larger Roma communities (rural or urban) consists of
the multifunctional centers which may be established for providing a broad area of services,
including awareness and informing campaigns, tailored to the community conditions and needs.
This type of interventions, highly relevant for the whole community, could be developed in
collaboration with NGOs active on the field of Roma.
Given the complexity of the causal mechanisms when explaining and trying to change the
position of Roma in the labor market, it is vital that the implementation of employment
measures is coordinated with those in the area of education, social protection, health and
housing, presented in the other chapters of this document.




135
      Sectoral Operational Programme for Human Resources Development.
136
      The two databases can be merged.
                                                     101
3.7.6 IMPLEMENTATION
                            Summary Table of Policy Recommendations
                                                                               Time frame
                                                             Impact
                                                                               Short: < 6
                          Entity(ies) best placed to         (Critical         months;
                                                             impact; High                      Monitoring
Recommendation            implement the                                        Medium: 6-18
                                                             impact;                           indicator
                          recommendation                                       months;
                                                             Enabling
                                                             condition)        Long: >18
                                                                               months
Policy Goal 1:
Improve skill and
employability
                          National Agency for
Policy Measure 1A:
                          Employment (NAE)
Increase access of
Roma(especially of        Ministry of Education              High impact       Long
youth) to relevant
                          National Agency for Roma
training
                          (NAR)
                          Ministry of Labor
Policy Measure 1B:
Promote employment        Ministry of Education              High impact       Long
for Roma women
                          Ministry of Health
Policy Goal 2: Improve job search incentives and combines it with job creation policies
Policy Measure 2A:
Incentivize job search    Ministry of Labor                  High Impact       Long
in formal labor market
Policy Measure 2B:
Promote job creation      Government                         Critical Impact   Long
policies
Policy Measure 2C:
Incentivize job search
for Roma women by
facilitating the access   Ministry of Labor                  Enabling
                                                                               Long
and participation of      Ministry of Education              condition
Roma children in early
education      and   in
childcare facilities
Policy Goal 3: Improve efficiency of job search - strengthen the capacity of the National Agency for
Employment (NAE)
Policy Measure 3A:
Ensure the adequate
                                                             Enabling
number            and     Ministry of Labor                                    Medium
                                                             condition
professional level of
NAE staff

                                                       102
Policy Measure 3B:
Improve awareness and      National Agency for
trust    of    potential   Employment (NAE)                 Enabling
                                                                               Medium
beneficiaries in the       National Agency for Roma         condition
Public      Employment     (NAR)
Services
Policy Measure 3C:
Allocate more budget       National Agency for
                                                            Critical Impact    Medium
to active labor market     Employment (NAE)
policies
Policy Measure 3D:
Develop         tailored   National Agency for
employment measures        Employment (NAE)
explicitly addressed to                                     Critical Impact    Long
Roma men and women,        National Agency for Roma
with clearly specified     (NAR)
budgets
Policy Measure 3E:
Support           the      Ministry of Labor
                                                            High impact        Long
development of social      Ministry of Finance
economy
Policy Goal 4: Invest in monitoring and evaluation of specific activation measures, and systematically share
best practices across municipalities
Policy Measure 4A: Set
up a monitoring and        Ministry of Education
evaluation system for
                           National Agency for Roma         Critical impact    Medium
employment      related
interventions aimed at     (NAR)
Roma
Policy Measure 4B:         Ministry of Education
Establish a knowledge                                       Enabling
                           National Agency for Roma                            Medium
portal    of    "good                                       condition
practice"                  (NAR)

Policy Goal 5: Strengthen the safety net that protects the most vulnerable, but also actively support
improvements in welfare
Policy Measure 5A:
Ensure the integrative
                           Government                       Critical impact    Long
nature of interventions
in Roma communities




                                                      103
REFERENCES
Bădescu, G., Grigoraş, V., Rughiniş, C., Voicu, M. and Voicu, O. (2007) Roma Inclusion Barometer, Open Society
Foundation, Bucharest.
Berevoescu, I. (2002), “O analiză demografică a populaţiei de romi: familie şi fertilitate” (“A Demographic Analysis
of the Roma Population: Family and Fertility”), in Zamfir, C. and Preda, M. (coord.) Romii in Romania (Roma in
Romania), p. 39-70, Bucharest: Expert.
Betcherman, Gordon, Karina Olivas, and Amit Dar (2004) Impact of Active Labor Market Programs: New Evidence
from Evaluations with Particular Attention to Developing and transition Countries , Washington, D.C.: World Bank,
Social Protection Discussion Paper Series 0402.
Bodewig, Christian; Hirshleifer, Sarojini. 2011. Advancing Adult Learning in Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
Social Protection&Labor. The World Bank
Cace, S. (2002), “Meseriile si ocupatiile populatiei de romi din Romania” (“Trades and Occupations of the Roma
Population”), in Zamfir, C. and Preda, M. (coord.) Romii in Romania (Roma in Romania), p. 157-182, Bucharest:
Expert.
Dimitrov, D. and Milosheva-Krushe, M. (2012) Towards Mainstreaming of good practices for Monitoring of Roma
Integration Policies, CREDA Consulting (Creating Development Alternatives), Sofia.
Duminică, G. and Preda, M. (2003) Roma access on the labor market, PHARE program RO 0004.02.02, Bucharest:
Editura ECA.
Duminică, G., and Ivasiuc, A. (coord.) (2013) Romii din România De la țap ispășitor la motor de dezvoltare ,
Report Agenția Împreună, Bucharest.
European       Commission       (2010)     Employment    in   Europe          2010,     available     online     at:
http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=738&langId=en&pubId=593
European Commission (2011) An EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies up to 2020 , available
online at la: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2011:258:0006:0009:RO:PDF
European Roma Rights Centre (2007) The Glass Box: Exclusion of Roma from Employment.
FRA, UNDP & EC (2012) The situation of Roma in 11 EU Member States.
Gabor Fleck, I. and Rughiniş, C. (ed.) (2008) Vino mai aproape Incluziunea şi excluziunea romilor în societatea
românească de azi, Bucharest, available online at: http://www.anr.gov.ro/docs/Publicatii/Vino_mai_aproape.pdf
Gheorghe, C. (coord.) (2009) The unions at the intersection between gender and ethnicity , Research Report.
Herwig Immervoll (2013) Profiles of Vulnerable People In Turkey, World Bank Report.
Ionescu, M. and Cace, S. (coord.) (2006) Employment Policies for Roma, Bucharest: Expert Publishing House.
Kluve, J (2006) The Effectiveness of European Active Labor Market Policy , IZA Discussion Paper no. 2018, March
2006, Bonn: IZA (Institute for the Study of Labor).
Koning, J. de, and Y. Peers (2007) Evaluation Active Labor Market Policies Evaluations, WZB Discussion Paper
2007-112, Berlin, WZB.
Kuddo, A. (2009) Employment Services and Active Labor Market Programs in Eastern European and Central Asian
Countries, Washington DC: World Bank.
Metis GmbH & wiiw (2012) Evaluation of the reaction of the ESF to the economic and financial crisis , Final
Report, European Commission report, DG Employment.
Mihalache, C., Preotesei, M., Doboş, C., (2009) Roma inclusion on the labor market Perceptions of the involved
stakeholders, Soros Foundation Romania.

                                                       104
Ministry of Labor, Family, Social Protection and Elderly (2012) Statistical Bulletin on Employment, Mobility,
Unemployment        and       Unemployed           Social    Protection ,       available     online      at:
http://www.mmuncii.ro/nou/images/buletin_statistic/somaj%20anul%202012.pdf
Ministry of Labor, Family, Social Protection and Elderly (2013) Statistical Bulletin on Employment, Mobility,
Unemployment        and       Unemployed           Social     Protection ,      available     online      at:
http://www.mmuncii.ro/nou/images/buletin_statistic/somaj%20trim%20I%202013.pdf
National Agency for Employment (2012) National Action Plan for Employment for 2012 , available online at:
http://fii-informat.ro/sites/fii-informat.ro/files/program_de_ocupare_anofm_2012.pdf
National Agency for Employment (2013) Annual Activity                      Report   for   2012,   available   online   at:
http://www.anofm.ro/files/raport%20de%20activ%202012.PDF
National Agency for Employment (2013) National Action Plan for Employment for 2013 , available online at:
http://www.anofm.ro/files/po%202013%20propuneri%201%20.PDF
National Agency for Roma (2011) Together on the labor market. Monitoring Report regarding the integration of
Roma population on the labor market and the progress in the employment process . SOP HRD project, available
online at: http://www.anr.gov.ro/docs/1525/Raport_2011.pdf
National Institute for Statistics (2012) Implementation of the labor market policies in Romania . Statistics data for
2011.
National Institute for Statistics Statistical Yearbook various editions.
Neef, R. and Stănculescu, M. S. (eds.) (2002) The Social Impact of Informal Economies in Eastern Europe , London:
Ashgate.
Neef, R., and Adair, Ph. (eds.) (2004) Shadow Economies and Social Transformation in Romania, LIT Verlag
Munster.
O’Higgins, Niall (2012). Roma and non-Roma in the Labour Market in Central and South Eastern Europe. Roma
Inclusion Working Paper. UNDP
Preda, M., Dumnică, G. and Moisa, F. (2003) “Young Roma – looking for a job” Dimensions of the Roma
participation on the labor market, Case study on Bucharest, PHARE program RO 0104.03/4.1/SOU 010.
Preoteasa, A. M., Cace, S. and Duminică, G. (coord.) (200 9) Strategia naţională de îmbunătăţire a situaţiei romilor:
vocea comunităţilor, Bucarest.
Research Institute for Quality of Life (2010) Legal and equal on the labour market for the Roma communities
Diagnosis of the factors influencing the employment rate of the Roma population in Romania , project ”L@EGAL 2
–European investment in Roma’s future in Romania” SOP HRD, Bucharest: Editura Expert.
Social Observatory, Bucharest University (2010) Social Inclusion Barometer.
Sondergaard, Lars; Murthi, Mamta et al. (2012). Skills, not just Diplomas. Managing Education for Results in
Eastern Europe and Central Asia. The World Bank. Soros Foundation Romania (2012) Roma Inclusion in Romania:
Policies, Institutions and Examples, project ,,EU INCLUSIVE – data transfer and exchange of good practices
regarding the inclusion of Roma population between Romania, Bulgaria, Italy and Spain” SOPHRD/98/6.4/S/63841.
Soros Foundation (2012) The Situation of Roma in Romania, 2011. Between Social Inclusion and Migration –
County Report. EU INCLUSIVE project – data transfer and exchange of good practices regarding the inclusion of
Roma population between Romania, Bulgaria, Italy and Spain SOP HRD/98/6.4/S/63841.
Sandu, D. and Stănculescu, M.S. (1999), Rebuilding Community Space, World Bank Report. Bucharest.
Stănculescu, M. S. and Ilie, S. (2001) Economia informală în România, UNDP and RIQL, Bucharest.



                                                           105
Stănculescu, M. S and Pop, L. (2009) “The Transition Process and Changes in Income, Income Inequality and
Poverty: The Case of Romania”, in Stănculescu M.S. and Stanovnik T. (eds.) Activity, Incomes and Social Welfare.
A Comparison across Four New EU Member States, p. 177-230, European Centre Vienna, Ashgate.
The Romanian Government (2012) The Strategy of the Romanian Government for the Inclusion of Romanian
Citizens Belonging to Roma Minority 2012-2020, available online at: http://www.gov.ro/strategy-guvernului-
romaniei-de-incluziune-a-cetatenilor-romani-apartinand-minoritatii-romilor-pentru-perioada-2012-
2020__l1a117977.html. Referred to in this chapter as the ‘NRIS’ or ‘National Roma Inclusion Strategy’.

The Romanian Government, the Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Protection and Elderly, The Managing
Authority for the Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources Development (2012) Annual Implementation
Report, available online at: http://www.fseromania.ro/images/doc2013/rai2012.pdf
Vincze, E. (ed.) (2011) The access of Roma women and men to decent job. Everyday life, policies and projects, Cluj:
Editura Fundaţiei Desire.
Voinea, L. (2010) Raport de avertizare timpurie: piaţa muncii, Biroul pentru observarea pieţei muncii şi a calităţii
locului de muncă, SOP HRD project implemented by the National Trade Union Block, Bucharest, available online
at:                                               http://www.bns.ro/wps/wcm/connect/6671933d-828a-4217-ae94-
55766c865b1f/Raport+de+avertizare+timpurie+privind+piata+muncii.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CACHEID=6671933
d-828a-4217-ae94-55766c865b1f
Voinea, L. and Albu, L. (2011) Economia informală şi impactul ei asupra pieţei muncii, SOP HRD project
implemented by the National Trade Union Block.
World Bank (2011) Functional Review. Labor and Social Protection Sector.
World Bank (2013) Europe 2020 Romania. Evidence-based Policies for Productivity, Employment and Skills
Enhancement.
World Bank. (2013). STEP Skills Measurement Study. Cross Country Report. June
World Bank and European Commission (2012) Reducing vulnerability and promoting the self-employment for Roma
in Eastern Europe through financial inclusion .
Zamfir, C. and Preda, M. (coord.) (2002) Romii în România, Bucharest: Editura Expert.
Zamfir, E. and Zamfir, C. (coord.) (1993) Ţiganii între ignorare şi îngrijorare, Bucharest: Editura Alternative.


Online sources:
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu
http://www.insse.ro




                                                        106
ANNEX


ANNEX TABLE 3-1: EVOLUTION OF ACTIVE INDIVIDUALS IN THE WORKING AGE POPULATION
BETWEEN 2008 AND 2012 (%)

                                                  2008   2009      2010   2011        2012

                          ROMA                     59     63        64     65          66

                          NON-ROMA                 64     57        57     59          55

Data: Authors' estimations on HBS 2008-2012. Notes: Active population determined as percentage of employed and
unemployed in total working age population. Inactive population determined as percentage of pupils/students,
pensioners, house persons and other dependents (15-64) in total working age population. Data on main occupational
status in the last month as declared by respondents.


Annex Table 3-2: Employment Rates, by Region and Gender, Roma and Non-Roma nearby
                                  Roma            Non-Roma
Bucharest            Men                 55              63
                     Women               58              38
Central Region       Men                 45              75
                     Women               14              36
Northern Region      Men                 43              50
                     Women               24              38
Southern Region      Men                 52              50
                     Women               15              35
Western Region       Men                 37              83
                     Women               15              25
Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011). Sample restricted to Roma subjects in the age group
25-64. Note: Northern region refers to Nord-Est and Nord-West; Southern Region refers to Sud, Sud-Est, and Sud-
West.
ANNEX TABLE 3-3: DISTRIBUTION OF ROMA AND NON-ROMA AGED 15-64 YEARS OLD, BY
GENDER, AGE GROUPS AND RESIDENCY
                                                                Roma      Non-Roma
                           Sample size        N                 6,064     230,377
                                              %                    100           100
                                              Urban                49            59
                           Area
                                              Rural                51            42
                           Gender             Men                  50            50


                                                         107
                                                   Women                50                  50
                              Age groups           15/24                28                  19
                                                   25/34                28                  23
                                                   35/44                21                  23
                                                   45/54                14                  18
                                                   55/64                 9                  17
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Note: Highlighted cells indicate visibly larger values.


ANNEX TABLE 3-4: DISTRIBUTION OF ROMA AND NON-ROMA AGED 15-64 YEARS OLD, BY
GENDER AND LEVEL OF EDUCATION
                                                           Roma                                  Non-Roma
                                            Total          Men       Women        Total            Men      Women
 N                                          6,064          3,032      3,032      230,377          112,265   118,112
 %                                           100           100         100            100          100       100
 Still in school                               7            7           6             12            12        12
 No formal schooling                          12            11          13            1             1         1
 Primary, grades 1-4                          32            30          33            3             2         3
 Middle, grades 5-8                           37            37          37            17            14        20
 Vocational/apprentice                         8            10          5             23            29        16
 High school, grades 9-12*                     5            5           5             29            27        31
 Post-secondary or foremen's school            0            0           0             4             4         4
 Tertiary, short and long term                 0            0           0             12            11        13
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: * High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10. Highlighted cells indicate
visibly larger values.




                                                              108
ANNEX TABLE 3-5: DISTRIBUTION OF ROMA AND NON-ROMA AGED 15-64 YEARS OLD, BY
RESIDENCY AND LEVEL OF EDUCATION
                                                         Roma                                Non-Roma
                                            Total        Urban       Rural         Total          Urban           Rural
 N                                          6,064        2,572       3,492        230,377         124,275     106,102
 %                                           100          100         100          100             100            100
 Still in school                              7            7           6            12              12             11
 No formal schooling                          12          11           13           1               0              1
 Primary, grades 1-4                          32          29           34           3               1              5
 Middle, grades 5-8                           37          35           39           17              8              29
 Vocational/apprentice                        8           11           5            23              20             26
 High school, grades 9-12*                    5            7           3            29              34             23
 Post-secondary or foremen's school           0            0           0            4               6              2
 Tertiary, short and long term                0            0           0            12              18             3
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: * High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10. Highlighted cells indicate
visibly larger values.


ANNEX TABLE 3-6: DISTRIBUTION OF ROMA AND NON-ROMA 15-64 YEARS OLD, BY
OCCUPATIONAL STATUS AND AGE GROUPS
                                                                                         NEETs

                                                          Still in                   Neither in
                    Age      Active        Inactive                  Retirement     employment            Total         Total
                                                          school
                   groups     (%)            (%)                        (%)             nor in             (%)           (N)
                                                           (%)
                                                                                    education or
                                                                                    training (%)
                                (A)       (B=B1+B2+B3)      (B1)           (B2)            (B3)           (A+B)

 Non-Roma          15/24        33            67            60              0               7               100        38,611
                   25/34        86            14               1            0               12              100        35,353
                   35/44        87            13               0            2               11              100        51,400
                   45/54        75            26               0            15              11              100        49,772
                   55/64        32            68               0            62              7               100        55,241
 Roma              15/24        48            52            23              0               29              100         1,556
                   25/34        65            36               0            0               36              100         1,350
                   35/44        67            33               0            1               32              100         1,353
                   45/54        60            40               0            10              30              100         1,035
                   55/64        39            61               0            35              26              100         770


                                                            109
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: Active population determined as percentage of employed and unemployed in total working
age population. Inactive population determined as percentage of pupils/students, pensioners, house persons and other dependents
(15-64) in total working age population. Data on main occupational status in the last 12 months as declared by respondents.
Highlighted cells indicate visibly larger values.
ANNEX FIGURE 3-1: PROPORTION OF ROMA AND NON-ROMA AGED 15-64 YEARS OLD, IN
HOUSEHOLDS WITH CHILDREN UNDER 15 YEARS (%)
 80
 60
 40
 20      42         21        70             61      21      5         27         6             51       53         11      1
  0
      Total (15-   15/24     25/34          35/44   45/54   55/64   Total (15-   15/24         25/34    35/44      45/54   55/64
         64)                                                           64)

                                            Age                                                          Age

                                     Roma                                                         Non-Roma
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012.
ANNEX TABLE 3-7: THE PROFILE OF EMPLOYEES
                                                                                 Non-Roma               Roma
 Sample size         N                                                                91,002                 723
                     %                                                                   100                 100
                     Urban                                                               74                  67
 Area
                     Rural                                                               26                  33
                     Men                                                                 55                  63
 Gender
                     Women                                                               45                  37
 Age groups          15/24                                                                7                  11
                     25/34                                                               31                  36
                     35/44                                                               32                  32
                     45/54                                                               22                  15
                     55/64                                                                8                   7
 Education           No formal schooling                                                  0                   1
                     Primary, grades 1-4                                                  0                  20
                     Middle, grades 5-8                                                   6                  43
                     Vocational/apprentice                                               24                  19
                     High school, grades 9-12**                                          40                  15
                     Post-secondary or foremen's school                                   6                   1
                     Tertiary, short and long term                                       23                   2
 Occupational        Managers, legislators                                                3                   *
 group               Professionals                                                       16                   *
                     Technicians and associate professionals                             11                   3


                                                                 110
                    Clerical support workers                                       7               1
                    Service and sales workers                                    17                18
                    Skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery workers             1               *
                    Craft and related trades workers                             22                17
                    Plant and machine operators, and assemblers                  15                13
                    Unskilled workers                                              8               46
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: *Less than 5 cases. ** High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10.
Highlighted cells indicate visibly larger values.
ANNEX TABLE 3-8: LOGISTIC REGRESSION PREDICTING "BEING EMPLOYEE                                                       OR
EMPLOYER" VERSUS "BEING SELF-EMPLOYED, UNEMPLOYED OR HOUSEWIFE"
                                                                                Odds Ratios
                                                            Model 1       Model 2        Model 3        Model 4
         Constant                                           0.19***       0.03***        0.02***        0.02***
         Non-Roma versus Roma                               5.3***        5.65***        1.89***        1.69***
         Urban versus Rural                                               5.1***         3.72***        2.5***
         Men versus Women                                                 1.92***        1.8***         1.8***
         Urban * Men                                                      0.87***        0.9***         0.91***
         25/34 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                           2.06***        2***           2.78***
         25/44 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                           2.47***        2.01***        2.86***
         45/54 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                           1.97***        1.97***        2.42***
         55/64 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                           1.14***        1.6***         2.42***
         No of children (<15 year olds)                                   0.85***        0.87***        0.87***
         No of children (<15 year olds) * Men                             1.12***        1.13***        1.13***
         Secondary school versus Primary school                                          2.29***        2.31***
         Vocational school versus Primary school                                         8.03***        6.04***
         High school versus Primary school                                               12.02***       6.63***
         Secondary school * Non Roma                                                                    1.03
         Vocational school * Non Roma                                                                   1.39**
         High school * Non Roma                                                                         1.89***
         25/34 year olds * Non Roma                                                                     0.71**
         25/44 year olds * Non Roma                                                                     0.69**
         45/54 year olds * Non Roma                                                                     0.81
         55/64 year olds * Non Roma                                                                     0.65**
         Urban * Roma                                                                                   1.5***
         Pseudo R^2                                         0.0116        0.1356         0.1947         0.195

                                                            111
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: The sample consists of individuals aged 15-64 who are or could be in the labor market, but
the individuals without education or with higher education were not included in the analysis because only a few Roma people
from the sample having no education or higher education were employed. High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-
10. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                            112
ANNEX FIGURE 3-2: PREDICTED PROBABILITY OF BEING EMPLOYEE OR EMPLOYER (%)

                            60


                            50


                            40


                            30


                            20


                            10

     RURAL
                             0
                                  15-24 years         25-34 years       35-44 years      45-54 years     55-64 years

         Roma Primary                   2                  5                 7                6                6
         Non-Roma Primary               4                  8                 8                7                6
         Roma Secondary                 5                 13                14               12               12
         Non-Roma Secondary             9                 16                16               16               13
         Roma Vocational               13                 29                30               26               26
         Non-Roma Vocational           26                 41                41               40               35
         Roma Highschool               14                 31                32               28               28
         Non-Roma Highschool           34                 50                51               50               45



                                 90

                                 80

                                 70

                                 60

                                 50
                                 40

                                 30

                                 20

                                 10
         URBAN
                                 0
                                      15-24 ye a rs     25-34 ye a rs    35-44 ye a rs   45-54 ye a rs   55-64 ye a rs

          Roma Pri ma ry                    6                  14             15              13              13
          Non-Roma Pri ma ry                13                 23             23              23              20
          Roma Se conda ry                  12                 28             29              25              25
          Non-Roma Se conda ry              27                 42             42              41              37
          Roma Voca ti ona l                27                 50             51              47              47
          Non-Roma Voca ti ona l            56                 72             72              72              67
          Roma Hi ghs chool                 29                 53             54              49              49
          Non-Roma Hi ghs chool             66                 79             79              79              75



Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: Probabilities predicted with the logistic regression model 4 shown in the previous table.
High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10.



                                                                    113
ANNEX TABLE 3-9: DISTRIBUTION OF ROMA AND NON-ROMA EMPLOYEES BY LEVEL OF
EDUCATION AND OCCUPATION IN THE MAIN JOB
                                                              Primary     Secondary     Vocational/    High
                                                               school       school      apprentice    school
         ROMA
         Total     -N                                            136         313              149      100
                   - %, of which:                                100         100              100      100
         Service and sales workers                               16           16              12       41
         Craft and related trades workers                        17           12              31       12
         Plant and machine operators, and assemblers              1           15              22       12
         Other skilled occupations                                0            2              6        18
         Elementary occupations (unskilled workers)              66           56              28       17
         NON-ROMA
         Total     -N                                            392        5,681         22,335      36,949
                   - % of which:                                 100         100              100      100
         Service and sales workers                               18           20              15       26
         Craft and related trades workers                        21           25              44       23
         Plant and machine operators, and assemblers              6           14              25       18
         Other skilled occupations                                2            3              5        27
         Elementary occupations (unskilled workers)              53           38              11        7
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Note: High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10.




                                                           114
ANNEX TABLE 3-10: LOGISTIC REGRESSION PREDICTING "SKILLED WORK" VERSUS
"ELEMENTARY OCCUPATIONS/UNSKILLED WORK" FOR EMPLOYEES
                                                                                Odds ratios

                                             Model 1    Model 2    Model 3      Model 4       Model 5    Model 6      Model 7

 Constant                                    1.12***    0.42***    0.18***      0.26***       0.26***    0.67*        0.9

 Non-Roma versus Roma                        6.90***    7.15***    2.38***      2.37***       2.17***    1.36**       0.96

 Urban versus Rural                                     2.17***    1.65***      1.47***       0.52***    0.27***      0.26***

 Men versus Women                                       1.36***    1.41***      0.81          0.79       0.78         0.79***

 25/34 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                 1.44***    1.47***      1.46***       1.46***    1.46***      1.46***

 25/34 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                 1.56***    1.3***       1.29***       1.3***     1.3***       1.29***

 45/54 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                 1.41***    1.41***      1.4***        1.41***    1.41***      1.4***

 55/64 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                 1.17***    1.52***      1.49***       1.5***     1.5***       1.5***
 Secondary school versus Primary school                            1.7***       1.54***       1.21       1.25         1.01

 Vocational school versus Primary school                           7.91***      5.16***       3.37***    3.57***      1.72*

 High school versus Primary school                                 14.63***     11.39***      5.64***    5.99***      3.41***

 Secondary school * Men                                                         1.15          1.08       1.1          1.09

 Vocational school * Men                                                        2.03***       1.98***    2.01***      2***

 High school * Men                                                              1.51**        1.55**     1.57**       1.56**

 Urban * Men                                                                    1.24***       1.31***    1.32***      1.32***

 Secondary school * Urban                                                                     1.76***    1.54**       1.62**

 Vocational school * Urban                                                                    2.62***    2.22***      2.35***

 High school * Urban                                                                          4.07***    3.43***      3.62***

 Urban * Non-Roma                                                                                        2.3***       2.22***

 Secondary school * Non-Roma                                                                                          1.31

 Vocational school * Non-Roma                                                                                         2.22***

 High school * Non-Roma                                                                                               1.87***

 Pseudo R^2                                  0.011      0.035      0.117        0.119         0.123      0.124        0.124

Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: The sample consists of all employees aged 15-64, but the individuals without education or
with higher education were not included in the analysis because only a few Roma people from the sample having no education or
higher education were employed. High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                                            115
ANNEX TABLE 3-11: DETERMINANTS OF WAGES FOR ROMA AND NON-ROMA EMPLOYEES:
OLS REGRESSION, DEPENDENT VARIABLE: LN(WAGE)
                                                 Model 1       Model 2      Model 3       Model 4      Model 5

 Constant                                        6.6***        6.25***      5.98***       6.03***      6.03***

 Roma versus Non-Roma                            -0.2***       -0.2***      -0.06***      -0.06***     0.05*

 Urban versus Rural                                            0.12***      0.09***       0.09***      0.09***

 Men versus Women                                              0.22***      0.23***       0.14***      0.15***

 25/34 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                        0.1***       0.1***        0.04***      0.04***

 25/34 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                        0.17***      0.16***       0.09***      0.09***

 45/54 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                        0.18***      0.18***       0.13***      0.13***

 55/64 year olds versus 16/24 year olds                        0.18***      0.21***       0.22***      0.22***

 Secondary school versus Primary school                                     0.11***       0.11***      0.11***
 Vocational school versus Primary school                                    0.24***       0.24***      0.24***

 High school versus Primary school                                          0.34***       0.34***      0.34***

 25/34 year olds * Men                                                                    0.1***       0.1***

 35/44 year olds * Men                                                                    0.12***      0.12***

 45/54 year olds * Men                                                                    0.08***      0.08***

 55/64 year olds * Men                                                                    0.002        0.001

 Urban * Rom                                                                                           -0.09***

 Men * Rom                                                                                             -0.09***

 R^2                                             0.003         0.114        0.150         0.152        0.152

Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: The sample consists of all employees aged 15-64, but the individuals without education or
with higher education were not included in the analysis because only a few Roma people from the sample having no education or
higher education were employed. High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                                            116
ANNEX TABLE 3-12: DETERMINANTS OF WAGES                                            FOR     ROMA         EMPLOYEES:           OLS
REGRESSION, DEPENDENT VARIABLE: LN(WAGE)
                                                              Model 1        Model 2        Model 3        Model 4

 Constant                                                     6.32***        5.85***        5.81***        5.84***

 "Craft and related trades workers" versus "Unskilled
                                                              0.19***        0.17***        0.13***        0.1**
 workers/Service and sales workers"

 "Plant and machine operators, and assemblers" versus
                                                              0.28***        0.29***        0.26***        0.19***
 "Unskilled workers/Service and sales workers"

 Urban versus Rural                                                          0.05*          0.04           0.01

 Men versus Women                                                            0.13***        0.12***        0.12***

 Age                                                                         0.02**         0.02**         0.02**

 Age^2                                                                       -0.0002*       -0.0002**      -0.0002**
 Primary school versus Secondary school                                                     -0.02          -0.03

 Vocational school versus Secondary school                                                  0.12***        0.11***

 High school versus Secondary school                                                        0.15***        0.16***

 "Craft and related trades workers" * Urban                                                                0.06

 *Plant and machine operators, and assemblers" * Urban                                                     0.17**

 R^2                                                          0.1053         0.1507         0.1869         0.1937

Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: The sample consists of Roma employees aged 15-64, with primary to high school
education, and with one of the four following occupations: 1. Service and sales workers, 2. Craft and related trades workers, 3.
Plant and machine operators, and assemblers, 4. Elementary occupations (unskilled workers). No of cases: 653. High school
includes also lower high school, grades 9-10. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                                               117
ANNEX TABLE 3-13: PREDICTED WAGES FOR ROMA EMPLOYEES BY GENDER (LEI, IN
DECEMBER 2012 PRICES)
                                                                                  Men         Women
 18 years old, Rural, Secondary school, Unskilled worker                           506           449
 18 years old, Rural, Vocational School, Unskilled worker                          567           504
 18 years old, Rural, High school, Unskilled worker                                591           525
 18 years old, Rural, Secondary school, Craft worker                               560           497
 18 years old, Rural, Secondary school, Plant/machine operator                     609           541
 18 years old, Urban, Secondary school, Unskilled worker                           509           452
 18 years old, Urban, Secondary school, Plant/machine operator                     729           647
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: Incomes predicted using the coefficients from model 4 shown in Annex Table 1-10. High
school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10.


ANNEX TABLE 3-14: PREDICTED INCOME FOR AN 18 YEARS OLD ROMA MAN BY LEVEL OF
EDUCATION, OCCUPATION GROUP AND RESIDENCY (LEI, IN DECEMBER 2012 PRICES)
                                              Primary         Secondary       Vocational        High
                                               school           school         school          school
 Unskilled Worker, rural                        492              506              567            591
 Craft Worker, rural                            544              560              628            654
 Plant/machine operator, rural                  592              609              683            712
 Plant/machine operator, urban                  708              729              817            851
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: Incomes predicted using the coefficients from model 4 shown in Annex Table 1-10. High
school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10.




                                                          118
ANNEX TABLE 3-15: PROFILE OF SELF-EMPLOYED IN NON-AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES
                                                                            Non-Roma         Roma
 Sample size       N                                                        10,160           934
                   %                                                        100              100
                   Urban                                                    41               56
 Area
                   Rural                                                    59               44
                   Men                                                      77               82
 Gender
                   Women                                                    23               18
 Age groups        15/24                                                    15               24
                   25/34                                                    33               30
                   35/44                                                    29               26
                   45/54                                                    17               15
                   55/64                                                    6                6
 Education         No formal schooling                                      0                13
                   Primary, grades 1-4                                      3                34
                   Middle, grades 5-8                                       25               41
                   Vocational/apprentice                                    35               8
                   High school, grades 9-12*                                31               3
                   Post-secondary or foremen's school                       1                0
                   Tertiary, short and long term                            5                0
 Occupational      Service and sales workers                                8                6
 group             Craft and related trades workers                         40               20
                   Unskilled workers                                        40               70
                   Other occupations                                        12               4
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: * High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10. Highlighted cells show visibly
larger values.




                                                            119
ANNEX TABLE 3-16: DISTRIBUTION OF NON-AGRICULTURAL SELF-EMPLOYED ROMA AND
NON-ROMA (15-64 YEARS), BY LEVEL OF EDUCATION AND MAIN OCCUPATION (%)

                                                                   Craft and
                                                  Unskilled                        Other skilled
                                                                 related trades                     Total (%)        Total (N)
                                                  workers                          occupations
                                                                    workers

 Roma              No formal school                   81              19                 0          100              117
                   Primary school                     78              14                 8          100              352
                   Secondary school                   68              21                 11         100              351
                   Vocational/apprentice              41              38                 22         100              72
                   High school**                      49              39                 12         100              41
                   Post-secondary or higher            *               *                 *                *          1
 Non-Roma          No formal school                   88               *                 *          100              44
                   Primary school                     68              22                 10         100              340
                   Secondary school                   55              34                 11         100              2,459
                   Vocational/apprentice              33              53                 14         100              3,582
                   High school**                      36              39                 25         100              3,139
                   Post-secondary or higher           15              14                 71         100              596
Data: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: * Less than 5 cases. ** High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10.


ANNEX TABLE 3-17: MONTHLY INCOMES OF THE NON-AGRICULTURAL SELF-EMPLOYED
ROMA AND NON-ROMA (15-64 YEARS)
                                                                                                     Craft and related
                                                                        Unskilled workers
                                                                                                      trades workers
                                                                        Non-                         Non-
                                                                                       Roma                          Roma
                                                                        Roma                         Roma
 Sample size                                                               3,962        659          4,162               193
 Percentage of individuals without non-agricultural incomes
                                                                            53           42            34                 8
 during the last month (%)
 Percentage of individuals with non-agricultural incomes
                                                                            47           58            66                92
 during the last month (%)
 Average income from non-agricultural independent activities
 for the persons with such incomes different from zero during              437          395           708                584
 the last month, (lei, in December 2012 real terms)
 Average income from non-agricultural independent activities
 for all self-employed in non-agriculture (including those
                                                                           207          229           467                536
 with zero incomes during the last month) (lei, in December
 2012 real terms)
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012.


                                                            120
ANNEX TABLE 3-18: OCCUPATIONAL STATUS, BY GENDER, AREA AND ETHNICITY
                                    Roma                             Non-Roma
                                    Gender           Area            Gender                 Area
                                    Men      Women   Urban   Rural   Men        Women       Urban   Rural
 Employee                           16       10      18      9       47         38          54      26
 Self-employed non-agriculture      26       6       18      14      8          2           4       7
 Self-employed agriculture          22       15      5       33      13         12          1       27
 Unemployed                         11       9       12      8       6          4           6       4
 Pensioner                          5        5       7       3       12         16          15      13
 Pupil, student                     7        6       7       6       12         12          12      11
 Housewife                          7        46      29      24      2          15          7       10
 Other (dependent, etc.)            5        4       5       4       2          1           1       2
 Total                              100      100     100     100     100        100         100     100
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012.


ANNEX TABLE 3-19: PROFILE OF SELF-EMPLOYED IN AGRICULTURE ROMA AND NON-
ROMA (15-64 YEARS OLD)
                                                                          Non-Roma      Roma
         Sample size       N                                              29,757        1,228
                           %                                              100           100
                           Urban                                          7             12
         Area
                           Rural                                          93            88
                           Men                                            51            60
         Gender
                           Women                                          49            40
         Age groups        15/24                                          13            25
                           25/34                                          25            30
                           35/44                                          28            21
                           45/54                                          21            15
                           55/64                                          14            7
         Education         No formal schooling                            1             14
                           Primary, grades 1-4                            7             39
                           Middle, grades 5-8                             45            40
                           Vocational/apprentice                          26            5


                                                     121
                            High school, grades 9-12*                                20                 3
                            Post-secondary or foremen's school                       0                  0
                            Tertiary, short and long term                            1                  0
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: * High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10. Highlighted cells show visibly
larger values.



ANNEX TABLE 3-20: MONTHLY INCOMES OF SELF-EMPLOYED IN AGRICULTURE ROMA
AND NON-ROMA (15-64 YEARS OLD)
                                                                                                 Non-
                                                                                                               Roma
                                                                                                 Roma
     Sample size                                                                                29,757         1,228
     Percentage of individuals without monetary agricultural incomes during the last
                                                                                                   62            49
     month (%)
     Percentage of individuals with monetary agricultural incomes during the last
                                                                                                   38            51
     month (%)
     Average monetary income from agricultural independent activities for the
     persons with such incomes different from zero during the last month, (lei, in                473           332
     December 2012 real terms)
     Average monetary income from agricultural independent activities for all self-
     employed in agriculture (including those with zero incomes during the last                   179           171
     month) (lei, in December 2012 real terms)
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012.


ANNEX TABLE 3-21: ESTIMATES OF MONTHLY CONSUMPTION FROM OWN HOUSEHOLD
(HH) (LEI, IN DECEMBER 2012 PRICES)
                                                                         Average per HH          Average per capita
                                                                          HH                      HH
                                                                        without       HH        without
                                                                         Roma        Roma        Roma        HH Roma
                                                                        members     members     members      members

           Average value for HHs without members working as self-
                                                                           151           143       61            40
           employed in agriculture

           Average value for HHs with one member working as self-
 Urban                                                                     359           224       112           59
           employed in agriculture

           Average value for HHs with two or more members
                                                                           511           415       124           88
           working as self-employed in agriculture

           Average value for HHs without members working as self-
                                                                           267           206       119           62
           employed in agriculture
 Rural
           Average value for HHs with one member working as self-
                                                                           367           258       126           76
           employed in agriculture


                                                            122
           Average value for HHs with two or more members
                                                                            486         288           124           63
           working as self-employed in agriculture

Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012.


ANNEX TABLE 3-22: PROFILE OF THE INDIVIDUALS NEITHER IN EMPLOYMENT NOR IN
EDUCATION OR TRAINING (NEET)
                                               Unemployed             House persons                   NEETs
                                             Non-                    Non-                     Non-
                                                         Roma                     Roma                      Roma
                                             Roma                    Roma                     Roma
 Sample size        -N                       10,043        594       18,737       1,566       28,780        2,160
                    -%                         100         100        100         100            100        100
 Urban                                         71          59          50          54            58           55
 Rural                                         29          41          50          47            42           45
 Men                                           61          56          13          13            31           25
 Women                                         39          44          87          87            69           75
 Age groups
 15/24                                         25          37          13          23            17           27
 25/34                                         30          29          28          34            29           33
 35/44                                         24          21          26          22            25           22
 45/54                                         16           9          22          13            19           12
 55/64                                          5           4          12           8            10           6
 Education
 No formal schooling                            1          11           1          17            1            15
 Primary, grades 1-4                            3          30           5          39            4            36
 Middle, grades 5-8                            15          44          32          36            25           39
 Vocational/apprentice                         28          10          23           5            25           6
 High school, grades 9-12*                     40           5          35           3            36           4
 Post-secondary or foremen's school             3           0           1           0            2            0
 Tertiary, short and long term                 12           0           4           0            7            0
Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: * High school includes also lower high school, grades 9-10.




                                                           123
ANNEX TABLE 3-23: LATENT CLASS ANALYSIS ON THE ROMA PEOPLE NEITHER IN EMPLOYMENT NOR IN EDUCATION OR
TRAINING (NEET)
                                                  Cluster 1        Cluster 2         Cluster 3      Cluster 4          Cluster 5         Cluster 6       Cluster 7

                                                   Women,           Women,         Uneducated         Young         Urban Roma,                             Old
                                                   under 45        under 45       older Roma,      individuals,      professional      Men, aged 25-    individuals,
                                                  years old,       years old,        without         without           training,         44 years,         without
                                                with children,   with children,   children, not   children, able        without        looking for a      children,
                                                  not able to    looking for a    looking for a      to start      children, able to        job        looking for a
                                                start working         job              job           working        start working                            job

            Cluster Size (%)                         40                7                16             14                 4                 13              7

            15/24                                    22               20                0              95                 7                 26              0

            25/34                                    49               49                4               5                 36                50              7

Age         35/44                                    25               26                24              0                 41                21              30

            45/54                                     4                4                42              0                 14                3               40

            55/64                                     0                0                30              0                 2                 0               22

            Looking for a job& could start
                                                      1               71                1              47                 42                74              67
            working within 15 days

Looking     Non looking for a job, but could
                                                      5               16                4              21                 21                15              17
for a job   start working without 15 days

            Non looking for a job and could
                                                     95               13                95             32                 37                11              15
            not start working without 15 days

            Men                                       0                0                8              34                 49                97              60
Gender &
            Women without children<15                11                9                90             65                 51                3               40
children
            Women with children<15                   89               91                2               0                 0                 0               0

Area        Urban                                    47               67                58             60                100                53              53

            Rural                                    53               33                42             40                 0                 47              47

Education   No formal schooling                      15                9                27              8                 0                 12              18


                                                                               124
               Primary, grades 1-4                       38               33               43     31   2    36   40

               Middle, grades 5-8                        39               46               27     47   28   43   36

               Vocational/apprentice                      7               12                3     13   70   9    6

Source: NIS, HBS 2008-2012. Notes: Cluster sizes are percentages in total Roma NEETs (N=2,074).




                                                                                  125
                                 4    SOCIAL PROTECTION
In addition to Employment, social protection is a second, crucial component of the Earning
Opportunities for Families dimension. This chapter examines the extent to which social
protection contributes to poverty alleviation in Roma communities. It looks into the coverage of
major social insurance and social assistance programs, targeting accuracy and the share of
safety nets benefits accruing to the Roma, especially the poorest of the Roma. The poverty
reduction impact of the various safety net programs is also investigated, as well as their impact
on employment and health. Lastly, institutional and implementation aspects are discussed. The
main recommendation with regard to social protection is to facilitate transitions to employment
through adequate design of benefits.
Despite widespread access to safety net programs, Roma households remain largely below
the poverty line (see Figure 4-1). Nine out of ten Roma households have access to at least one
social protection program in Romania, but three out of five Roma households still remain in the
poorest quintile137 of the income distribution (HBS 2009 to 2012). While the correlation between
high levels of poverty and high participation of the Roma in social protection programs shows
that safety net programs are reaching the poorest, it raises the question of the efficiency of social
protection in mitigating poverty in Roma households.
FIGURE 4-1: POVERTY RATES AND ACCESS TO SAFETY NETS - 2009/2012

                         90

                         85

                         80

                         75

                         70
                                  2009         2010          2011            2012
                                         Share of Roma in poorest quintile
                                         SP access (all Roma)

                                                  Source: HBS 2009 through 2012.



4.1 PANORAMA OF THE SOCIAL PROTECTION SYSTEM
As most countries in Eastern Europe, Romania operates an extensive Social Protection (SP)
system, comprising (i) a contributory Social Insurance (SI) component, (ii) contributory
labor market programs, and (iii) noncontributory Social Assistance (SA) benefits. SI
benefits refer to pensions, maternity and sick leave, disability and survivor insurance. Labor


137
   Using Romania’s Household Budget Survey from 2009 to 2012, and using EUROSTAT’s relative poverty line
methodology (60 percent of the equivalized median income), the population below the poverty line corresponds
exactly to the poorest quintile.
                                                   126
market programs include unemployment insurance and redundancy payments. SA benefits refer
to programs mostly targeted at low-income and vulnerable households: Guaranteed Minimum
Income (GMI), family allowance (FA), child raising benefit, heating benefits, social pensions,
survivor and veterans privileges, and disability allowance; as well as universal child benefit
(SCA) and scholarships. 84 percent of the population in Romania has access to social protection,
with 45 percent of the households receiving SI benefits, 2 percent receiving labor market
transfers, and 62 percent receiving SA benefits138 (HBS 2012). Because in Romania contributory
pensions constitute a key income transfer for the most vulnerable (one fifth of household income
in Roma communities), the analysis in this chapter includes not only social safety nets but also
social insurance.
TABLE 6: SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMS IN ROMANIA

              Social Insurance            Labor             Market     Social Assistance
                                          Programs
 Programs     Pension                     Unemployment benefit         Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI)
              Maternity leave             Redundancy payments          State Child Allowance (SCA)
              Sick leave                                               Family allowance (FA)
              Disability insurance                                     Child raising benefit
              Survivor insurance                                       Heating benefits
                                                                       Social pension
                                                                       Survivor and veterans privileges
                                                                       Disability allowance
                                                                       Scholarships
 Coverage     45 percent                  2 percent                    62 percent
 Source: HBS 2012. Note: Coverage refers to national coverage (Roma and non-Roma households).
Access to social protection among the Roma in Romania is high: nine out of ten Roma
households report one or more social protection transfers139. These numbers are driven up by
access to social assistance: 75 to 85 percent of Roma families are beneficiaries of social safety
nets (compact neighborhoods from RRS and self-declared Roma from HBS, respectively). Both
figures – SP and SA140 – are high and comparable to access rates in the Czech Republic,
Hungary and Slovakia (see Figure 4-2).




138
    The total of these three shares is larger than 84 because some households receive several types of benefits at the
same time.
139
    Access to all lines of social protection programs is extremely similar for segregated and non-segregated
settlements (UNDP/WB/EC regional Roma survey, 2011), so we only present statistics for the Roma as a whole.
140
    Social Assistance includes universal child benefit and any other social assistance transfers (maternity leave,
poverty and local assistance benefits, and stipends and scholarships), while Social Protection includes SA,
contributory pension, and unemployment benefits.
                                                        127
Figure 4-2: Main SP programs received by the Roma across countries

        100     96            93   84       89               88
                     76                          76                75   79
         80                                                                            67
         60                                                                   53             49
         40
         20
          0
                     HU             SK           CZ               RO         BG             MK
              Social Protection - Roma
              Social Protection - non-Roma neighbors
              Social Assistance - Roma
              Social Assistance - non-Roma neighbors                              Source: RRS 2011.



While Roma and neighboring non-Roma households display similar access to social protection
as a whole (nine households out of ten), they display major differences in access to social
insurance and social assistance (see Figure 4-3). Roma households are slightly more likely (6.1
percent) to receive social protection than their non-Roma neighbors (see Table 7 in the
Annexes). Roma households show more limited access to social insurance programs, but larger
access to social assistance programs. Whereas one in three (28 percent) Roma households living
in compact neighborhoods has access to pension benefits, this figure reaches two thirds (66
percent) of neighboring non-Roma families. On the other hand, three in every four Roma
households has access to social assistance, and only one third (35 percent) of neighboring non-
Roma households do so (RRS 2011). While numbers are slightly different in HBS, the picture
remains similar: self-declared Roma households are half as likely to receive social insurance as
the rest of the Romanian population (21 versus 46 percent), and the opposite picture appears for
social assistance, with respective coverage of 84 and 61 percent (HBS 2012).




                                                       128
FIGURE 4-3: COVERAGE OF SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMS

       SOCIAL PROTECTION                                    SOCIAL PROTECTION
        SOCIAL INSURANCE                                     SOCIAL INSURANCE
          UNEMPLOYMENT                                         UNEMPLOYMENT
        SOCIAL ASSISTANCE                                    SOCIAL ASSISTANCE
      State Child Allowance                                State Child Allowance
          Other SA benefits                                     Family allowance
                                                                     Scholarships
                                                                Disability benefit
                                                                             GMI
                                                             Child raising benefit
                                                                  Heating benefit
                                            Roma              In-kind SA benefits                     Roma
                                            non-Roma               REMITTANCES                        non-Roma
             REMITTANCES
                                                                                     0   20   40     60   80   100
                              0   20   40   60   80 100
                                       Source: RRS 2011.                                           Source: HBS 2012.

The State Child Allowance (SCA), contributory pensions, and the Guaranteed Minimum
Income (GMI)141 are the three safety net programs with the highest coverage of Roma
households. Two out of three Roma households receive the State Child Allowance (69 percent
in compact neighborhoods from RRS and 61 percent in self-declared Roma households from
HBS). One in every four Roma households receives contributory pension benefits (28 percent in
compact neighborhoods from RRS and 21 percent in self-declared Roma households from
HBS).142 Eventually, GMI records the third largest coverage of Roma households, with 23
percent of the households143 (HBS 2012).

Roma households receiving social protection programs are rather large families, with low
education, and out-of-the-labor-force household heads (see Figure 4-4 and Table 8 in the
Annexes). The majority of Roma households receiving SP programs count 1 or 2 children and at
least two adults (42 percent), closely followed by families with 3 and more children (33 percent).
The respective shares of these two groups rise as we consider only Roma households receiving
social assistance programs (47 and 38 percent). Given that the State Child Allowance is the
program with the largest coverage, these results come as no surprise. In addition, most household
heads of beneficiary families are not working, with labor-force participation rates about 40


141
    The SCA is a universal cash transfer to all children under 18 (or older if still in school), with differentiated
benefit levels for all children under 2 years old, and children with disability. The GMI is a monthly cash transfer that
tops up family income to a GMI threshold. Adult family members who can work are subject to a work requirement
and an activation requirement.
142
    Old-age allowance (non-contributory pension) has a very low coverage in Romania, both among non-Roma and
Roma households (less than 0.2 percent of all households).
143
    RRS does not not permit to identify the coverage of GMI in compact neighborhoods as it lumps all SA programs
but the SCA together.
                                                          129
percent. Two thirds of the household head beneficiaries have no education (see Figure 4-4 and
Table 8 in the Annexes).

FIGURE 4-4: HOUSEHOLD STRUCTURE OF SOCIAL PROTECTION BENEFICIARIES – ROMA FAMILIES

                  Social Protection                                Social Assistance
                    3+                                                     Single
                            Single                                          3% Single
                                                                     3+
                  adults,    4% Single
                    3+             parent                          adults,       parent 2 adults,
                 children           7% 2 adults,                     3+           8% no child
                   15%                    no child                children
                                                                                           2%
                                            8%                      17%
               3+                                                                    2 adults,
             adults,                                           3+
                                   2 adults,                                            1-2
               1-2                                           adults,
                                      1-2                                            children
            children                                           1-2
                                   children                                            27%
              19%                                           children
              3+       2 adults,     23%                      20%        2 adults,
                                                              3+
           adults,        3+                                                3+
                                                            adults,
          no child     children                                          children
                                                           no child
             6%          18%                                               21%
                                                              2%
                                                                             Source: RRS 2011.

Educational outcomes of Roma households are quite low (see Chapter 2 on education), and
Romania’s Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programs have not proven effective so far at
improving educational outcomes of the Roma . CCTs are considered to be one of the most
effective ways of improving educational outcomes, and represent in many developing countries a
substantial share of the safety nets mix. In Romania, education-related social protection transfers
are limited, and CCT programs few and far between. Introducing its first Conditional Cash
Transfer related to education in 1993, Romania later abandoned this policy as unconstitutional in
2007. Not only is there little evidence to suggest that Romania’s first attempt at a CCT brought
positive change in the educational outcomes of Roma, but the policy also seems to have
negatively affected the economic well-being of some segments of the country’s Roma
population. On the other hand, Money for High School – a CCT for secondary education
introduced in 2004 – appears to exhibit potential to exert a positive effect on Roma’s (and
others’) educational outcomes, but only to the extent that its current shortcomings are addressed
adequately from both demand and supply sides.




                                                     130
TABLE 7: EDUCATION AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY OF SOCIAL PROTECTION BENEFICIARIES

                                                                           SP                     SA only
Economic activity of household head
Employed                                                                  36.3                      41.3
Unemployed                                                                12.0                      12.9
Out of labor force                                                        51.7                      45.9
Education of household head
None                                                                      63.1                      62.4
Primary                                                                   28.5                      29.3
Secondary                                                                  8.1                       7.9
Tertiary                                                                   0.3                       0.4
                                                                                              Source: RRS 2011.
4.2 COVERAGE, TRANSFER AMOUNTS AND TARGETING EFFICIENCY
Social insurance and non-targeted family policy programs display good coverage within the
Roma community. The State Child Allowance displays extremely good coverage of its potential
beneficiaries: 95 percent of Roma households with children under the age of 2 are beneficiaries,
as well as 90 percent of those with children under the age of 18. This take-up is slightly higher
than in non-Roma neighboring households (92 and 89 respectively). Similarly, three out of four
(74 percent) Roma households with at least one individual beyond compulsory retirement age144
receive contributory pension benefits. This is however much lower than in nearby non-Roma
households, where the proportion reaches 97 percent. This highlights a major gap in the social
pension program, which is meant to target low-income pensioners and should cover the
difference between their current pension level and a guaranteed minimum: there are no recipients
of the social pension145 in the sampled Roma households, even though 15 percent of Roma
households count at least one person in age of retiring.146

On the other hand and despite lower coverage of Roma households, means-tested programs
for low-income families cover Roma households much better than non-Roma (HBS 2012).
The Guaranteed Minimum Income, which tops poor families’ income up to a given threshold,
covers about two fifth of Roma households in the poorest quintile (3 percent of non-Roma). The
family allowance, a monthly cash transfer to families with children in the poorest three deciles,
reaches 10 percent of the Roma in the poorest quintile, but less than 2 percent of non-Roma


144
    Retirement age individuals are men over 64 and women over 59, as per the Romanian legislation in 2012.
145
    Pension systems are made of two components: (i) contributory pension schemes – employees contributing a share
of their income while working receive pension proportional to their contributions, and (ii) means-tested non-
contributory pension schemes – also called social or old-age pension – targeted at poor individuals. Data come from
HBS 2012.
146
    Ibid. footnote 9.
                                                       131
households from the bottom 20 percent of the income distribution. Similarly, the heating benefit
– a seasonal cash transfer program targeted at households in the poorest half of the population –
reaches about 8 percent of the Roma, compared to 3 percent of non-Roma households.

The means-tested system scores indeed better on coverage of the poorest Roma and on
benefits’ incidence. 63 percent of the poorest Roma quintile is covered by the GMI, 16 percent
benefit from the family allowance and 11 percent receive the heating benefit. Over half of the
GMI budget allocation going to the Roma is received by the poorest quintile, and similarly 39
percent of the family allowance budget and 25 percent of the heating benefit budget for Roma
households accrue to the poorest quintile (see Figure 4-5). These findings are corroborated by the
share of means-tested transfers received by the Roma which is larger than from programs not
specifically targeted at low-income groups: while the Roma represent 9 percent of Romania’s
poorest income quintile, they receive only 4.5 percent of the total SA envelope, and 6.7 percent
of means-tested programs’ budget.
FIGURE 4-2 : BENEFITS’ INCIDENC E AMONG ROMA HOUSEHOLDS

               60                       Universal child allowance
               50                       Family allowance
                                        Guaranteed Minimum Income
               40                       Heating benefit
               30
               20
               10
                0
                       Poorest           Q2              Q3              Q4            Richest

              Source: HBS 2012. Note: Benefits’ incidence is the transfer amount received by each
                     quintile as a share of total transfers received by the population. Quintiles are
                                                                     constructed before SP transfers.

4.3 SAFETY NET TRANSFERS AND INCOME DECOMPOSITION
Romania’s Roma derive a relatively large share of their total income from employment
when compared to other Eastern European countries (see Figure 4-6). With Bulgaria and
Macedonia, Romania’s Roma are the only households where income from employment
represents over half of total household income. On the other hand, employment represents 44
percent of income for Roma families in the Czech Republic, 33 percent in Hungary and only 26
percent in Slovakia. As in most other countries, the share of income stemming from contributory
pensions and unemployment insurance is about one fifth of the total income. Finally, the child
benefits represent a small share of household income (11 percent), as in Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, and Macedonia. It is much lower when compared to Hungary and Slovakia –
respectively 19 and 32 percent.

Social insurance and social assistance contribute to the same extent to household income in
Roma families (see Figure 4-7). Both Roma and non-Roma households rely heavily on social

                                                     132
protection as a whole: only just over half of total household income comes from employment
activities. Social assistance transfers represent 20 percent of income in the case of Roma
households, out of which half – or about €20 per month per household – comes from the State
Child Allowance. SCA transfers only make up for 2 percent of non-Roma neighboring
households’ income. Social insurance transfers also represent 20 percent of household income in
Roma families, with contributory pensions amounting to about €40 per month. This is much
lower than non-Roma households, where the same share reaches 42 percent, and transfers
amount to €146.

FIGURE 4-3: INCOME SOURCE - CROSS-COUNTRY COMPARISON


                Romania                                Bulgaria                    Czech Republic
                                                                                          1%
                                                5%
                     5%                                    7%
              8%
                                                                               24%
                                         2%     8%
        11%                                                                                         44%
   1%
                                 55%                                          7%
                                               20%                58%
          20%                                                                   10%
                                                                                          14%



                   Hungary                            Macedonia                          Slovakia
                     0%                                                                    0%
                                                            6%
          21%                                        13%
                                         3%                                        25%           26%
                                33%
                                         1%

        19%                                     18%               59%                                 9%

                                                                                    32%          8%
                9%        18%


    Employment                                Labour: unemployment benefits   SA benefits (other than SCA)
    Social Insurance: pension benefits        State Child Allowance (SCA)     Remittances
                                                                                           Source: RRS 2011.




                                                           133
FIGURE 4-4: INCOME DECOMPOSITION

                              Roma                                 non-Roma
                                                                     2% 1%
                            5%                                      2%
                       8%                                         1%

                 11%

                 1%           €188                                      €349
                                           55%              42%                    52%

                   20%



                 Employment                                  State Child Allowance (SCA)
                 Social Insurance: pension benefits          SA benefits (other than SCA)
                 Labour: unemployment benefits               Remittances
                                                                         Source: RRS 2011.

The income impact of social protection programs is progressive among Roma households:
low-income Roma households depend on social assistance for almost all of their income,
while safety nets constitute a small share of richer Roma families’ income (see Figure 4-8).
Among Roma households, dependency on social protection is very regressive with income, as is
social assistance. On the other hand, the share of household income coming from social
insurance increases steadily with household income and reaches 25 percent in the richest Roma
income quintile. Among non-Roma households nearby, the share of income obtained from social
transfers is rather uniform across quintiles, with very limited reliance on social assistance.




                                                      134
FIGURE 4-5: DEPENDENCY ON SOCIAL PROTECTION BY INCOME QUINTILES


                                    0.9                                                    0.9
 Share of household income coming


                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                                    0.7                                                    0.7
                                    0.6                                                    0.6
           from SA and SI




                                    0.5                                                    0.5
                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                                    0.3
                                                                                           0.3
                                    0.2
                                                                                           0.2
                                    0.1
                                                                                           0.1
                                      0
                                          Poorest    Q2      Q3       Q4    Richest         0
                                                                                                 Poorest   Q2     Q3    Q4   Richest
                                                    Roma Income Quintiles
                                                                                                      Non-Roma Income Quintiles
                                                                  Social Insurance
                                                                                                    Social Assistance
                                                                  (pensions)
 Source: RRS 2011.
 Income quintiles were constructed separately for Roma and non-Roma populations.
4.4 IMPACT OF SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMS
Social protection contributes to a limited extent to poverty reduction among Roma
households. Simulations suggest that safety net transfers reduce the proportion of Roma
households in the bottom quintile of the income distribution by 8.6 percentage points (HBS
2012). In the absence of SP transfers, 82 percent of the Roma would be in the bottom quintile (up
from 73.2 percent). Social insurance (contributory pensions) contributes most to poverty
reduction (6.2 percentage points) followed by social assistance (3.5 percentage points out of
which 1.4 percentage points are the State Child Allowance). Transfer amounts are thus
inadequate to participate significantly in a poverty reduction effort.

However, there is field evidence that the GMI pays a dual role as last resort income and
health insurance, thus reducing vulnerability among Roma households. Due to the
restrictive nature of health insurance benefits in Romania, the GMI in fact assumes a dual role: in
addition to providing last resort social assistance to vulnerable and chronically poor families, it
also serves as a de facto health insurance: unemployed individuals who are either not initially
eligible for health insurance, or do not have the means to subscribe on their own to health
coverage, apply to the GMI to benefit from the health insurance component.

In the aftermath of the 2008 crisis, Romania’s Social Protection system had little room to
expand its coverage of the poorest Roma (Figure 4-9). The proportion of Roma households in
the poorest quintile covered by at last one SP program has remained stable over time, at over 95
percent. The share of households covered by social insurance (pensions) rose slightly in the
aftermath of the crisis, when the proportion of households covered by social assistance decreased
by 8 percentage points. However, remittances started playing an increasing role as the share of
Roma households receiving remittances in the poorest quintile rose from 9 to 16%.
                                                                                     135
FIGURE 4-6: SOCIAL PROTECTION COVERAGE 2009-2012 – ROMA HOUSEHOLDS IN POOREST
QUINTILE



                 1.00

                 0.80

                 0.60

                 0.40

                 0.20

                 0.00
                                  2009                 2010                  2011                  2012

                     Social Protection                       Social Insurance
                     Labout Market Programs                  Social Assistance
                     Remittances
Source: HBS 2012.
Similarly, the income of the poorest Roma was quite resilient to the 2008 crisis. The share of
income coming from work activities remained stable at about one fourth to one third of total
household income between 2009 and 2012. In addition, total household income did not shrink
but steadily increased from 2009 to 2012 in real January 2011 terms (see Figure 4-10).
FIGURE 4-7: INCOME DECOMPOSITION 2009-2012 – ROMA HOUSEHOLDS IN POOREST QUINTILE

              2009                              2010                            2011                           2012

                2%                               2%                             3%                             3%
          11%                             13%                              9%                            11%
                                                       24%
                         30%                                                            33%                               34%
                                                                   20%
    22%       €135                  24%
                                            €160                            €160                   24%
                                                                                                               €180
                                                                      2%
       2%                                              33%
                  33%                     4%                                    33%                      3%         25%


     Employment                     Labour: unemployment
                                                                    SA benefits (other than SCA)
                                    benefits
     Social Insurance (pension)     State Child Allowance (SCA)     Remittances

Source: HBS 2012.

Finally, there is limited evidence on the impact of the GMI on Roma’s employment pattern.
Firstly, a Roma household in which the household head is employed is only 5 percent less likely
to depend on social assistance than a Roma household where the household head has no job,
keeping other background characteristics the same. This finding is based on regression estimates
that explore the correlation between social assistance and household background characteristics,
including employment. As shown in the Annex, the association is much weaker than among non-
                                               136
Roma neighbors, for which the chance of depending on social assistance decreases by 13 percent
if the household head is employed. Secondly, the average GMI transfer received by Roma
households in the poorest quintile is €15 per capita, or 17 percent of the maximum per capita
income for this income group, which should not deter recipients from finding a job on the labor
market.147 Thirdly, the poorest households, which are also more likely to hold informal jobs,
have fewer disincentives to work, as their total income is difficult to verify: Romania’s GMI is a
top up income, which takes into account household income from work and social transfers to
verify eligibility and set the transfer amount. Because most Roma households, as other non-
Roma poor households, are employed in the informal sector, the informal income declared to
social welfare is difficult to verify,and despite asset checks, vulnerable households are likely to
declare lower income levels than what they really are to qualify for the GMI, while continuing to
work.


4.5 INSTITUTIONS AND IMP LEMENTATION
Whereas the Romanian social protection system is governed by a complex and
comprehensive package148 of laws, there is no explicit legislative provision to regulate the
targeting based on ethnic considerations. Nevertheless, the Roma are included among the most
vulnerable groups social protection measures provide for; therefore, the analysis will tackle the
functioning of the system as a whole, from the perspective of definitions, duties and
responsibilities, regulatory and interagency mechanisms, and resources allocated to its
functioning. Most of the central institutions were created during the EU pre-accession process,
often following considerable pressure from the EC. They are also the most developed, regulated
and best financed ones, whereas the provision of services at local levels did not benefit from the
EC’s attention as its development was considered to be a a „natural” next step of the reform
process.

The decentralization process of the social protection system remains vague, with
increasingly diluted roles, responsibilities and accountability, as one moves from central to
local agencies.149 With more impact on institutional construction, the demarcation of
organization and operating rules governing the institutions follows the same trend: any central
institution will have a well-defined organizational chart, with clear roles and responsibilities,
including the quality of human resources, whereas the functioning of local ones relies on vague
provisions for the organizational charts, a mixture of unclear roles and responsibilities, and poor
quality of human resources.



147
    This remains slightly below 20 percent, which is the rule of thumb for work disincentives for safety net transfers.
148
    From social assistance framework to social benefits and services provision, from public to private, from programs
to policies, from quality standards and accreditation to social inspection, all in favor of a variety of beneficiaries, the
package is accessible at http://www.mmuncii.ro/j3/index.php/ro/legislatie/protectie-sociala
149
    Roma specific (National Agency for Roma, regional offices, county and local professionals) and non-Roma
social protection institutions (Ministry of Labor, Family, Social Protection and Elderly, Agencies and Central
Authorities, County Agencies, particularly for payment of social benefits, Local councils and professionals at local
level).
                                                           137
      o   From a horizontal view, the inter-institutional cooperation relies mainly on the
          goodwill of stakeholders at each level of decentralization. Therefore, cooperation
          cannot be properly achieved, not because of the segregation of duties and
          responsibilities, but because of the lack of harmonizing capacity and the lack of
          institutional linkages explicitly regulated by law.

      o   From a vertical perspective, whereas the de-concentration maintains the
          hierarchy relationships and thereby inter-institutional relations work well
          between central and county levels, the decentralization principles are different:
          county and local authorities are less responsible and accountable in front of central
          institutions, with the exception of financing. Hence, local authorities are given the
          money to invest in social protection, but are not monitored on their effectiveness in
          accomplishing adequate targeting and coverage.

      o   Moreover, the number of institutions is disproportionately distributed between
          decentralization levels: for each social protection area there is a central and a county
          institution, whereas at local level an institution alone deals with all the areas. As real
          leverages between decentralization levels are missing, this could once again make
          local social policy implementation impossible. Normally, monitoring, evaluation and
          control should act as leverages, but these systems and procedures are in fact deficient.

      o   Additional burdens come from the difficulty in managing the authority and the
          decision making processes, which, all combined, hamper the capacity to act properly
          at almost any local level of the social protection system.

On the organizational side, stakeholders’ duties and responsibilities remains complex due
to a limited M&E system, lack of accountability and heterogeneous structures. Monitoring
appears to be something everybody is aware of and is engaged in, but a closer look shows key
risks: in a scheme where little accountability is associated with the process, monitoring becomes
an intention rather than a coherent process with the ability to inform policy making in a relevant
manner. Central authorities monitor quality standards, principles and rights stipulated by law as
well as variations in budgets, number of social benefits’ recipients or types of ser vices they
receive, but this mechanism is affected by two factors: the lack of strategic and coherent data
collection and reporting mechanisms at lower levels, and missing institutional linkages between
the levels of decentralization.

      o   First, local and county councils must set up local needs-adjusted services. Thus far, no
          system of control was set up to reward best practices or to sanction failure.

      o   Second, it is impossible to set up a uniform articulated system, since there are no
          mandatory organizational charts to ensure the required number of services in line with
          legal provisions.




                                               138
       o     Third, the inspection role at the levels of both local decision-makers and specialized
             entities (e.g. social inspection) is misunderstood or underestimated: the same county
             agency150 is in charge of both delivering social benefits and carrying out the social
             inspection measures. The overlapping of the two functions makes the system
             vulnerable from the perspective of transparency and accountability, mainly in a
             context where vertical and horizontal lines of authority are often blurred.
             Accountability remains to be an informal feature or attribute of institutions as long as
             there is no regulatory mechanism of positive and negative sanctions.

Local level stakeholders need to ensure appropriate quality of services despite limited
resources, both material and financial. There are no clear regulating mechanisms between the
levels of decentralization,151 nor appropriate mechanisms for funds allocation. The legislation,
and in particular the framework law on decentralization, is hardly regulating the financing
mechanisms. It proposes only general principles and makes references to the law on local public
finances and annual budget, which continues to remain very generic. The central and county
structures’ functioning relies152 on a detailed description of resources they use and sources they
access in implementing their programs, whereas the local stakeholders are given only some
guidelines153 that barely offer a real answer to the questions “from where?” and “how much?” In
addition, financial sources are often unavailable154. As for the effective provision of social
protection measures for the vulnerable, particularly the Roma, the system allocates the necessary
funds at central and county level, but apparently ‘forgets’ a key element: its own functioning
relies on an entire system of stakeholders and services at the community level, which has unclear
and uncertain allocated funds.

The number of roles assigned to local staff is an everyday burden. There are clear definitions
of stakeholders at central, county and local levels.155 All appears to be a complex set of
institutions, where – theoretically – the strategic functions (e.g. social policies) and the
operational functions (e.g. implementation, monitoring) are fulfilled by articulated institutions at
each level of decentralization. However, a closer look indicates that as the level of
decentralization becomes lower, the number of institutions decreases while the number of roles
increases, which creates tremendous pressure on local professionals. Local-level professionals
carry a heavy burden of roles and responsibilities on their shoulders due to the multitude of legal



150
    County Agency for payments of social benefits and social inspection – de-concentrated stakeholder in charge of
provision of all social benefits, with the exception of those for disabled
151
    The current analysis relies on the Law 195 / 25.05.2006 of decentralization which establishes its key principles.
In 2013 the Government is expected to take responsibility over the Parliament regarding the decentralization
process.
152
    Government Decision 131 / 15.03.2012 on the functioning of National Agency for payment of social benefits and
social inspection, including its county bodies.
153
    All relies on the provisions of the law on decentralization.
154
    All the laws stipulate a large list of financing mechanisms (programs, local financing circuits, etc.) but in reality
the state budget is the most reliable source. Its availability, together with the appropriate control mechanism appears
to be a key guarantee of success for any policy, particularly within the SP system.
155
    Law 292 / 20.12.2011 on Social Assistance Framework.
                                                          139
provisions: in rural areas, a single person carries out all the tasks. Cojocaru (2007) shows that
over 65 percent of communes have only one employee in social assistance. This is one of the key
factors related to the poor quality of services156 for those in most need, particularly the Roma.
The same pattern applies to the specialization of professionals, which is much higher at the
central than at the local level. The professionalization relies on the allocated financial resources,
which in the case of local communities are once again poor; therefore, the quality of human
resources at local level is poor due to professionals’ under-specialization, whereas at the county
or national levels157 the situation is the opposite.

In addition, at the county level other stakeholders deliver social benefits,158 although the reform
was supposed to create a single agency (see above); its professionals are in charge of ensuring
effective access to social benefits, but this engenders a ‘proximity disadvantage’: vulnerable
people living in remote areas often (cannot) make considerable efforts to reach these institutions.

4.6 RECOMMENDATIONS

4.6.1 POLICY GOAL 1: REINFORCE MEANS-TESTED SAFETY NET PROGRAMS
While 95 percent of the Roma in the poorest quintile receive at least one social protection
transfer, 75 percent of the Roma remain below the poverty line, raising questions about the effect
of these social protection measures on poverty reduction. Increasing the equity of the system,
especially for the Roma, will be achieved by expanding the principle of granting assistance
primarily to those in need.
          POLICY MEASURE 1A: CUT BACK ON SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMS THAT DO NOT
                                TARGET THE POOR EXPLICITLY

Social inclusion must be promoted by refocusing social assistance spending on the poorest – and
thus the Roma – and making it easier for them to access the assistance programs for which they
are eligible. Reforms are underway but efforts need to be sustained.

      - Cut back on social protection programs that do not target those in need. This may include
        the elimination or scaling down of regressive, ineffective programs – e.g. the elimination
        of the pro-natality cash payments to couples and mothers in July 2010.
      - Consolidate program eligibility rules: this will cut down administrative costs, and will
        simplify a complex system, both on the beneficiaries’ and the institutions’ side – e.g. the
        recent law consolidating all means-tested programs (Family Benefits, Heating Benefits,
        and the GMI) into one single program for low-income households. The new program is
        larger and more generous than the current GMI and better targeted than the Family or the
        Heating Benefit.


156
    The term “services” covers both social services as means to support the vulnerable children, disabled, elderly,
etc., and the administrative services as means to ensure access to benefits.
157
    Ibid. 72.83% of the human resources in SP work don’t hold higher education degrees in social work.
158
    General Directorate for Social Assistance and Child Protection – decentralized stakeholder in charge of social
services and provision of social benefits for disabled only.
                                                       140
       - Focus on what works: Romania’s social assistance system has some strong features to
         build upon. With the means-tested GMI – which ranks among the best in terms of
         targeting accuracy in the region and the world – Romania has found a model that is well
         adapted to country circumstances. This program targeted at low-income households – and
         thus the Roma – can be used as a platform for other low-income programs.
Such initiatives discarding program lines and consolidating a large number of social assistance
programs around the most successful ones were undertaken in Brazil, Chile and Mexico under
respectively the Bolsa Escola (now Bolsa Familia), Chile Solidario and Progresa (now
Oportunidades) programs.
BOX 4-1: CHILE SOLIDARIO 159

To address multiple needs of Roma families through the social protection system, Romania can
build on international experiences such as the Chile Solidario program. This program focuses on
providing complementary services targeting the poorest families that go beyond the main social
safety nets available in Chile. The program‘s main goal is to help households progressively
sustain their exit from extreme poverty by improving their human capital assets, housing, and
income-generation capacity. Chile Solidario also has a supply-side component, aimed at ensuring
coordination among different social protection programs.

The rationale comes from the recognition that an approach with isolated and sectoral programs is
not able to address the multiple and interrelated causes of extreme poverty. The long-term
objective is to move away from an approach based on single programs toward a system of social
protection in which bundles of programs are tailored to meet the specific needs of households
that are hard to reach. While the specific target groups are obviously different in the Chile
Solidario, the program feature of a dedicated coordinating body providing personalized social
protection support to the most vulnerable provides important lessons for the Roma situation,
where the social protection system provides not only a crucial backbone for security but provides
also opportunities to stimulate targeted investments in employment, (early) education, health,
housing, and financial literacy.

              POLICY MEASURE 1B: SET CLEAR PROGRAM OBJECTIVES ANGAINST WHICH THEY
                                       SHOULD BE EVALUATED

       - Evaluate poverty reduction impact of programs: means-tested programs should be the
         backbone of poverty reduction. However, in Romania, most poverty reduction is
         achieved through contributory pensions, and not through social safety nets. When
         compared to neighboring countries, Romania is the country with the largest share of
         social insurance programs to total household income (20 percent).
       - Emphasis should be put on social assistance programs so that they play their role as the
         main poverty mitigation strategy. By prioritizing programs targeted at low-incomes


159
      See http://www.chilesolidario.gob.cl/en.
                                                 141
      households, a greater share of social assistance benefits would shift to those in the
      poorest quintile, which includes a disproportionate share of the Roma.

  -   Avoid confusion and evaluate programs against their stated objectives. For instance,
      many GMI applicants are more interested in the health insurance component of the GMI
      than in the income support: roles and goals of programs must be though of carefully so as
      to respond to the Roma community’s needs.
4.6.2 POLICY GOAL 2: IMPROVE ACCOUNTABILITY THROUGH M&E

              POLICY MEASURE 2A: STRENGTHEN PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

  - Institutionalize M&E: in a context where monitoring, evaluation, control and inspection
    are not always understood in their true value and meaning, the analysis at this level
    underlines an inconsistent monitoring doubled by the virtual lack of evaluation and a low
    capacity in making the control a positive feed-back mechanism to contribute to system’s
    development.
  - Train staff in evaluating their work: there is a clear need of training for professionals at
    all levels in relation to the role and use of an appropriate monitoring and evaluation
    mechanism. This should rely on a comprehensive ex-ante and ex-post approach, taking
    into account all technical, material and human related needs. Whereas this could
    relatively easily happen, the evaluation would require additional intervention: preparing
    the system in generating its own lessons learnt and striving to achieve progress only
    based on reliable evidence. With these two desiderata fulfilled, the control and inspection
    functions of the system could easily fulfill their counseling and regulating role.

            POLICY MEASURE 2B: SHARE BEST PRACTICES ACROSS MUNICIPALITIES

  - The Romanian government can improve the effectiveness of social protection
    interventions and expand its reach to the neediest by systematically piloting and
    evaluating promising ideas, and by investing more in knowledge sharing across
    municipalities. Governments, also in Europe, are increasingly using rigorous impact
    evaluations to pilot programs and measure their effectiveness. This is especially
    important in areas where policy measures are designed to address some of the greatest
    social challenges, including improving employment prospects for the long-term
    unemployed. Examples include a program of systemic evaluations of social protection
    measures in Denmark, the Netherlands, France, and others such as Mexico and Brazil. To
    implement these evaluations, the Romanian evaluation departments in the Ministries can
    reach out to academics and policy think tanks in Europe – e.g. the Poverty Action Lab
    Europe – founded at MIT University, and partner with local Romanian think tanks. The
    European Commission is promoting (and funding) social policy experiments through its




                                             142
         PROGRESS facility, as was highlighted during the December 2012 conference on
         monitoring and evaluation in Bratislava.160
      - Furthermore, the Government of Romania could establish a knowledge portal of good
        practices of municipal activation activities. Many municipalities are undertaking
        innovative ideas in the area of employment as well as other areas, sometimes in
        collaboration with the NGO sector. Creating a platform where mayors and other
        municipal level authorities can exchange these ideas with one another – even a virtual
        platform – and creating a regional task force that systematically compiles these practices
        (including impact evaluation findings) and shares them with municipalities can ensure
        that good but isolated ideas can benefit all municipalities. Such an initiative is currently
        being funded in a few Dutch municipalities: a Platform for Roma communities of the
        VNG is being launched as of December 2013, where municipalities with Roma
        populations can share their experience of what works and what doesn’t.161

                        POLICY MEASURE 2C: SIMPLIFY APPLICATION PROCESSES

Reduction in the cost of applying for beneficiaries and accessing the system would have the
greatest impact on poor households, including the Roma.

      - Simplifying application procedures would be particularly important for the Roma
        population as international evidence suggests that complex application and verification
        procedures can represent an obstacle to Roma inclusion in social programs: . For these
        reasons, it is expected that the Roma would benefit from simplification of application
        procedures and improved targeting of social assistance, both in terms of raising welfare
        and reducing vulnerability.

4.6.3 POLICY GOAL 3: DEVELOP MEASURES THAT GO BEYOND INCOME SUPPORT

Romania’s social assistance system should develop program that go beyond mere income
support, by increasing its pro-activity and providing incentives for households to invest in the
health and education of their children, and for adults to seek and retain work. Thus working hand
in hand with the education, health and labor Ministries is highly needed.

              POLICY MEASURE 3A: PROMOTE INVESTMENTS IN EDUCATION AND HEALTH

Roma’s low level of education has been identified as one of the key obstacles to income
generation.




160
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTROMA/Resources/6159861325095562445/Diane_Angermueller.ppt
161
   See the report commissioned by the Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, which offers scientifically validated
knowledge on how municipalities tackle the multi-dimensional issues faced by Roma families (integration,
unemployment, pollution, crime, women and children rights, etc.):
https://www.politieacademie.nl/overdepolitieacademie/nieuws/Documents/Aanpak%20multi-problematiek.pdf
                                                       143
   - Investigate the development of a compelling CCT: a few initiatives related to CCTs exist
     in Romania (Money for High School or the conditionality of the Family Assistance), but
     their impact on schooling outcomes is either inconclusive or has not been evaluated. For
     instance, the evaluation of Money for High School shows it has a potential to induce
     positive changes in Roma’s educational outcomes, but these are limited by benefit levels
     that are too low to cover the costs of school attendance and, more importantly, the
     absence of provisions to increase the quality of education, particularly in the rural areas
     which constitute the policy’s main focus. On the other hand, program features, which
     seem to merit further consideration for reducing the gap in educational outcomes between
     Roma and non-Roma include targeting of beneficiaries on economic grounds and the
     attendance conditionality, as well as the absence of per-family benefit ceilings.
     International experience of such successful programs includes Mexico’s Oportunidades
     and Brazil’s Bolsa Familia.
   - Early childhood development: similarly, several studies on Roma households show that
     the lack of financial resources of the family is one of the main barriers to send children to
     preschool education. Removing preschool costs barriers for the poorest parents and
     providing incentives to poor parents to enroll their children into preschool at an early age
     (as early as 3 years old) conditional on meeting good attendance might be considered as a
     priority. The incentives may take different forms, according to the real needs of the
     community and the profile of the population – see Chapter 2 on education.
   - In the light of decentralization and models of integrated community-based care, MoH,
     MoE and MoLSP should be working hand in hand.

       POLICY MEASURE 3B: COMPLEMENT GMI WITH ADDITIONAL ACTIVATION MEASURES

Social economy may be considered as a path for the inclusion of Roma in the labor market,
beyond the activation measures included in the GMI. Several successful projects have already
been implemented with good activation results. Although they would need to be improved in
terms of sustainability, these types of experiences should be shared much more broadly across
the different municipalities and among all the relevant actors – see Chapter 3 on Employment.

  4.6.4 POLICY GOAL 4: SIMPLIFY THE SOCIAL ASSISTANCE SYSTEM THROUGH
                             BETTER COORDINATION

The complexity of the current social protection system leads to fragmentation, redundancy, and
overlaps. A reorganization of the service delivery chain around the principle of one-beneficiary,
one application, one-point-of-service could substantially reduce the administrative and private
costs of social assistance.

                         POLICY MEASURE 4A: DEFINE CLEAR MANDATES

Setting clear program objectives and monitoring their results to improve performance
management is key.

                                              144
-     The legislative analysis indicates that not all institutions and their mandates are clearly
      defined and the cooperation procedures and mechanisms need considerable improvements.
      Moreover, the resources and the access to them are insufficiently specified. The social
      control mechanisms are vague and overlapping, requiring systemic adjustments and
      compulsoriness.
-     Programs need to be merged and consolidated: the institutional162 analysis indicates that
      deconcentration and decentralization, instead of interacting in a complementary manner are
      sources of systemic incoherency and/or redundancy both vertically and horizontally. This
      leads to authority, decision-making and action vacuums. Consolidating the number of benfit
      programs will reduce fragmentation and will contain spending levels.
The establishment of effective legislative provisions to make institutional cooperation work both
vertically and horizontally will result in addressing more effectively the needs of all vulnerable
groups, particularly the Roma. Increased access to social protection for all vulnerable implies
increased institutional capacity. Whereas the allocation of resources may be a part of the
response to the issue, the schemes of responsibility and accountability need to be strengthen at
each level of intervention, particularly the local / community one.

                      POLICY MEASURE 4B: IMPROVE ADMINISTRATIVE EFFICIENCY

The administration of the current SP system is inefficient: harmonization and integration for the
different programs need to be designed. That includes the preparation of a legislation to support
the change, and modify the supporting the management information and IT systems of the
agency responsible for the payment and registry of the majority of social assistance programs
(NASB). Staff in town halls and county agencies would need training on the new system. 163

                   POLICY MEASURE 4C: EMPHASIZE THE ROLE OF SOCIAL MEDIATORS

A network of trained and certified Experts on Roma exists specifically to provide outreach to
Roma populations. Social mediators exist for all communities at risk, but education and sanitary
mediators and local Experts exist for communities with a significant Roma ethnic population.
These Experts, most of whom are of Roma origin, provide support to their communities by
disseminating information and helping individuals deal with their problems at the local council
level. In 2010, the position of Expert on Roma was recognized nationally, giving town halls a
legal basis for hiring such experts. A national Government Strategy for the Social Inclusion of
the Roma called the ‘Roma Decade Action Plan’ (prepared under the Decade for Social Inclusion
of the Roma) is in place and is being implemented reasonably well at the county level.



162
    The institutions ensuring access to social protection are the same for all vulnerable groups, including the Roma.
Whereas no explicit measure may be envisaged exclusively for Roma, it seems that a part of low access of Roma to
SP measures may be explained by the institutional constraints. This is due to low institutional capacity but also to
the reduced responsibility and accountability of stakeholders directly interacting with the vulnerable groups.
163
    Technical assistance for implementing this result area would be have been earmarked in the on-going Romania
SIP.
                                                        145
-   Human resources need to be allowed to do what they should do (social workers to carry out
    social work activities not bureaucratic ones) and on the other hand could be better trained. A
    coordination mechanism between county and local levels could also be envisaged.
-   One must ensure that Roma counselors are present in areas where there is a Roma
    community, as they prove to be the key link between Roma households and social protection
    programs.

                  POLICY MEASURE 4D: FOCUS ON LOCAL DELIVERY OF SERVICES

-   The analysis of resources indicates that the budgets are inequitably distributed between the
    various levels and areas. Although an increase of resources may address part of the systemic
    issues, the practice indicates this is not a universal panacea to all the problems vulnerable
    groups and particularly Roma are facing. The issues generated by a context of scarce
    resources require, besides financial, human and material additional support, the use of
    existing ones in a more effective and efficient manner.
-   Financial resources could be regulated by explicit legislative provisions on their use in the
    benefit of most vulnerable.




                                               146
4.6.5 IMPLEMENTATION
                               Summary Table of Policy Recommendations
Recommendation                  Entity(ies)  best   Impact               Time frame       Monitoring indicator
                                placed         to
                                implement     the   (Critical impact;    Short:  <    6
                                recommendation      High       impact;   months;
                                                    Enabling             Medium:   6-18
                                                    condition)           months;
                                                                         Long:      >18
                                                                         months



Policy Measure 1: Reinforce means-tested safety net programs

Policy Measure 1A: Cut          MoLFSP              High Impact          Short            Overall and      program-
back on SP not targeting the                                                              specific         targeting
poorest                                                                                   accuracy



Policy Measure 1B: set          MoLFSP              Critical Impact      Medium           Each SP program has a
clear program objectives                                                                  clear and measurable
against which they should be                                                              development objective
evaluated                                                                                 (ex: “provide health
                                                                                          insurance to the poorest
                                                                                          quintile if in the informal
                                                                                          sector”)

Policy Measure 2: Strengthen the institutional social welfare system

Policy     Measure     2A:      MoLFSP,             High Impact          Short            Standardized OM for all
Strengthen     performance                                                                agency levels, M&E
management                                                                                enforced, timely reports
                                                                                          received from all agency
                                                                                          levels

Policy Measure 2B: Share        MoLFSP              High Impact          Medium           Existence    of     a
best    practices  across                                                                 knowledge portal with
municipalities                                                                            examples   of    good
                                                                                          practices

Policy     Measure     2C:      MoLFSP              Critical Impact      Medium           Less paperwork to apply
Simplify        application                                                               to programs, use of
procedures                                                                                common          eligibility
                                                                                          criteria when possible

Policy Measure 3: Develop measures that go beyond income support

Policy    Measure    3A:        MoLFSP,     MoE,    Critical Impact      Short            Integrated         health,
Promote   investments in        MoH                                                       education    and    social

                                                     147
education and health                                                                   protection policies

Policy     Measure     3B:      MoLFSP             Critical Impact   Short             Additional   activation
Complement GMI with                                                                    measures offered with
additional       activation                                                            GMI
measures

Policy Measure 4: Simplify social assistance system through better coordination

Policy Measure 4A: Define       MoLFSP             Critical Impact   Short             Unnecessary programs
clear mandates                                                                         discarded/shrunk,
                                                                                       programs merged and
                                                                                       consolidated

Policy     Measure     4B:      MoLFSP, NASB       Critical Impact   Short             Management information
Improve      administrative                                                            and IT system updated
efficiency

Policy     Measure     4C:      MoLFSP             Critical Impact   Medium            1 Roma counselor per
Emphasize the role of Roma                                                             municipality with share
social mediators                                                                       of Roma above national
                                                                                       average

Policy Measure 4D: Focus        MoLFSP             Critical Impact   Medium            Proportion of resources
on local delivery of services                                                          used for low-income
                                                                                       targeted programs




Summary Table of Potential Indicators to Monitor Key Policy Objectives in the SP Sector
Indicators                          Purpose                                  Potential Data Source
Indicator associated with each SP   Track progress of each SP program        Administrative data (every      6
program’s development objective     towards its stated development           months), HBS data every year
                                    objective
Coverage and generosity of each     Track proportion of Roma covered by      HBS data every year
SP program (disaggregated by        each SP program
Roma and non-Roma)
M&E indicators                      Track functioning of social welfare      Administrative data, M&E reports,
                                    agencies                                 yearly




                                                    148
REFERENCES
Cojocaru, Ş., and D. Cojocaru, 2007.“Identified Practices in the Area of Child Abuse, Neglect and Child Labour
Prevention at PSSA”, USAID, ChildNet, Page 88.
Radu, M., 2011. “Romania - Promoting Social Inclusion of Roma”, European Commission, DG Employment, Social
Affairs and Inclusion.
Roma Education Fund, 2009. “Assessing Conditional Cash Transfers A Tool for Reducing the Gap in Educational
Outcomes between Roma and non-Roma,” Roma Education Fund, Working Paper No 4.
Sollie, H., V. Wijkhuijs, W. Hilhorst, R. van der Wal, N. Kop, 2013. “Aanp ak multi-problematiek bij gezinnen met
een Roma-achtergrond: Een kennisfundament voor professionals,” Boom Lemma Publishers, The Hague.
The World Bank, 2011. “Romania Functional Review – Labor and Social Protection Report”, Volume 2, The World
Bank, Washington D.C.
The World Bank, 2013a. “Europe 2020 Romania Evidence -based Policies for Productivity, Employment and Skills
Enhancement”, The World Bank, Washington D.C.
The World Bank, 2013b. “Diagnostics and Policy Advice on the Integration of Roma in the Slovak Republic”, The
World Bank, Washington D.C.




                                                      149
ANNEX
TABLE 7: PREDICTING SOCIAL PROTECTION AMONG ROMA HOUSEHOLDS

                                         All households   Roma households   Non-Roma neighbors
Roma                                        0.061**
                                             (0.03)
Household Age                                0.000             0.000              0.001
                                             (0.00)           (0.00)              (0.00)
Household Male                              -0.023            -0.005             -0.079**
                                             (0.02)           (0.03)              (0.04)
Employed                                   -0.071***         -0.051**           -0.128***
                                             (0.02)           (0.02)              (0.04)
Education (omitted: none)
Primary Education                            0.035             0.039              0.031
                                             (0.02)           (0.03)              (0.05)
Secondary Education                         -0.027            -0.055              0.015
                                             (0.03)           (0.04)              (0.05)
Tertiary Education                         -0.138**            0.078              -0.128
                                             (0.07)           (0.21)              (0.08)
Pensioners                                 0.122***          0.096***            0.135***
                                             (0.02)           (0.03)              (0.03)
Child <5 y.o.                              0.170***          0.158***            0.208***
                                             (0.02)           (0.02)              (0.05)
Child 6-17 y.o.                            0.195***          0.206***            0.168***
                                             (0.02)           (0.02)              (0.04)
Suffers from hunger                         0.051**           0.051**             0.037
                                             (0.02)           (0.02)              (0.06)
Speaks Romani at home                      -0.049**          -0.055**             -0.038
                                             (0.02)           (0.02)              (0.12)
Dominant ethnicity of settlement: Roma      -0.014            -0.020              0.023
                                             (0.02)           (0.02)              (0.05)
Region (omitted: Bucharest)
Transilvania                                 0.023            -0.023              0.112
                                             (0.04)           (0.05)              (0.08)
                                              150
Muntenia                  -0.003     -0.032                  0.059
                          (0.03)     (0.04)                  (0.05)
Moldova                   0.038      0.010                   0.086
                          (0.03)     (0.04)                  (0.06)
Constant                 0.596***   0.672***               0.689***
                          (0.07)     (0.07)                  (0.13)
R2                        0.207      0.191                   0.283
Degrees of freedom        1,089       740                     334
Number of observations    1,106       756                     350
                                              p<0.10, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     Source: RRS 2011.




                           151
                                             5     HEALTH
The third dimension of exclusion faced by Roma is ‘Access to Basic Services and Living
Conditions’. A crucial component of this dimension is health. This chapter provides a detailed
assessment of the gaps that exist in health outcomes between Romanian Roma, their non-Roma
neighbors, and the general population. The assessment is followed by policy recommendations
considered to deserve priority concern based on the assessment. The most important
recommendation is to ensure adequate early child and maternal health standards, as well as
adequate care for these groups.
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Romania’s health system performs poorly in delivering health services, especially to the
rural poor, where most of the Romanian Roma reside (WB Health Sector Review 164). Due
to a combination of a limited number of facilities, shortage of health personnel and fear of high
medical costs, a large majority of the poor (85%) do not seek health care when they need it.
Romania spends less than 5 percent of its GDP on health, which is low compared to EU member
states that spent on average 8.7 percent on health. When accessing health services, Romanians
complain about long waiting lines, persistence of informal payments, poor infrastructure
maintenance and suffering indignities.
Within this general context, the Roma are particularly affected and their life expectancy is
on average 6 years lower than the non-Roma population in Romania. The disparities in life-
expectancy are consistent with the regional survey165 finding that only 2.6% of Romanian Roma
are older than 65, as opposed to 18% among the general population.
Roma suffer worse health than the non-Roma population (Box 1). The 2011 Roma survey
data on the health status of Roma and the results of the Impreuna Survey point to a higher burden
of infectious and chronic disease (UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey, 2011;
Impreuna Study 2013; European Roma Rights Centre, 2013166 ). When broken down by age-
group, the self-reported health status of Roma is much worse than among non-Roma adults and
elderly (figure 5-1, UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey, 2011). This is especially the
case for women, who suffer at earlier ages and more often from ill-health (Figure 5-2).




164
    http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/05/17056888/romania-functional-review-health-sector
165
    See section 2 on methodology for a description of the Regional Roma Survey.
166
    http://www.errc.org/cms/upload/file/hidden-health-crisis-31-october-2013.pdf
                                                     152
BOX 5-1: THE HEALTH STATUS OF ROMA DECLINES FASTER THAN AMONG NON-ROMA

FIGURE 5-1: FRACTION OF ROMA, NON-ROMA AND NATIONAL ADULTS WHO REPORTED THAT
THEIR HEALTH WAS EITHER GOOD / VERY GOOD, OR FAIR, BY AGE GROUP




Source: Roma and non-Roma neighbors: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011); General
population (referred to as ‘national’ in the figure): Eurobarometer (2006).


FIGURE 5-2: FRACTION OF ROMA ADULTS WHO REPORTED THAT THEIR HEALTH WAS EITHER
GOOD / VERY GOOD, OR FAIR, BY AGEGROUP AND GENDER




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
Explanatory factors of lower health status include poor living conditions which contribute
to infectious disease, diarrhea and respiratory disease, especially among children. About
30% of Roma households live in a ruined house or slum, while only 4% of non-Roma
                                            153
households do. Only 18% of Roma households have indoor sanitation (toilet, bathroom, sewage
connection) while 40% of nearby non-Roma families have these amenities. 35% of Roma
households report irregular or no collection of solid waste, versus 20% of non-Roma households
nearby. 42% of Roma households use wood for cooking (14% among non-Roma households
nearby) and 87% use wood or coal for heating, substantially more than the use by non-Roma
comparator households (73%).
Second, a high burden of chronic disease is consistent with high risk behavior such as
smoking, both for men and women, poor diet and low levels of physical activity. For
example, the analysis shows that almost half of Roma adults smoke regularly and Roma women
smoke 2.2 times as much as Romanian women nationally.
Third, poor health outcomes can be caused by ineffective use of the available health
services. The regional Roma survey finds that most Roma (over 75%), live within a few
kilometers (3 or less) from a health facility. Moreover, most Roma report being satisfied with the
health services received. At the same time, 42% of Romanian Roma does not seek health care
when they actually need it. Over 80% of those that do not seek needed care say it is because of
financial constraints, even though a number of services are free of charge. Lack of insurance and
uncertainty about what to pay are major concerns.
Health is one of the six main directions for action in the National Roma Inclusion Strategy
(NRIS), however it responds only in a limited way to Roma health needs. The health
objective fostering health promotion measures which would contribute to better access of the
Roma citizens to public healthcare services and to an increase in life expectancy is addressed by
two MoH priorities: (i) vaccination campaigns for the unvaccinated Roma children and (ii)
health education campaigns on TB prevention which are included in the 2012-2013 Action Plan.
However, the fourteen additional directions for action, focusing mainly on health promotion and
health education are not yet put into an action plan. Topics like chronic diseases, mother and
child health, early childhood nutrition and care, reproductive health, adolescent health, and
health threatening behaviors are missing entirely.
The remainder of this chapter presents findings from the recent regional Roma survey on
Roma health status and performance of the health system for the Roma population in
Romania. Based on the findings of the regional Roma survey and on the review of the current
health policies and programs addressing Roma health, specific policy recommendations are
suggested at the end. The policy recommendations are consistent with, and broaden, the overall
NRIS.
5.2 METHODOLOGY AND KEY DATA SOURCES
The findings in this chapter rely primarily on the Regional Roma Survey (UNDP/World
Bank/EC, 2011), and comparisons with data on the general population. Throughout this
chapter, two comparison populations are presented: 1) the "general population," which is the
national population of each country in the EU Eurobarometer data167, and 2) “non-Roma,” who


167
    For comparison of Roma's health status and utilization of health services with those of the general population in
Romania, use was made of the Eurobarometer instead of EU SILC. Although the latter is used throughout the rest of
this report as the main source for comparison data, the EU SILC survey did not include detailed questions on health-
                                                        154
are non-Roma neighbors of the vulnerable Roma sampled in the Regional Survey. The chapter
will use these terms to refer to specific comparison populations.
In addition, complementary findings are also presented from a second, recently conducted
study on Roma in Romania, conducted by the Impreuna Agency (2013). The sampling
method for the survey relied on third-party identification method for determining which
households were of Roma background. Data were collected in July 2012. In contrast to the
regional Roma survey, which represents Roma living in communities with a concentration of
Roma higher than the national average (89% of all Roma), the Impreuna study aims to be
representative of all Roma in Romania. At the same time, the sampling method adopted in the
Impreuna study decreases the odds of Roma living in concentrated communities to end up in the
sample. Since this is precisely the group of Roma that generally has worse welfare outcomes, the
numbers cited in the Impreuna study should be interpreted as ‘lower bound estimates’. In the
current chapter, the Impreuna study is used to complement the regional Roma survey findings,
where the latter lacks details on specific subject areas.
Follow up face-to-face interviews were held with Roma and non - Roma NGOs, Roma
health mediators and community nurses, general practitioners, as well as with
representatives of national and local public institutions (MoH, NAR, county health
authorities, Roma experts at county level), WHO and UNICEF representatives to include more
in-depth understanding of certain health service utilization behavior and program
implementation. Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) with hospital nurses have been cross-checked
with the findings from FGDs carried out with Roma mothers of inpatients children. Other two
FGDs were carried out with Roma and non Roma population living in the same community and
insights related health services access and barriers, users and healthcare providers’ behaviors are
included in the analysis below.
All estimates related to the general population of Romania are based on Eurobarometer
survey data collected in either 2006 or 2009. Eurobarometer (2006) is data from the 66.2 round
of the Eurobarometer surveys. The survey queried respondents about their general health and
quality of life and current or past health problems. Respondents were also asked about treatment
for chronic illness, medical tests or health checkups, and recent changes in health behavior.
Demographic and other background information includes age, gender, origin of birth (personal
and parental), and marital status. In all, Eurobarometer 66.2 interviewed 28,585 citizens aged 15
and over of the 25 countries in the European Union after the 2004 enlargement, remaining
Accession Countries (AC) Bulgaria and Romania, Candidate Country (CC) Croatia, and among
the Turkish Cypriote Community (TCC). National estimates on smoking and alcohol
consumption were based on data from Eurobarometer 72.3, conducted in 2009. This round of the
survey interviewed 30,292 citizens in the 27 countries of the European Union.
When comparing adult estimates across these populations, the figures are also adjusted for
age in order to identify the disparities or gaps between Roma and non-Roma. The Roma
population structure is different from that of the general population or non-Roma neighbors –
Roma are younger on average and have fewer elderly (Figure 5-3). As a result, comparing simple


related behavior, health status and health utilization. Since the Eurobarometer did include these topics, use was made
of this comparison survey instead
                                                        155
averages between Roma, non-Roma neighbors and the national population would bias the results
obtained for Roma: overall health status figures, for example, would be equal across the three
groups, but this would be caused entirely by the fact that Roma are, on average, much younger,
and that health problems generally occur at an older age. To prevent this bias, such figures are
either disaggregated by age-group – presenting separate estimates for those aged 25-54 and those
aged 55 or older – or, when only one estimate for the entire adult population is provided, this is
based on an adjusted age structure for Roma.168
FIGURE 5-4: POPULATION AGE STRUCTURE FOR ROMA AND NON-ROMA NEIGHBORS IN ROMANIA




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
5.3 POPULATION AND HEALTH OUTCOMES AMONG THE ROMANIAN
    ROMA
5.3.1 AGE STRUCTURE AND FERTILITY
Roma marry young and have high dependency ratios. About 28% of Roma between the ages
of 15 and 19 years are married, as opposed to only 2% in the general Romanian population.
About 63% of Roma between the ages of 20 and 24 years are married, compared to 17% in the
general population (Regional Roma Survey, 2011). The difference in marital age is driven
predominantly by Roma women who get married very early: while 16% of Roma men aged 15-
19 are married, among Roma women of this age-group, almost 41% is married. The Roma
population also has a higher dependency ratio whereby more community- or family members
that are not in the labor-force depend on members in the labor-force with gainful employment,
which, coupled with low employment rates, exacerbates poverty levels.


168
   The age structure for Roma is adjusted in these cases in such a way that it ‘mimics’ the age structure of the
national population. This is done in order to prevent a bias in estimates for Roma towards seemingly ‘good’ health
outcomes, caused by the fact that the Roma population is, on average, much younger than the national population in
general.
                                                      156
After marrying young, the mean desired age to start having children is 21 years for Roma
women, compared to 26 among non-Roma women (Roma Regional Survey 2011). In a
household survey across Europe, the fraction of women between the ages of 14-16 years that had
given birth for the first time is three times higher among the Roma than among the non-Roma
(FSG 2009). Early age pregnancy is linked to low income, likely due to lower levels of education
among low income Roma households, as well as to a lack of information on birth control and a
lack of financial means to invest in the latter (Impreuna, 2013: 123). According to Impreuna, the
average number of children per woman has declined and is 1.74 currently (2.35 in 1992).
5.3.2 LIFE EXPECTANCY
Life expectancy among Roma is considerably lower than among the general population in
Romania. Rigorous data on life expectancy gaps between Roma and the general population are
rare in most countries because administrative data are not disaggregated by ethnicity. Data that
does exist is often estimated or extrapolated from household survey data or official statistics, and
may be based on small sample sizes. Table 1 presents Roma life expectancy data for countries in
Eastern Europe, available since 2000, including their source and methodology. Although the data
are derived from various sources and should be interpreted with caution, the evidence is
suggestive of lower life expectancy among Roma. The gap in Romania of an estimated 6 years is
average compared to the gaps in other countries, but the data concerns and the year (2003)
should be kept in mind. More recent data (ERRC, 2013) mention a 16-year difference in the age
of death between Roma and the general population in Romania.169
TABLE 1.6: LIFE-EXPECTANCY FOR ROMA AND NON-ROMA IN SELECTED COUNTRIES

 Country     Year     Life       Life        Life        Source                 Methodology
                      Exp        Exp         Exp
                      Gap        Roma
                                             Gen Pop
 Moldova 2006         3          65          68          UNDP    survey Estimate based on infant
                                                         (UNDP-Moldova  deaths from household survey,
                                                         2006)          and correlation between life
                                                                        expectancy     and     infant
                                                                        mortality.170
 Serbia      2005     10         63          73 171      2005     Mortality No methodology reported.
                                                         Database, Serbian Only reported life expectancy
                                                         Office of Statistics gap.
                                                         (Bogdanovic et al.
                                                         2007)




169
    Hidden Health Crisis - A Report by The European Roma Rights Centre: Health Inequalities and Disaggregated
Data, October 2013, p.5
170
    The Roma infant mortality rate was calculated as number of infant deaths (40) over total number of live births
(1,386). No reference to the range of years (e.g., births within the last 10 years) over which the births occurred.
171
    Non-Roma life expectancy from WHO European Health for All Database (HFA-DB 2010)
                                                       157
 Romania 2003         ~6          64          70          UNDP     survey Estimated from life expectancy
                                                          (UNDP 2003)     of countries with similar infant
                                                                          mortality rate. Infant mortality
                                                                          rate estimate from separate
                                                                          survey (RHS 1999).172
 Hungary      2002    10-15       56-61       71          Unknown (Kovac No methodology reported.
                                                          2002)
 Bulgaria     2001    5           67          72          1992 and 2001 No methodology reported.
                                                          census, Bulgaria Data only for people who
                                                          (UNDP 2003)      declared ethnic affiliation.
 Slovakia     2000    15          59          73 173      UNDP        2004, Not methodology reported.
                                                          Zoon 2001174      Only reported life expectancy
                                                                            gap
Source: World Bank


5.3.3 BURDEN OF DISEASE
Evidence from small, local studies indicates that infectious disease prevalence remains high
among the Roma. Measles outbreaks have occurred in recent years among Roma communities
in Italy, Portugal, Germany, Greece, Croatia, Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia and Poland
(Loewenberg 2006; Orlikova et al. 2010; Seguliev et al. 2007).
Romania has the highest Tuberculosis (TB) incidence within the European Union and
reported in 2010 the fifth-highest rate TB incidence within the WHO Euro region (after
Kazakhstan, Moldova, Georgia and Kirgizstan). The 2013 ERRC survey shows that the rate of
diagnosis of TB among Roma respondents is more than double that of the general population,
while in the 55 to 64 age group diagnosis is four times higher among Roma respondents175.
Given the high percentage of resistant forms of diseases, Romania has joined the group of 18
European countries labeled as priority TB control countries due to the high occurrence of TB
Multi-Drug-Resistance (MDR).
Self-reported health outcomes suggest that Romanian Roma suffer disproportionately from
long-lasting and chronic diseases. Self-reported prevalence of asthma is significantly higher

172
    Unclear which infant mortality rate was used for the calculation. UNDP 2003 cites that the Roma infant mortality
rate is “roughly three times higher than the national average” and shows infant mortality rate figures of 27.1 for the
Romanian population and 72.8 for the Roma population for children born in the last 5 years, between 1994-1999.
The RHS 1999 final report only presents figures for children born in the last 10 years, between 1989-1999, with
infant mortality rate figures of 26.9 for the Romanian population and 50.6 for the Roma population.
173
    From WHO European Health for All Database (HFA-DB 2010)
174
    Zoon and UNDP only present life expectancy gap for men (13 years) and women (17 years). For overall life
expectancy gap, Roma male-to-female ratio was assumed to be the same as for the general population, 95:100 (UN
Population Division 2000). Source cited was a report by the International Organization for Migration (2000), which
was not found.
175
    Hidden Health Crisis - A Report by The European Roma Rights Centre: Health Inequalities and Disaggregated
Data, October 2013, p.6

                                                        158
among adult and elderly Roma. Hypertension and rheumatism/arthritis are among the most
prevalent chronic illnesses reported both among the Roma, non-Roma neighbors and (not shown)
the general population of Romania. Self-reported prevalence of hypertension and chronic
joint/muscular pain is about 50% among elderly Roma. Self-reported prevalence of these six
chronic diseases is generally slightly higher among Roma as compared to their non-Roma
neighbors, and gaps are particularly large among men (Figure 5-5). Similarly, shares of elderly
Roma suffering from a chronic illness and limitation in daily activities (both genders) are much
higher than among non-Roma neighbors. These chronic diseases, including mental illness,
require regular medical care (and associated expenditures), and their management requires health
literacy176 among both patients and their families. Self-reported, age adjusted prevalence of each
chronic disease is often higher among Roma women than among men.
FIGURE 5-5: CHRONIC DISEASE RATES AMONG ROMA MEN AND WOMEN, BY AGEGROUP




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
5.4 DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH OUTCOMES
Why are Roma people dying young and suffering from poor health status? There is
evidence suggesting that the socio-economic conditions in which Roma grow up and live expose
them to greater risk factors in comparison with their non-Roma neighbors and the general
Romanian population. In addition, Roma display unhealthy behaviors such as smoking and early
pregnancies. Utilization of health services determines one’s health status to some extent,
especially for as far as preventive services utilization, seeking timely care when needed and
awareness of once health status are concerned. Roma tend to seek care late and they experience
barriers and constraints to seeking care to a higher degree than their non Roma neighbors.




176
   Health literacy is the ability to understand instructions on prescription drug bottles, appointment slips, medical
brochures, doctor’s directions and consent forms, as well as the ability to negotiate complex health care systems.
                                                        159
5.4.1 SOCIO-ECONOMIC CHALLENGES
High poverty, low education, and low employment rates among the Roma population
contribute to poor health. Most Roma of working age do not have jobs: over half is not in the
labor force, and among those who are, one third is unemployed. Roma have lower levels of
education, with less than 10% of adults aged 25 or older having finished secondary school. Many
Roma are subject to very poor living conditions and face financial constraints reducing much
needed investments in human capital such as education and health. 40% of Roma children in
Romania are not enrolled in school and 30% report this is because school is too costly. Poor
health also directly impacts educational outcomes: 6% of children are not enrolled because of
illness.
Low socioeconomic status and poor health among the vulnerable Roma go hand in hand
with hunger and other measures of hardship. Over 55% of Roma households in Romania
surveyed reported that a household member went to bed hungry at least once during the past
month. Roma are unable to maintain heating through the winter with three-quarters of Roma
households reporting they restrict heating during winter (figure 5-6).
FIGURE 5-6: MEASURES OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP AMONG ROMA AND NON-ROMA NEIGHBORS




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
Vulnerable Roma households face constraints when making decisions about health
investments, including the purchase of nutritious foods. Financial constraints bind Roma and
non-Roma households differently, even though these households are located in the same or
neighboring communities and experience similar socioeconomic conditions. For example, only a
small minority (5%) of Roma households report that they would be able to pay for a large,
unexpected expenditure out of the household’s own resources – compared to 28% of their non-
Roma neighbors. Similarly, only 1 in every 5 Roma households can afford to eat meat every
second day (compared to 3 in every 5 non-Roma households).


                                             160
FIGURE 5-7: AFFORDABILITY OF UNEXPECTED EXPENDITURES, NUTRITIOUS FOOD AND DENTAL
VISITS AMONG ROMA, BY INCOME QUINTILE




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011). The figure refers to the Fraction of households
reporting the can afford each item.
Approximately 40% of the children in Roma households are undernourished, leading to
long term negative health and loss of learning ability (Roma Early Childhood Inclusion
Report 2012). UNICEF has drawn attention to the risk of child malnutrition in Romania,
estimating that among those suffering from malnutrition 72 percent are children under three.
Child anemia prevalence decreased between 2010 and 2004 however, the prevalence of anemia
among Roma infants remains very high at 60%. Nevertheless, compared to previous years, there
is a declining trend which can be associated with better preventive care actions taken in these
communities, including sustained efforts made by community nurses or Roma health mediators.
Exclusive breastfeeding rates in Romania are very low (12,6%) in general and while better,
still low among Roma, 20%. In addition to poor breastfeeding rates, diet diversification is
inadequate, with mothers feeding their children little meat, eggs and vegetables. Diet
diversification is especially poor among the economically disadvantaged population, including
Roma, people in rural areas and children of poorly educated mothers177.
5.4.2 PUBLIC SERVICES INFRASTRUCTURE
Provision of public infrastructure in vulnerable Roma communities is inadequate.
Estimates from the Regional Roma Survey show that while the majority of vulnerable Roma
have regular waste collection in their neighborhood, 65% report waste is collected only once
every two weeks. Among neighboring non-Roma, 81% reported the same. Only 12% of
Romanian Roma households have piped water inside their dwelling and close to three quarters of
Roma households access water through a public tap or a source at higher risk of
contamination178. Compounding the problem, over 80% of vulnerable Roma households in
Romania reported their residence was not connected to the public sewerage system, and a similar
share did not have showering/bathing facilities inside the dwelling. Each of these factors places
Roma at higher risk for contracting infectious disease. The connection problems may be related



177
    (Nanu MI et Co., Evaluarea eficienţei intervenţiilor incluse în programele naţionale privind nutriţia copiilor ,
IOMC, MS, UNICEF, 2011)
178
    Data on the quality of drinking water that Roma households use has never been collected.
                                                       161
to the fact that connection tends to stop where Roma communities start (see chapter on
discrimination).
FIGURE 5-8: WASTE COLLECTION AND WATER SOURCES IN VULNERABLE ROMA COMMUNITIES




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
FIGURE 5-9: FACILITIES WITHIN HOUSEHOLDS




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).


5.4.2 DIET, SMOKING AND ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
Across Europe, Roma adults and children are poorly nourished, a result of unhealthy diets
and nutrition practices reinforced by the low socioeconomic status of the population. Poor
diet and nutrition contributes to low immunity, a high incidence of infectious diseases, and poor
child growth, reducing education attainment and increasing the risk for cardiovascular disease in
later life (WHO, 2003). In Romania, the intake of fruit and vegetables among Roma was found
to be much lower than among non-Roma (Impreuna, 2013: 118). Similarly, the intake of meat
was much lower among Roma, with almost 90% of non-Roma reporting to be eating meat at
                                              162
least 2-3 times a week, compared to two thirds of the sampled Roma (ibid.). Only slightly over
half of the sampled Roma in this study consume vegetables on a daily basis, compared to 80%
among non-Roma.179
Related to good nutrition is the condition of teeth. Roma have a high incidence of non-treated
cavities and missing teeth and have poor dental check-up records (FSG 2009), which can
negatively impact the ability to consume fresh and healthy foods such as fruits and vegetables,
whole grains and tubers.
Smoking is very common among Roma. 48% of Roma adults smoke regularly. Non-Roma
neighbors smoke as well, but prevalence is significantly lower, at 20%. A very high percentage
of Roma women smoke, 43% compared to 14% among non-Roma neighbors.
FIGURE 5-10: PREVALENCE OF SMOKING AMONG ROMA AND NON-ROMA, BY GENDER




Source: Roma and non-Roma neighbors: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).; General population
(referred to as ‘national’ in the figure): Eurobarometer (2006).
By contrast, the evidence on alcohol use is inconclusive. According to the regional Roma
survey, about 70% of Roma adults report that they never drink, which is 21 percentage points
more than among the general population. Only 8% report drinking regularly: once to several
times a week. These differences between the Roma, non-Roma neighbors and the national
population are prevalent across both genders: generally, Romanian men in all three groups drink
more frequently than women. The 2013 Impreuna study finds less of a gap between Roma and
non-Roma, and in that study, alcohol consumption is actually higher among Roma. They also
report that there is a correlation between alcohol consumption and smoking: i.e. in households
with higher alcohol consumption, respondents are also more likely to smoke (Impreuna
20132:120). Alcohol consumption, smoking and especially drug abuse are reported as not high
among Roma adolescents but the low level of awareness among Roma adolescents about HIV
should be of most concern (UNICEF report, 2013)180.
5.4.3 REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH AND INFANT MORTALITY
While most Roma women had visited a gynecologist at least once and gave birth in a
hospital, the frequency of reproductive health check-ups is low. About 75% among Roma


179
    These gaps between Roma and non-Roma are likely to be even larger in reality, given that compact Roma
communities were underrepresented in this study.
180
    Situatia adolescentilor in Romania, Raport final, septembrie 2013
                                                  163
and non-Roma women visited a gynecologist at least once in their life (Figure 5-11). It remains
unclear, however, how frequently or regularly these visits were made and what the quality of the
services is. For example, less than a quarter of Roma women had ever undergone a cervical
smear examination181. As with other examinations, the fraction was slightly higher among the
non-Roma neighbors (38%), which is also very low. These results suggest that while women in
these vulnerable communities may be receiving care at the time of birth (89% did deliver in a
hospital), access and utilization of pre- and postnatal care may still be very inadequate. Roma
women participating in the focus group discussions held in the rural area mentioned that
although they received information from the community health workers regarding the need to
undertake cervical smear examination, the lack of money, health insurance, knowledge on how
to access and reluctance to go to the gynecologist were reasons for noncompliance. Non-Roma
women revealed better knowledge and higher use of pap smear examination, although financial
barriers were also mentioned.
Among pregnant women, Roma reported an average number of three prenatal
consultations, non Roma reported five consultations. This was driven, at least in part, by a
higher share of Roma women who did not receive any medical check-ups at all, 13% (Impreuna,
2013: 124). More than half the adolescent mothers (aged 15-19) lack counseling during
pregnancy and register the highest prevalence of non-users (10%) and under-users (51,4%) of
prenatal care services.182 Poor preventive healthcare among women is not only a Roma issue, but
also a broader issue for all women across the region 183. Mothers participating in the FGDs
reported having received both pre and post natal care, through home visits from the family
doctors’ nurse and from the community nurse; as well checkups provided by the family doctor;
some of them have been taken /accompanied to the family doctor by the health mediator, at least
for the first visit during pregnancy.




181
     Women of reproductive age are recommended to have annual pap smears. Regular pap smears dramatically
reduce the chance of development of invasive cancer.
182
     (Nanu MI et Co., Evaluarea eficienţei intervenţiilor incluse în programele naţionale privind nutriţia copiilori ,
IOMC, MS, UNICEF, 2011)
183
    Fewer than 50 percent of sexually active women in Moldova and Romania reported ever having had a Pap test; in
Azerbaijan and Georgia, fewer than 5 percent of women reported having had the test in 2003 (Population Reference
Bureau).
                                                        164
FIGURE      5-11:    UTILIZATION        OF     REPRODUCTIVE          HEALTH       CARE      SERVICES




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
Maternal mortality is over 15 times higher among Roma women than for non-Roma:
0,62%, compared to 0,04% (Vincze 2013:8). Among the structural obstacles Roma women
face in the field of health are the exclusion from the health insurance system, caused by their
absence from the formal labor market, as well as various discriminatory practices which they
face when trying to access healthcare services. Roma women are likely to have a high risk of
mental health issues associated to poverty-induced stress and anxiety at the time of pregnancy
(Roma Support Group 2012:27).
Abortion rates remain high, especially in the lower income quintiles (Impreuna, 2013).
Abortion is regularly used as an anti-conception method among Roma: as much as 17% of Roma
women report abortion to be the method of birth control they use (4% among non-Roma women.
Repeated induced abortion is not uncommon among some women living in Roma settlements,
which poses another risk to their reproductive health. Women are not well informed about
methods of birth control, in part related to low education levels and cultural factors that lead to
tabooisation of sexuality in traditional Roma communities (UNDP/ILO 2002). According to a
qualitative study on Roma women, the use of contraceptives is an important differentiation
between communities. In traditional communities modern contraception is not accepted and
probably not practiced184.
The recent Impreuna study reports that the use of contraception among Roma increased
(Impreuna, 2013), but remains lower than among non-Roma. Whereas in 1998, 23% of
Roma women reported not to use any form of contraception because of a lack of knowledge, the
same is only reported by 6.5% in 2012. The share of Roma couples reporting to use
contraception has also increased, by a factor of 1.5 over the past 15 years. The response rate to
questions on this topic is low (these numbers should be interpreted with caution); contraception
is possibly perceived to be a taboo subject in Roma communities. Among those Roma women

184
    Malina Voicu, Raluca Popescu, “Roma women - known and unknown -Family Life And The Position Of The
Woman       In       The       Roma        Communities,      RESEARCH          REPORT”, available    at
http://www.oportunitatiegale.ro/pdf_files/Femeia_roma.pdf, accessed September 2013
                                                 165
who do not use any method of contraception, the largest share (17%) reports a lack of resources
to be the reason (compared to 1% among non-Roma women). Religious reasons are also reported
frequently (15% of Roma women considers the use of contraception to be ‘sinful’, compared to
11% among their non-Roma counterparts).
The risk of infant mortality among Roma infants is reported to be four times greater than
among general population in urban areas (Roma Early Childhood Inclusion Report, 2012).
Around 45.7% of the Roma children do not receive all the vaccines required by the National
Immunization Program even though they are mandatory and free of charge. Roma children living
in urban ghettos or in rural settlements are most exposed (RECI 2012)185. A very low
immunization rate in Roma children is also found in ERRC survey 2013, almost four time as
many Roma children (both genders) have never been vaccinated, 6.4%, compared to 1,7 % in the
general population.


5.4.4 HEALTH CARE SERVICES
The Romanian Roma population is in much poorer health than the general population, raising the
question whether the health system provides adequate services to fulfill the health needs of the
Roma population.
Romania has the lowest number of health professionals (physicians, pharmacists and
nurses) compared to the EU member states. This is particularly the case in rural or remote
areas, where the majority of Roma live. In contrast, the services provided by the community
nurses or Roma Health Mediators (RHM) are highly appreciated, where available. The FGD
have shown that where they are present in the community, they provide both social support and
health education and care. Participants mention a proactive approach of the community workers,
who provide counseling and information on social and health related topics. Access to
community workers is good; a common example was the community nurse’s availability to
provide home treatments at any time.
A large fraction (17%) of Roma households in vulnerable communities does not access
outpatient care when needed. A higher fraction (25%) reported feeling unsafe with regard to
their health needs. While the vast majority of vulnerable Roma feel that they have access to
doctors when needed, only 28% report having gone to see a doctor on every occasion they
needed one in the previous year (Figure 5-12). In contrast, almost 70% of their non-Roma
neighbors report seeing a doctor when needed. The large majority of poor Roma are unable to
afford needed medicines (Figure 5-13) and even the majority of considered richer Roma cannot
afford them either. This is consistent with the findings of the focus-group discussions, Roma
reporting the costs of medicines as the main barrier to healthcare. Costs of the ambulatory
specialized services and the distances to the outpatient clinic prevent Roma from the rural
settings to access outpatient specialized health services.




185
      RECI (Roma Early Childhood Inclusion) Overview Report -2012
                                                     166
 FIGURE 5-12: DO RESIDENTS OF VULNERABLE ROMA         FIGURE   5-13:  SHARE OF   ROMA
 COMMUNITIES FEEL THAT THEIR HEALTH NEEDS             HOUSEHOLDS UNABLE TO AFFORD
 ARE BEING ADEQUATELY MET?                            MEDICINE WHEN NEEDED IN THE PAST
                                                      YEAR, BY QUINTILE




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
Among Roma who do use health service, many rely on emergency services. The FGD show a
high appreciation for emergency care; ambulances are timely and first-responders do not demand
informal payments. The perception of the FDG-participants is that they either benefit from a
free-of-charge home consultation provided by the ambulance medical staff or no-cost
transportation to hospitals where the emergency departments provide free-of charge checkups,
including blood-tests and other expensive tests. Over 40% of Roma adults and their non-Roma
neighbors had accessed outpatient medical services at least once during the month preceding the
survey. A Roma adult has on average 4 outpatient visits per year – conditional on use- whereas
this number is 5 for both genders among non-Roma neighbors (Figure 5-14). 36% of all
outpatient visits were emergency services, whereas this was only 21% among non-Roma
neighbors.
FIGURE 5-14: UTILIZATION OF OUTPATIENT HEALTH SERVICES




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
                                             167
Roma have less regular health checkups as compared to their non-Roma neighbors and the
general population (Figure 5-15). Adjusting for age, the rate of undergoing heart check-ups was
equal among Roma as compared to the general population while the use of X-ray or other scans
was slightly lower. Blood pressure check-ups over the past year were lower among the Roma
(48%) than in the general population (55%). The largest differences can be found in dental
check-up. Limited screening coupled with a low utilization of health services and lack of
resources to afford medication even when diagnosed paves the way to a high prevalence of
undetected and un-treated illness.
FIGURE 5-15: ROUTINE MEDICAL EX AMINATIONS AND CHECK-UPS – AGE ADJUSTED ( A )




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011); Eurobarometer (2006). A The figure refers
to age adjusted percentages among the age group 15-70.
Roma and their non-Roma neighbors have similar utilization rates for inpatient care
(Figure 5-16). Just over 20% of Roma adults reported having accessed inpatient services at least
once in the past year, and among these adults, an average of 2 visits were conducted per adult.
The number of visits among the non-Roma was slightly lower, at 1.7 hospital visits per adult in
the same period. As discussed above, there is concern among health practitioners that many
Roma choose not to seek timely medical care and wait until the health concern has deteriorated
significantly before accessing care. It is possible that this may help explain the high use of
emergency services and the high rate of hospitalization observed here.




                                              168
FIGURE 5-16: UTILIZATION OF INPATIENT HEALTH SERVICES




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
Public budgets and public infrastructure tackling HIV/STDs prevention are almost
completely absent. NGOs and community health workers like Roma health mediators and
community nurses remain the only potential providers. Since NGOs often lack funding and
community workers lack training and supervision, the current situation is inadequate. In addition,
for various Roma communities, some health services like testing and treatment of STDs is
socially stigmatized and therefore avoided or practiced, if affordable, away from the community.
Information and counseling services for parents are also lacking. This appears to be an important
gap, as many parents do not know how to approach adolescents in order to discourage alcohol,
tobacco, drugs and unsafe reproductive health practices.
5.4.5 BARRIERS TO ACCESSING HEALTH SERVICES
Why do 42% of Roma choose not to consult a doctor, even when over 80% of Roma do
believe that the services are available to them? Lack of knowledge on disease prevention and
the right to health service, as well as limited physical access to services are the main barriers to
health care for Roma. Many Roma are not registered with a family doctor. This may result from
a lack of documents, but also may be attributed to reluctance on the part of health service
providers to accept Roma patients. At local level mechanisms of protecting the Roma against the
violation of their rights in regards to access to medical services are few and not well known.
There are cases where Roma patients who complained about the quality of the medical services
offered by their GP were excluded from their lists in retaliation. The National Council for
Combatting Discrimination is relatively unknown in the rural areas and there are no institutional
mechanisms for town halls to refer discrimination cases to this institution.
The most commonly reported reason, validated also by the FDGs, for not accessing health
services is financial (84% of households). Slightly over 60% of neighboring Roma households
reported that the direct cost was a barrier and compared to the Roma, a significantly higher
fraction (16%) reported they wanted to wait to see if the problem would get better. Monthly per
capita household expenditures on health are relatively high: 14 Euro per capita per month among
                                                169
the Roma, and 25 Euro among the non-Roma neighbors. When expressed as a share of total
household income both spend 11% of their total income on health costs. The low utilization is
also driven by low coverage of health insurance. In the vulnerable Roma communities surveyed
in the Regional Survey, coverage of health insurance is much less widespread than among non-
Roma neighbors, 77 versus 51%. Reasons such as distance from services, fear, availability of
time, and knowledge about a good doctor played a very small role in a Roma households’
decision about whether to seek a consultation or not. This is not uncommon in the region; other
countries show similar results.
FIGURE 5-17: REASONS FOR NOT SEEKING CARE WHEN NEEDED




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
The majority of Roma are satisfied with the quality of outpatient care received and most
Roma households are located within 3 km from critical medical care. About 46% of Roma
households reported being either fairly or very satisfied with the quality of outpatient services
used in the past month, and another 14% report being neutral (Figure 5-18). Dissatisfaction with
services is still 40% among households, with more than 30% of Roma men reportedly being very
dissatisfied with the quality of services. The FGDs show satisfaction with the received health
services with participants ranking ambulance/pre-hospital care, followed by the family doctor, as
highest. Inpatient care was linked with informal payment and at times behavior issues of the
health personnel while outpatient specialized care was lined with high direct costs. Although the
Roma communities surveyed are often in rural, sometimes isolated areas, over 80% of these
Roma households were resident within less than 3 kilometers from a GP, primary medical
centers and or pharmacies (Figure 5-19).

                                              170
FIGURE 5-18: SATISFACTION OF HOUSEHOLDS WITH OUTPATIENT SERVICES




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
FIGURE 5-19: DISTANCE OF HOUSEHOLDS FROM ESSENTIAL SERVICES: SHARE OF HOUSEHOLDS
HAVING ACCESS TO EACH SERVICE WITHIN A 3KM RADIUS




Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional Roma survey (2011).
Practices of bribery in hospitals occur often and at all levels of medical staff186 as
confirmed in the FGDs. Mothers of in-patient children reported that treatment is often
conditioned by bribes, which places the most vulnerable Roma at risk of not receiving due


186
   The amount of bribes has been reported as being differentiated according to the type of staff. Doctors are offered
50 lei (approximately 15 USD), while nurses receive 5 or 10 lei (approximately 1,5 - 3 USD), but prices may vary
outside Bucharest, as well as according to social status.
                                                        171
medical care on time. The necessity to bribe medical staff for treatment appears to be generally
accepted as a practice, both by Roma and non-Roma irrespective of social status. Patients find
themselves in very vulnerable positions of unequal power relation with medical staff, whereby
the patients rarely voice their dissatisfaction with the medical staff for fear of life-threatening
consequences. Under the circumstances, the stereotype that the Roma are careless and „do not
want” to access medical services must be interpreted in the context of a generalized system of
bribery likely to exclude de facto a large share of the Roma from medical services, as well as the
infringement of patients’ rights and a visible lack of care towards the psychological needs and
comfort of patients in hospitals.
BOX 5-2: HEALTH AND DISCRIMINATION

Formal and informal exclusion: An explicit classification of exclusion of the Roma population
with respect to health services was described in the mid-term assessment of the Romanian
Decade of Roma Inclusion Action Plan . Formal exclusion is exclusion due to the lack of
identification documents or to the insurance status; and informal exclusion is generated by
discrimination, exclusion despite the fact that people fulfill the requirements that make them
eligible for medical care. Informal exclusion can be shaped by health workers’ behavior, by
formal and informal payments, by the inequitable distribution of the health personnel, or
insufficient information among the Roma population with regard to their health rights. This may
lead to serious health problems, including risk of dying during child birth. Several cases of
discrimination of Roma women in the healthcare system have been brought forward by the
Center for Health Policies for the Roma – SASTIPEN.
Discrimination in the healthcare system may lead to psychological barriers to accessing health
care as Roma women may think such services unattainable to them (EUMC 2003:6). The UN
Human Rights Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination noticed in 2010 the
presence of racist stereotypes and of racial discrimination against Roma when accessing health
services in Romania. The Committee recommended to Roma health mediators and to identify
and hold accountable those responsible.
According to a recent survey on discrimination among Roma , one out of ten Roma reports
having been denied home visits by their family doctor. Denial of free of charge or partly-
subsidized prescriptions is also perceived as discrimination. The same survey noted that three out
of ten respondents felt discriminated when using emergency healthcare services or specialized
care for check-ups, treatment or surgery (Totem Communication, 2011).
Health mediators are highly appreciated: 47% of those who called upon a health mediator stated
appreciation. The social stigma that is associated to accessing reproductive health services,
counseling and testing for sexually transmitted infections exposes Roma to increased health
risks. Under these circumstances health mediators play an important role as they contribute to
changing the social norms.
Occurrence of discrimination and segregation of Roma patients when accessing health services
was confirmed in the FGDs with both Roma patients and health personnel. Health workers have
prejudgments related to the Roma population. Although there is no evidence that Roma patients
are treated differently, access to care is perceived as more limited for the Roma population.
Segregation of Roma patients in hospitals takes place both between hospitals with large pediatric
hospitals systematically sending a major share of Roma to particular hospitals, as well as within
                                               172
hospitals, in separate rooms. Stereotypical attitudes of medical staff towards Roma,
discriminatory treatment of Roma reported by mothers, as well as recurrent altercations between
medical staff and mothers or family members render the hospitalization experience negative. The
rights of patients are infringed upon by practices such as lack of informed consent and lack of
communication between medical staff and parents regarding diagnostics and treatment.
5.5 CURRENT ROMANIA ROMA HEALTH POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
5.5.1 THE EUROPEAN CONTEXT ON HEALTH AND ROMA HEALTH
Health is a priority area in the EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies
2020. Member States are invited to focus their Roma health policies on access to healthcare,
with particular reference to quality healthcare including preventive healthcare and health
education187. The EU goal is to reduce the gap in health status between the Roma and the rest of
the population.
The health strategic directions for the forthcoming period at EU level imply a shift from
institutional care to community based-care. The legislative package for EU Cohesion Policy
2014-2020 reinforces an integrated program approach, allowing the Member States to prepare
and implement multi-funded programs. European financial instruments for investing in health
focus on: (a) investing in health infrastructure that fosters a transformational change in the health
system, in particular reinforcing the shift from a hospital-centered model to community-based
care and integrated services; (b) improving access to affordable, sustainable and high-quality
healthcare, in particular with a view to reducing health inequalities between regions and giving
disadvantaged groups and marginalized communities better access to healthcare; and (c)
supporting the adaptation, up-skilling and life-long learning of the health workforce. The
Common Strategic Framework 2014-2020 states as general implementation principle that "the
CSF funds may not be used for actions contributing to any form of segregation and
discrimination”.
Health is one of the eight country-specific recommendations issued by the Commission to
Romania188 on its 2013 national reform program and convergence program 2012-2016. In
June 2013 the Council endorsed the following statement: There are major inequalities in the
Romanian health sector due to inefficient use of resources and poor management. Romania
should put more efforts to increase the cost-effectiveness of the system by reducing excessive use
of hospital in-patient care and by strengthening primary care and referral systems. Romania
needs comprehensive and inclusive health reform measures.
5.5.2 NATIONAL ROMA INCLUSION STRATEGY
Health is one of six directions for action in the NRIS 2012-2020. The health objective
“fostering health promotion measures for better access of the Roma citizens to public healthcare
services and to an increase in life expectancy” is addressed by two MoH priorities: vaccination
campaigns for the unvaccinated Roma children and health education campaigns on TB
prevention. Fourteen additional directions for action, focusing mainly on health promotion and


187
      http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/en/lsa/122100.pdf
188
       European Commission, {COM(2013) 373 final}
                                                       173
health education are included. Attempts to improve access to health services are made through
the Roma health mediators, MoH national programs and by identifying solutions to extend health
insurance coverage for the Roma people. County- and local action plans targeting Roma health
shall be developed and implemented with the MoH and NAR technical support. These are
important efforts however the extent to which they have materialized remains to be assessed.
According to interviews with local stakeholders, the measures in the county action plans are not
linked to budgets and financial sources.
The health section of the Strategy responds in only a limited way to Roma health needs .
Topics like water and sanitation, chronic diseases, mother and child health, early childhood
nutrition and care, reproductive health, adolescent health, health threatening behaviors are
missing. The objective and proposed interventions are poorly formulated compared to the ones in
the Decade of Roma Inclusion Action Plan. In the MoH Sectoral Action Plan, which implements
the above mentioned strategy, the health measures planned for 2012-2013 are exclusively health
education campaigns addressing HIV/AIDS, TB, STIs, hygiene, healthy nutrition of Roma
population; immunization is added both as part of the MoH National Immunization Program and
additional immunization campaigns for unvaccinated Roma children. Better access to healthcare,
including financial measures, is insufficiently reflected in the Strategy.
Presently, the Strategy health measures have no targets or budgets and the follow-up is
done by descriptive reports collected through the Regional Agencies for Roma. In 2012, the
European Commission, assessing the National Roma Strategies of the Member States189,
identified for Romania a key gap: the proposed actions are welcome but insufficient in size and
scope. The gap in access to health care and health outcomes affecting Roma should be addressed
more effectively. Detailing a calendar, targets, indicators, and budget are needed to secure the
effective implementation. The strategy would benefit from developing concrete measures to
increase the health insurance coverage. Registration with local authorities is necessary. The
Strategy is currently under a revision process.
5.5.3 INSTITUTIONS AND COORDINATION
The Ministry of Health is responsible for designing and implementing health policies, while
the National Insurance Fund issues regulations within the health insurance system. MoH is
therefore accountable for identifying the Roma health gaps and for implementing cost-effective
measures. The design of the NRIS 2012-2020 was a group effort of line ministries coordinated
by the vice-prime-minster. Each ministry drafted its own priorities and measures, with or without
measurable indicators and budgets. Regional and local authorities and a Coalition of civil society
representatives have been consulted, although some NGOs later asserted that the Government
had only conducted formal consultations and that their opinions had not been reflected. As the
Strategy for health interventions covers only two years (2012-2013), MoH has to elaborate
before the end of the year its new plan of interventions addressing Roma health. Sofar, except for
the transfer of budgets to local authorities covering the salaries of the Roma health mediators,
there is no evidence of specific and coordinated interventions addressing Roma health. However,
MoH national programs target public health priorities, through prevention and care, addressing
the general population, including but not specifically designed for Roma.

189
      National Roma Integration Strategies: a first step in the implementation of the EU Framework - COM(2012) 226
                                                        174
The health social insurance system contracts health providers to provide services for all
insured people, including a minimal benefits package for the uninsured. All Romanian
people are entitled to benefits including Roma, who as a vulnerable group benefit from free
access to medical services. The government subsidizes the minimal benefit package for the
uninsured which includes medical emergencies, pre and post-natal care, immunizations, early
detection, treatment and care of diseases with endemic potential, family planning counseling and
prescriptions. However, during the FGDs financial constraints and lack of health insurance were
mentioned as the key barriers to seeking care which may be explained by informal payments and
lack of documentation. Without proper ID one cannot access free health care services or register
with a family doctor. Many of the poor including Roma remain outside the system190. According
to National Health Insurance House 2012 Report, the population registered with a family doctor
decreased with 10% in 2012, down from 95% in 2011.

5.6 RECOMMENDATIONS
The previous sections illustrate there are important gaps in the health status of Roma
compared to non-Roma in Romania. It also demonstrates that improving health outcomes for
Roma will require policy measures on a number of fronts, including initiatives in sectors
other than health, such as housing, water and sanitation, education and anti-discrimination.
More specifically, the assessment section of this chapter highlights:
 the need for a stronger focus, concrete actions and more budget for health in the various
  Policies, Policy Documents and Strategies for Roma Inclusion;
 the need to strengthen effective access and use of health services for Roma and ensuring
  health insurance coverage;
 the need to emphasize women and child health, including reproductive health, pre- and
  post-natal care, early child health care and early child development;
 the need to increase attention to prevention, early detection and management of non-
  communicable disease while continue to focus on tuberculosis as well;
 the need to focus on community-based health services, integration with social care, and
  strengthening of the Roma Health Mediator Program (scope, budget, administration and
  monitoring);
 the need to build capacity in and monitoring of the trends and impacts of interventions for
  Roma in the health sector and beyond to inform policy and budgetary decisions.
In addition, there are numerous instances where the challenges faced by Roma reflect
problems in the general healthcare system in Romania, which affect other groups as well.
Based on the challenges outlined above, this section presents the main policy


190
    In fact, “there is field evidence that the GMI plays a dual role as last resort income and health insurance (…). Due
to the restrictive nature of health insurance benefits in Romania, the GMI in fact (…) serves as a de facto health
insurance: unemployed individuals who are either not initially eligible for health insurance, or do not have the
means to subscribe on their own to health coverage, apply to the GMI to benefit from the health insurance
component.
                                                         175
recommendations proposed for advancing the Roma health agenda. In doing so, this section
will propose a multi-sectoral approach, and pay attention to both challenges that are specific
to the Roma, and challenges of a more generic nature.
At present Romania is considering decentralization and is in the process of developing the 2014-
2020 National Roma Inclusion Strategy, which is a revision of the original 2012-2020 NRIS.
Both processes open up opportunities to build in Roma-focused interventions. The first two
policy-measures proposed emphasize these opportunities.

 5.6.1 POLICY GOAL 1: IMPROVE, ADAPT AND COMPLEMENT NRIS 2012-2020 TO
RESPOND TO THE KEY CHALLENGE OF EFFECTIVE ACCESS TO HEALTH SERVICES
                               FOR ROMA

The current NRIS does not adequately specify how Roma access to health services will be
improved nor are concrete measures or budget allocations are proposed. The Strategy
mentions health insurance coverage and the Roma Health Mediator (RHM) programs as
being successful and would further support these programs, but does not add details how to
strengthen them. Policy suggestions:
 Ensure coverage of all Roma under the health insurance through registration and effective
  communication about the benefits to Roma and their rights and include this as a
  measurable target in the Strategy to ensure follow up;
 Eliminate informal payments charged by health workers by addressing discrimination
  among health practitioners and by establishing a reporting system to the appropriate
  authorities.
 Extend the professions of Roma Health Mediator and Community Nurse countrywide/in
  all rural settings;
 Review the functioning of the RHM and propose concrete actions for increased
  effectiveness (salary structures incentive structures, monitoring and evaluation);
 Increase budget allocation for RHM program in line with recommendations for scaling up
  and increasing scope of the program;
 Create a fund, attached to the Roma Inclusion Framework, to provide seed funding for
  innovative Roma Health Actions such as the inclusion of an anti-discrimination
  component in the medical curriculum (see annex 1);
 Build a transparent and participatory approach, through a consultative process, involving
  line ministries, NGOs active in the field of Roma health, the academic environment and
  experts.
 Develop and implement a mechanism to assess the impact on health (positive or negative)
  of all other interventions included in the RRIS.

  5.6.2 POLICY GOAL 2: EMBED ROMA-SPECIFIC CHALLENGES INTO NATIONAL
      HEALTH POLICIES, IN A TRANSPARANT AND PARTICIPATORY MANNER

The need for a systematic, integrated approach to Roma health, including adequate budget, is
a key challenge and requires collaboration with Roma agency and other sectors. At present,
communication both within the Ministry, between departments and local bodies and with
                                              176
other line ministries is poor. As MoH is finalizing its health strategy 2014-2020 this is a good
opportunity to review and refocus policies aimed at improving Roma health outcomes in line
with the EU recommendations.
 Use the current decentralization/regionalization legislative changes to introduce more
  focus on vulnerable groups, especially Roma population. Ensure using this process as an
  opportunity to bring health policy decisions closer to the people and in line with local
  needs. Moreover, ensure budgetary allocations are linked to needs.
 Pay particular attention in this process to building adequate capacity at the local levels in
  the areas of health planning, organization and delivery of health services and coordination
  with other sectors (education, housing, social services, public infrastructure); ensuring the
  continued role and presence of RHM for example as changes in roles and functions may
  bring additional confusion among both patients and healthcare providers; consider local
  training programs for all stakeholders.
 Ensure state institutions remain in charge of public health priorities, and introduce focus
  on risk factors prevalent among vulnerable groups, including Roma, through the revision
  of the national programs, clear regulations and a sound system of monitoring of health
  care services and providers.
 Take advantage of the opportunity to introduce sound interventions addressing the
  identified gaps, with defined budgets and funding sources, measurable targets with
  baseline indicators, a systematic review mechanism, a monitoring and evaluation plan,
  and periodical impact assessment studies.

  5.6.3 POLICY GOAL 3: PROMOTE POSTPONEMENT OF EARLY MARRIAGE AND
                            CHILDBEARING

Investing in programs aimed at informing and raising awareness about contraception and its
related methods has the probability of positively and sustainably impacting the development
of Roma women. The distribution of free contraceptives for the most vulnerable, including
Roma women, has significant gaps.

 Strengthen public awareness campaigns adapted to the local situation and beliefs of
   Roma;
 Ensure provision of free contraceptives and compliance with current policies;
 Pilot incentivizing health providers to provide quality services and free distribution of
   contraceptives (see box 3);
 Pilot demand-side incentives, (non) monetary incentives to women to seek timely
   reproductive health care (see box 3);
More attention should be given to youth reproductive health behaviors, reproductive health and
HIV/STIs counseling and education in the NRIS’s future interventions.
BOX 5-3: PERFORMANCE BASED INCENTIVES SCHEMES

The introduction of performance-based incentives has been shown to have positive effects on
child care, increased vaccinations, and other types of care and could be considered for certain
interventions which are particularly important to the Roma population. A substantial number of
countries is piloting and scaling up results and performance based payments schemes. The
                                               177
essence of these schemes is to pay directly for results. A result in this case can be to complete the
vaccination protocol of Roma infants and to provide specific payments or bonuses for the
responsible providers. These would need careful consideration of what type of results and what
‘incentive’ (to prevent so-called perverse incentives) to provide. There are many international
examples available.
Especially incentives for providers in the area of reproductive health need to be very carefully
identified to avoid any perverse effects of providing incentives and could be limited to incentives
for quality of performance.
Demand-side incentives, (non) monetary incentives to women to seek timely reproductive health
care. These been found effective in for example Conditional Cash Transfers programs and in this
case could be linked to free extra years of schooling, specific job-training among others. The
development of incentives should be conducted with the participation of Roma women
themselves to have proper understanding of what type of incentives would influence
reproductive behavior, the timing to reward and the location and decision making process around
it.

    5.6.4 POLICY GOAL 4: ENSURE UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO ADEQUATE, HIGH-
                 QUALITY PRE- AND POSTNATAL AND CHILD CARE

Early childhood nutrition and care with a specific focus on vulnerable children, including
Roma, should be considered as a critical priority.
 Re-think and adequately budget the MoH MCH (Mother and Child Health) National
  Program, with a specific and measurable target on Roma women and children building on
  the MoH MCH Program’s community based approach, networks of community
  workers/primary care/specialized care and strong partnerships with local authorities and
  NGOs to improve delivery of services at the local level, including:
 Ensure mother and child check-up services are free of charge and this is known to all,
  including vulnerable populations such as Roma;
 Eliminate discrimination by medical personnel of Roma and other vulnerable groups,
  establish a complaint line.
 Revising existing guidelines, protocols on pre- and post natal care using an evidence
  based approach;
 Piloting innovative incentives for better performance in reaching vulnerable groups,
  especially Roma.
 Ensuring that preventive health measures reach out to Roma, in particular women and
  children;
 Add specific targets on service delivery to mothers and children among vulnerable
  populations to the Strategy to ensure follow up and allocation of budget.




                                                178
      5.6.5 POLICY GOAL 5: REDUCE INFECTIOUS- AND CHRONIC DISEASES AND
                    PREVENT AND DELAY ONSET OF COMPLICATIONS

Infectious diseases, especially TB control and addressing HIV/AIDS should remain high on
the agenda as they are particularly prevalent among vulnerable groups including Roma. At
the same time, the incidence of non-communicable disease and chronic disease including
mental illness, is also very high among Roma, and often early onset as a results of low levels
of utilization of health services and follow up even when early detected.
 Continued funding assurances are needed to address TB191. In addition to extra funding,
  MoH should address NTP as a national public health priority and budget it accordingly,
  while strengthening both the NTP management/coordination and the capacity of the NTP
  network at county to implement sound interventions addressing TB in the most vulnerable
  communities. MoH should further consider/look for the Global Fund financial support
 Ensure 100% DOTS implementation involving community stakeholders and health
  professionals at the local level.
 Strengthen the MoH screening program for the early detection of cervical cancer in rural
  and remote communities and target high risk women. Roma women fall within the high
  risk group with high smoking rates. In addition, the screening program needs to be linked
  to appropriate access to treatment and care. The Roma Mediator Program plays an
  important role in raising awareness and ensuring women go for screening and follow up.
  They may need additional training.
 Develop a public awareness campaign regarding healthy lifestyle and adapt messages to
  vulnerable populations including Roma regarding smoking, diet and physical exercise.
 Address healthy lifestyle from very early ages and repeat messages at pre-natal, post natal
  and child check-up sessions (see Box 4).
Develop specific messages and channels to reach youth among the vulnerable populations.
BOX 5-4: SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

In the US, a pilot among households receiving support through the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly known as ‘food stamps’, creates incentives for these
households to buy fruits, vegetables, and other healthy nutrients, through the build-up of credit:
“participants earned an incentive of 30 cents for every SNAP dollar they spent on targeted fruits
and vegetables (…) at participating retailers. The incentive was immediately credited to the
household SNAP account and could be spent on any SNAP-eligible foods and beverages. The
incentive was capped at $60 per household per month.” (USDA) An evaluation of the effects of
this pilot is currently under way. An evaluation of a similar initiative in the state of Oregon
(USA)                           already                        exists:                        see
http://www.ophi.org/download/PDF/healthy_planning_pdfs/hefm_nutritionincentives0923.pdf.
In addition, these types of programs are now also being linked to local produce thereby
stimulating the local agriculture economy as well.



191
  A number of ongoing initiatives continue, with WHO, Global Fund and EU support, but overall the National TB
Control Program (NTP) remains underfunded.
                                                     179
   5.6.6 POLICY GOAL 6: PUT IN PLACE A COMPREHENSIVE MONITORING AND
    EVALUATION FRAMEWORK, WITH MEASURABLE INDICATORS AND CLEAR
                                  TARGETS

None of these recommendations should be implemented without combining it with a
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. The benefits of M&E far outweigh the costs of
such as system as it allows for rapid assessments of inefficiencies. M&E allows for checks
and balances in the system and could serve to measure performance linked to results as a
basis for payment for results systems.
 Start with what exists and build on what is available: A large number of local, national
  and international organizations are involved in designing, implementing and monitoring
  various programs.
 Ensure the participation of health practitioners and community health workers in any
  design and monitoring of any program.
 Develop smart measures to collect ethnic disaggregated data, for example with the
  occasion of the forthcoming patient electronic record or developing partnerships/making
  use of robust statistic systems like the National Institute for Statistics. Another option is
  to collect disaggregated data at the local level, as data collection by ethnicity is a sensitive
  issue, that could have unwanted effects.
 Carefully assess the sustainability of interventions; carry on ex-ante and ex-post
  evaluations on effectiveness and efficiency of different interventions and develop the
  framework for providing continuous financial support for the most effective ones
 Plan regular assessments and impact studies; assure independent external evaluations of
  the planned interventions

             5.6.7   POLICY GOAL 7: USE A CROSS-SECTORAL APPROACH

Health is for a large part determined by factors outside of the health system. Effective health
policies should be integrated with all relevant policy sectors, in particular the social,
education and environment policies, Health in All Policies Approach. In particular for the
Roma population, improved housing- and infrastructural conditions are also crucial to prevent
the spread of infectious diseases.
 Promote the integration of community-based services following the recent MoH initiative
  to set up community health centers to promote social inclusion;
 Increase awareness of risky behaviors among the Roma through working with the
  education sector;
 Improve communications among institutions and with the beneficiaries.




                                                180
 5.6.8 POLICY GOAL 8: ADDRESS SEGREGATION AND DISCRIMINATION AT ALL
                            LEVELS OF CARE

 Forge and / or strengthen ties between Roma (and non-Roma) civil society and medical
  institutions by fostering common initiatives regarding the prevention of discrimination of
  the Roma with regards to medical services;
 Create a functional system of recording complains, for example a “green phone line” at
  county level. The system may be used for recording all discrimination complains, not
  only those related to health segregation/discrimination. The Roma experts and the
  Regional Agencies for Roma could become an integrated part of this system;
 Provide information to all Roma citizens to their legal rights to health, both as insures or
  not insured people; make information reach the most remote and disadvantaged
  communities;
 Support awareness raising interventions that are initiated/implemented by the Roma
  themselves.




                                              181
6.6.9 IMPLEMENTATION

                                Summary Table of Policy Recommendations

Recommendation                   Entity(ies) best      Impact                Time frame         Monitoring
                                 placed to implement                                            indicator
                                                       (Critical impact;     Short:  <     6
                                 the recommendation
                                                       High impact;          months;
                                                       Enabling condition)
                                                                             Medium:     6-18
                                                                             months;

                                                                             Long: >18
                                                                             months

Policy Goal 1:                   Ministry of Health    Critical Impact       Medium             Inclusion of the
                                                                                                following metrics in
Improve,        adapt     and
                                                                                                the NRIS:
complement the NRIS 2012-
2020 to respond to the key                                                                      1) Number of Roma
challenge of effective access                                                                   reached      through
to health services for Roma                                                                     outreach campaigns
                                                                                                on the benefits of
                                                                                                health insurance and
                                                                                                on the rights of
                                                                                                Romanian citizens
                                                                                                2) Number of Roma
                                                                                                registered for health
                                                                                                insurance
                                                                                                3) Number of health
                                                                                                professionals trained
                                                                                                in               anti-
                                                                                                discrimination
                                                                                                programs
                                                                                                4) Establishment of
                                                                                                a            reporting
                                                                                                mechanism           for
                                                                                                discrimination       or
                                                                                                informal payments
                                                                                                to health officials
                                                                                                5) Official role for
                                                                                                Roma          Health
                                                                                                Mediators in every
                                                                                                community where
                                                                                                Roma             live
                                                                                                (including official
                                                                                                budget    allocation,
                                                                                                salary    structures,
                                                                                                incentive structures,
                                                                                                monitoring       and
                                                                                                evaluation of Roma

                                                       182
                                                                                      Health    Mediators’
                                                                                      work)
                                                                                      6) Creation of a
                                                                                      fund, attached to the
                                                                                      Roma        Inclusion
                                                                                      Framework,         to
                                                                                      provide seed funding
                                                                                      for innovative Roma
                                                                                      Health Actions such
                                                                                      as the inclusion of
                                                                                      an               anti-
                                                                                      discrimination
                                                                                      component in the
                                                                                      medical curriculum
                                                                                      (see annex 1)
                                                                                      7)            Regular
                                                                                      consultations by the
                                                                                      Ministry of health
                                                                                      with     other    line
                                                                                      ministries,     NGOs
                                                                                      active in the field of
                                                                                      Roma health, the
                                                                                      academic
                                                                                      environment       and
                                                                                      experts
Policy Goal 2:                  Ministry of Health   Critical Impact   Short          1)                Use
                                                                       (include       decentralization
Embed         Roma-specific
                                                                       inputs    in   legislative changes
challenges into National
                                                                       2014-2020      to introduce focus on
Health Policies,      in a
                                                                       Health         vulnerable groups,
transparant and participatory
                                                                       Strategy)      especially     Roma.
manner
                                                                                      Oblige Ministry of
                                                                                      Health officials to
                                                                                      incorporate      local
                                                                                      feedback          into
                                                                                      policies.      Ensure
                                                                                      budgetary
                                                                                      allocations.
                                                                                      2) Number of local
                                                                                      level           health
                                                                                      professionals trained
                                                                                      in the areas of health
                                                                                      planning,
                                                                                      organization      and
                                                                                      delivery of health
                                                                                      services, coordinated
                                                                                      with other sectors
                                                                                      (education, housing,
                                                                                      social       services,
                                                                                      public
                                                     183
                                                                                infrastructure), and
                                                                                ensuring         the
                                                                                continued role and
                                                                                presence of RHM.
                                                                                3) Identify critical
                                                                                risk factors prevalent
                                                                                among      vulnerable
                                                                                groups,      including
                                                                                Roma
                                                                                4) Introduce sound
                                                                                interventions
                                                                                addressing         the
                                                                                identified gaps, with
                                                                                defined budgets and
                                                                                funding       sources,
                                                                                measurable targets
                                                                                with         baseline
                                                                                indicators,          a
                                                                                systematic     review
                                                                                mechanism,           a
                                                                                monitoring        and
                                                                                evaluation plan, and
                                                                                periodical     impact
                                                                                assessment studies.
Policy Goal 3: Promote          Ministry of Health, in   High Impact   Medium   1) Number of Roma
postponement      of    early   collaboration    with                           reached      through
marriage and childbearing       Roma           Health                           public     awareness
                                Mediators                                       campaigns,
                                                                                including awareness-
                                                                                raising           on
                                                                                contraception and its
                                                                                related      methods
                                                                                (adapted to the local
                                                                                situation and beliefs
                                                                                of Roma)
                                                                                2) Number of Roma
                                                                                having access to free
                                                                                contraceptives
                                                                                3) Number of health
                                                                                providers    reached
                                                                                through incentive-
                                                                                schemes to provide
                                                                                quality services and
                                                                                free distribution of
                                                                                contraceptives
                                                                                4) Number of Roma
                                                                                women        reached
                                                                                through demand-side
                                                                                incentive-schemes,
                                                         184
                                                                                   based     on  (non)
                                                                                   monetary incentives
                                                                                   to women to seek
                                                                                   timely reproductive
                                                                                   health care
                                                                                   5) Share of Roma
                                                                                   women reporting to
                                                                                   use birth control
                                                                                   6) Share of Roma
                                                                                   women entering into
                                                                                   marriage       before
                                                                                   turning    18     and
                                                                                   before turning 23
                                                                                   7) Share of Roma
                                                                                   women having their
                                                                                   first child before
                                                                                   turning    20     and
                                                                                   before turning 25
Policy Goal 4: Ensure           Ministry of Health, in   Critical Impact   Short   1) Introduce specific
universal access to adequate,   collaboration    with                              and       measurable
high-quality     pre-    and    local   health   care                              target on Roma
postnatal and child care        providers (including                               women and children
                                Roma           Health                              in the MoH MCH
                                Mediators)                                         (Mother and Child
                                                                                   Health)     National
                                                                                   Program, building
                                                                                   on the community
                                                                                   based approach, to
                                                                                   improve delivery of
                                                                                   services
                                                                                   2) Ensure mother
                                                                                   and child check-up
                                                                                   services are free of
                                                                                   charge
                                                                                   3) Share of Roma
                                                                                   aware of existence
                                                                                   of free of charge
                                                                                   mother and child
                                                                                   check-up services
                                                                                   4) Share of Roma
                                                                                   mothers
                                                                                   experiencing
                                                                                   discrimination when
                                                                                   seeking care
                                                                                   5) Impact of pilot
                                                                                   programs
                                                                                   incentivizing better
                                                                                   performance       in
                                                         185
                                                                           reaching vulnerable
                                                                           groups,  especially
                                                                           Roma
                                                                           6) Share of children
                                                                           having received all
                                                                           required
                                                                           vaccinations
                                                                           7) Share of pregnant
                                                                           women          having
                                                                           accessed      prenatal
                                                                           care at least 3 times
                                                                           during pregnancy
                                                                           8) Infant mortality
                                                                           rate among Roma
                                                                           9) Share of children
                                                                           aged 0-5 having had
                                                                           at least one health
                                                                           check-up per year
                                                                           10) Results based
                                                                           approach evaluated
Policy Goal 5: Reduce          Ministry of Health   High impact   Medium   1) Assure continued
infectious-    and   chronic                                               funding to address
diseases and prevent and                                                   TB.
delay onset of complications
                                                                           2) Strengthen both
                                                                           the             NTP
                                                                           management/
                                                                           coordination and the
                                                                           capacity of the NTP
                                                                           network at county
                                                                           level.
                                                                           3) Assure Global
                                                                           Fund     financial
                                                                           support
                                                                           4) Ensure 100%
                                                                           DOTS
                                                                           implementation
                                                                           involving
                                                                           community
                                                                           stakeholders        and
                                                                           health professionals
                                                                           at the local level.
                                                                           5.1) Share of Roma
                                                                           women        screened
                                                                           through          MoH
                                                                           screening program
                                                                           for early detection of
                                                                           cervical cancer in
                                                    186
                                                                                rural and remote
                                                                                communities;
                                                                                5.2) Share of high
                                                                                risk        women
                                                                                screened.
                                                                                5.3) Share of Roma
                                                                                women aware of
                                                                                appropriate access to
                                                                                treatment and care,
                                                                                based              on
                                                                                information received
                                                                                during the screening.
                                                                                6) Share of Roma
                                                                                reached       through
                                                                                public      awareness
                                                                                campaign regarding
                                                                                healthy lifestyle (e.g.
                                                                                smoking, diet and
                                                                                physical exercise).
                                                                                7)    Inclusion     of
                                                                                healthy      lifestyle
                                                                                awareness campaign
                                                                                in primary school
                                                                                curriculum and in
                                                                                pre-natal, post natal
                                                                                and child check-up
                                                                                sessions.
                                                                                8) Share of Roma
                                                                                suffering        from
                                                                                infectious diseases
                                                                                9) Share of Roma
                                                                                suffering       from
                                                                                chronic illness
Policy Goal 6: Put in place a   Ministry of Health   Critical impact   Medium   1)      Include    an
comprehensive Monitoring                                                        implementation plan
and Evaluation framework,                                                       and      budget   for
with measurable indicators                                                      Monitoring       and
and clear targets                                                               Evaluation activities
                                                                                in every policy
                                                                                initiative aimed at
                                                                                addressing the health
                                                                                status of Roma
                                                                                2) Evaluate the
                                                                                performance          of
                                                                                responsible
                                                                                stakeholders based
                                                                                on the outcomes of
                                                                                M&E         activities,
                                                     187
                                                                                  including        the
                                                                                  indicators mentioned
                                                                                  in this table
                                                                                  3)     Ensure    the
                                                                                  participation     of
                                                                                  health practitioners
                                                                                  and        community
                                                                                  health workers in
                                                                                  any design and
                                                                                  monitoring of any
                                                                                  program
                                                                                  4) Develop smart
                                                                                  measures to collect
                                                                                  ethnic disaggregated
                                                                                  data, for example
                                                                                  with the occasion of
                                                                                  the       forthcoming
                                                                                  patient      electronic
                                                                                  record or developing
                                                                                  partnerships/ making
                                                                                  use of robust statistic
                                                                                  systems like the
                                                                                  National Institute for
                                                                                  Statistics.
Policy Goal 7: Use a Cross-       Ministry of Health   Critical Impact   Medium   1) Number of cross-
Sectoral Approach                                                                 ministerial programs
                                                                                  designed         and
                                                                                  implemented       to
                                                                                  address the issues
                                                                                  identified in this
                                                                                  chapter
                                                                                  2) Use feedback
                                                                                  from beneficiaries to
                                                                                  further      improve
                                                                                  cross-sectoral
                                                                                  cooperation
Policy Goal 8: Address            Ministry of Health   Critical Impact   Medium   1)     Number     of
segregation                and                                                    common initiatives
discrimination at all levels of                                                   established
care                                                                              regarding        the
                                                                                  prevention        of
                                                                                  discrimination    of
                                                                                  Roma with regards
                                                                                  to medical services,
                                                                                  between Roma (and
                                                                                  non-Roma)      civil
                                                                                  society and medical
                                                                                  institutions
                                                                                  2)     Number       of
                                                       188
      complaints received
      through functional
      system, for example
      a “green phone line”
      at county level.
      3) Share of Roma
      reporting   to    be
      aware of their legal
      rights to health and
      health          care,
      especially in the
      most          remote
      communities
      4)           Support
      awareness      raising
      interventions that are
      initiated/
      implemented by the
      Roma themselves.




189
REFERENCES
Barker D.J.P. 1998 Mothers, Babies and Diseases in Later Life, Churchill Livingstone, London
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010a. “Health, Human Capital, and Development” Annual Review of Economics 2: 283-310.
Bogdanovic, D., D. Nikic, B. Petrovic, B. Kocic, J. Jovanovic, M. Nikolic, and Z. Milosevic. 2007. “Mortality of
Roma population in Serbia, 2002-2005.” Croat Med J 48(5): 720-6.
Currie, Janet. 2009. “Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Soc ioeconomic status, poor health in childhood, and human capital
development.” Journal of Economic Literature 47(1): 87-122.
Fundación Secretariado Gitano (FSG). 2009. Health and the Roma community: Analysis of the situation in Europe.
Madrid, Spain.
Fundación Secretariado Gitano (FSG) and Ministry of Health and Consumer Affairs. 2005. Health and the Roma
community: analysis of action proposals. Madrid, Spain.
Hajioff, S. and M. McKee. 2000. “The health of the Roma people: a review of the published literature.” J Epidemiol
Community Health 54(11): 864-9.
Janevic, T., P. Sripad, E. Bradley. 2011. “Access to Prenatal and Maternity Care among Romani Women in Serbia
and Macedonia: Research Brief. Yale Global Health Initiative.
Kremer, Michael and Rachel Glennerster. 2012. “Improving Health in Developing Countries: Evidence from
Randomized Evaluations. In Handbook of health economics, Mark V. Pauly, Thomas G. Mcguire and Pedro P.
Barros (eds.), Oxford, Elsevier Science BV: 201-315.
Parekh, N. and T. Rose. 2011. “Health Inequalities of the Roma in Europe: a Literature Review.” Central european
journal of public health 19(3): 139-42.
Petrova, Dimitrina. 2011. A Rights-Based Approach to Roma Health. Manuscript, World Bank.
Schaaf M. 2007. Confronting a hidden disease: TB in Roma communities. Open Society Institute (OSI).
Sepkowitz, K. A. 2006. “Health of the world's Roma population.” Lancet 367(9524): 1707.WHO (2011) MHealth
New       Horizons      for       Health      Through     Mobile       Technologies.    WHO,       Geneva
http://www.who.int/goe/publications/goe_mhealth_web.pdf
Singhal, A and Lanigan J, 2007 Breastfeeding, early growth and later obesity. Obesity Reviews 8 (Suppl.1):51-54
Spence M. and M. Lewis (2009). Health and Growth. Commission on Growth and Development.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. 2007. “Health over the life course.” UC Los Angeles: California Center for
Population Research.
United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 2004. Social assessment of Roma and HIV/AIDS in Central East
Europe. Bucharest, Romania.
United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 2003. Avoiding the dependency trap: Roma human development
challenges and opportunities.
World Bank. Gender Dimensions of Roma Inclusion: A Qualitative Study in Bulgaria. (Forthcoming)
Zeman, C. L., D. E. Depken, and D. S. Senchina. 2003. “Roma health issues: a review of the literature and
discussion.” Ethn Health 8(3): 223-49.




                                                       190
ANNEX
Existing Programs that Address Roma Health
Community-based health workers: Roma health mediators (RHM) and community health
nurses (CHN). All reports and studies related to Roma health highlight as example of best
practice in Romania the RHM program. Romania was the first country in the region
institutionalizing in 2002 a concept introduced in Romania in 1998 by an NGO (Romani Criss) -
the Roma mediator - a respected and trustful Roma community member able to connect the
community health needs with the appropriate service providers. The RHM service proved
effective, and it turned into a public policy built on an NGO’s initiative. Therefore, MoH has
implemented in 2002 a national program on community workers (RHM and CHN), aimed at
improving the access of the vulnerable to basic healthcare services, with a focus on Maternal and
Child Health (MCH), and to overcome the lack of health education. From 2002 to mid-2009, 422
RHM and 780 CHN192 were recruited countrywide, to serve the vulnerable communities. At the
time, the new community workers were endowed with appropriate training, guidelines, working
procedures, with substantial international support provided by the international organizations
and/or bilateral agencies. The institution of community worker (either RHM or CHN) alleviated,
to some extent, the access problems confronted by Roma people, while at the same time raising
concerns about patient dependency and the confusion of responsibilities between family doctors
and community workers.
With the decentralization process in 2009, MoH duties and competencies regarding the
community workers were transferred to the local public administration authorities. Since 2009,
there is a decline both in the number and in the activity of the community health workers, as
proved by many studies and reports. MoH data confirm in January 2013, a number of 389 RHM
and 979 CHN. Several local authorities refused to engage with the RHM. If community workers’
salaries come from the state budget through MoH, there is no law provision on who covers the
other costs related to their activity. MoH has no longer a program, the support and supervision
from the County Health Directorates (CHD) is weak, training is provided only by NGOs, with no
continuity or evidence on its effectiveness.
The Roma Health Mediators contribute directly to the improvement of the health situation
of the Roma; this has been assessed in several research reports (Fărcășanu 2006; Fundación
Secretariado Gitano (FSG) 2007; Fleck and Rughiniș 2008; Briciu and Grigoraș 2011) and as
confirmed in the focus group discussion undertaken with Roma. From a gender perspective the
positive impact of the health mediators’ activities is perceived to a greater extent among Roma
women than men (Briciu and Grigoraș 2011:30). This may be explained by the fact that the tasks
related to reproductive health and contraception. The Health Mediators’ interventions have also
had a positive impact on Roma women beyond the field of health, in promoting them to the role
of professionals and sometimes even community leaders, thereby challenging oppressing gender
roles and providing models to communities. The FSG report also stresses the importance and
positive impact of the trainers within the program, who acted as role-models for the health
mediators, displaying cooperation dynamics between genders and the empowerment of the Roma
female trainer (FSG 2007:40-42).

192
      MoH data, February 2013
                                              191
Despite the positive outcomes of the health mediators’ activity, it also has weaknesses which
reveal structural issues whose causes are deeply rooted in social perceptions on the Roma.
For instance, there have been cases where health mediators fulfill other secondary tasks within
the local public authority (Briciu and Grigoraș 2011:27); also, the perception (including
oftentimes self-perception) that they are „dispensable” human resources at a higher risk of losing
their job than other (non-Roma) staff has impacted negatively their role and possibilities of
action within the local public authority.193 And, following the decentralization process, the social
protection component of the RHM daily activity tends to crowd out the health activities. RHM
are employed and report to the social protection services/departments of the local
authorities/mayor’s office and the supervision of the County Health Directorates is weak.
Although social and health care are interconnected especially for the Roma population, face to
face interviews with Roma health mediators revealed that they would allocate more time for the
health information/health care matters of their beneficiaries, but this decision doesn’t belong to
them. Fear of losing their jobs, lack of coordination and methodological support from the County
health Directorates or from any health authority has been commonly mentioned.
The National Agency for Roma (NAR) cooperates with the Council of Europe in
implementing the ROMED Program, addressing Roma health and strengthening the Roma
health mediators’ network. A standardized online training program was delivered and
monitored. The collaboration included a NAR financial contribution and in-country training
activities. (ROMED 1, 2011-2013). The program will continue with a new phase, starting 2014,
providing training for the public institutions and promoting/supporting participation of Roma
citizens to the Community Action Groups. A new program called ROMACT has been launched
in November by the Council of Europe with EC funding, addressing a number of urban
municipalities, aiming at strengthening the local policies related to Roma inclusion through the
community mediators (health and school mediators) and integrating the Roma problems into the
general public policies.
The European Social Fund (ESF) is by far the biggest funding source for Roma and Roma
health projects. According to ESF Management Authority194, so far more than 250 million
Euros have been spent on 120 projects targeting the vulnerable groups, including in some of
these projects Roma. The EURoma network has compiled a file of ESF195 programs in some of
the EU countries, including Romania; 11 social inclusion projects developed by five Roma
organizations account for more than 32 million Euros. In addition, there are other remarkable
programs addressing health, funded from ESF grants (under 500.000 Euros) or strategic projects
with a budget up to 5 million Euros. Examples of strategic projects funded under ESF are
described below.
The Center for Roma Health Policies – SASTIPEN is implementing sound programs addressing
Roma health, with substantial ESF funds. From 2010 to June 2013, in partnership with two other


193
    In this respect, the situation of the health mediator is similar to the one of the school mediator. See the chapter on
Education for more details regarding the weaknesses of the school mediation program.
194
    ESF Management Authority is the MLFSP body in charge with EU funds/Sectoral Program on Human Resources
Development, called AM POSDRU.
195
    http://www.euromanet.eu/facts/ro/39216.html

                                                          192
NGOs, it has implemented a sustainable project building up community resource centers in 15
rural community, bridging up the provision of social and health services with the increase of the
entrepreneurial skills and employment of the most vulnerable and focusing on Roma. Also, the
ESF funded project “The Health Mediation Program: Opportunity to increase the
employment rate among Roma women”, is aiming at fostering the inclusion on the labor
market of Roma women. This intervention can be regarded as an example of integrated
approach with benefits in several sectors, and with clear benefits for Roma women. Of
particular interest will be the assessment of the outcomes of the project regarding two main
issues: the setup of a Technical Assistance Unit, Monitoring and Evaluation, and its role
regarding gender-sensitive monitoring and evaluation, as well as the outcomes of the lobby
and advocacy campaign implemented within the above mentioned project. The aim of the
campaign is to expand employment of health mediators within the local public authorities,
in line with the decentralization of public health services. This endeavor can prove difficult
in times of crisis, when public authorities’ budgets are shrinking and employment of new
civil servants is put to a halt.
Another innovative initiative, transformed into a structural project funded under ESF is
called “Roma professionals in health”. It provides mentorship and scholarships to Roma
graduates to accede the medical schools, tutoring for Roma medical students and a national
campaign aiming at motivating the Roma children to enroll in higher education. The project is
implemented by a consortium of local and international NGOs leaded by an NGO named Active
Watch Press Monitoring Agency. The risks related to the ESF funded projects are their
sustainability if they are not well anchored in the national public policies and the continuity of
the best practices and models if the new EU program 2014-2020 has funding gaps, beyond the
present bureaucracy and cash flow interruptions.
Community health nurses (CHN) constitute the first line of health services delivery at
community level. The second part of the former MoH program on community-based health
workers, at least as important as RHM, but ignored by most of the stakeholders active in the
Roma health area, is the Community health nurse program. With the same history and present,
the CHN is often the only service provider in the Roma communities, providing both social and
health preventive services. If a Roma health mediator and/or a social assistant/referent are also
present, they team up and deliver better the respective services.
UNICEF is implementing a project called “First priority – no invisible children” in
communities from 8 North-East counties. Social workers, community health workers and
Roma health mediators are trained and work together in disadvantaged communities, with large
Roma populations. The project aims at developing a minimal package of integrated community-
based services. There are child preventive services, developed and tested through the project; the
final aim is to budget the community services package and to advocate towards the Government
to fund it, in line with the Convention for Children’s Rights. The project is implemented in
partnership with MLFSP and the de-concentrated body on child protection and health.
Under the Swiss-Romanian Cooperation/Thematic Swiss Fund “Reform linked to Health
Issues”, there is a program called “Widening the access to health and social servi ces:
Community integrated health and social services”. The program is foreseen for the next five
years, starting 2014, with a budget of 5 million Swiss Francs, and the main partner is the

                                               193
Romanian Ministry of Health. The project aims to develop functional and locally managed
models, which increase access to health care through close collaboration between health and
social services. Specific attention shall be given to equal access for the entire community and the
cost effectiveness of service provision. Pilot regions will be selected amongst others through
local development and health indicators. Capacities shall be strengthened with local authorities
and service providers to locally manage integrated services. The Program addresses the
population of rural communities and small towns with low development indicators, vulnerable
groups including Roma and people living below the poverty threshold. The targeted stakeholders
are family doctors, community nurses, Roma mediators, social workers, home care providers,
local authorities and other relevant groups. It is another opportunity to address Roma health
through an integrated approach in the coming years. Integration and coordination at all levels is
again necessary, in order to avoid overlaps and to integrate the interventions in multisectoral
public policies.
An innovative and sustainable project on ethics and nondiscrimination of vulnerable
groups, focusing on Roma is implemented by an NGO, the Association for Development
and Social Inclusion – ADIS, with OSI funds. Starting from a study conducted in partnership
with Iasi University of Medicine, which revealed that medical students are aware of the fact that
discrimination occurs but they are not trained to prevent it and do not know how to address it, the
project initiated and conducted a comprehensive campaign for the design and inclusion into the
curriculum of the universities of medicine of a course on ethics and non - discrimination against
vulnerable groups in the health system in Romania, focusing on the Roma minority. A course
curriculum and educational materials have been developed in partnership with faculties from Iasi
University of Medicine. Gradually, from 2011 to 2013, the course has been introduced into the
regular curriculum of four big universities of medicine (Iasi, Cluj, Bucuresti and Targu Mures).
The course is delivered in an interactive way, including presentation of real cases of
discrimination and challenging the students to debate; the evaluations show that the course is
appreciated by the audience (medical doctors and nurses).




                                               194
         6     ADDRESSING DISCRIMINATION – CHALLENGES AND
                              OPPORTUNITIES

A cross-cutting theme affecting all three dimensions of exclusion is discrimination. This chapter
provides an overview of the situation of discrimination faced by the Roma in Romania, and
possible points of intervention from legal and practical perspectives to address this issue. The
chapter starts by presenting the nature and levels of discrimination experienced by the Roma,
using self-reported data from the 2011 UNDP/EC/WB Regional Roma Survey. Subsequent
sections provide an overview of how discrimination manifests itself as a barrier to Roma
inclusion. Then the chapter examines the current legal and institutional mechanisms and their
current shortcomings, followed by a review of existing initiatives that are combating
discrimination in Romania. The chapter concludes by presenting policy recommendations to
better address both the sources and acts of discrimination.

6.1 INTRODUCTION:                     WHY         DISCRIMINATION                 MATTERS            FOR   ROMA
    INCLUSION
Being a Roma increases the risk of poverty. Analysis of the RRS data shows that a Romanian
individual (including children) is 38% more likely to be at risk of poverty if he or she is of Roma
origin, in comparison with a non-Roma of similar age, education level, household composition,
community composition and geographic location. Children are 37% more likely to be at risk of
poverty if they are Roma. Similarly, 20 percent of the gap in employment between Roma and
non-Roma neighbors is unexplained by measured factors, such as age, gender, education level,
and geographic location. These disparities reflect ‘unmeasured’ factors, which may include
unobserved skills or factors such as discrimination, norms, and values; and they beg the
questions: how does discrimination play a role in Roma exclusion? And what policy strategies
can be used to effectively address this?

6.2 EVIDENCE OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST ROMA
Discrimination is the act of treating an individual or group unfairly based on preconceived
opinions, stereotypes, or prejudicial attitudes towards a group196. Unfortunately, due to the
subtle and covert nature of discrimination, it is often very difficult to measure and determine its
extent and influence. Theorists have tried to measure discrimination concretely using statistical
techniques especially in relation to labor market discrimination197. However, objective statistical
evidence of discrimination is rare, and where such direct evidence exists, corroboration is even
rarer. Nonetheless, self-reported experiences and feelings of unfairness and injustice, although
unquantifiable, provide an important indication of the level of discrimination that exists in
society. This study examined self-reported feelings of non-Roma towards Roma as well as self-


196
      European Commission (2011) Compendium of Practice on Non Discrimination/Equality Mainstreaming.
197
   The two most well known models are the i)“taste model” (Becker 1957) - whereby discrimination arises because
employers and workers have a ‘distaste’ for working with people from different ethnic backgroun ds and the ii)
“ignorance model” (Arrow 1971) - discrimination arises when the employer through ignorance or prejudice assumes
that certain groups of workers are less productive than others and thus is less willing to employ them.
                                                           195
reported experience and feelings of Roma, and how they affect the Roma’s motivations in
accessing services and how it impacts their wellbeing.

Over a quarter of Roma report to have experienced discrimination because of their
ethnicity (see Figure 6-1).198 These results are further corroborated by a study on perceptions
and attitudes of discrimination conducted by the National Council for Combatting
Discrimination (NCCD), which found that “48 percent of the Non Roma consider that the Roma
are ‘a disgrace’ for Romania, while 45 percent declared that they are afraid when they meet a
group of Roma on the street. 20 percent even maintained that there should be shops or pubs
where Roma should be banned.”199

FIGURE 6-1: PERCENTAGE OF ROMA AND THEIR NON-ROMA NEIGHBORS WHO REPORTED
EXPERIENCING DISCRIMINATION OVER THE LAST 12 MONTHS FROM 2011.

                30
                        26
                25

                20
      Percent




                15

                10

                 5                                    3

                 0
                       Roma                      Non-Roma

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).

6.2.1 WHICH ROMA ARE THE MOST VULNERABLE TO EXPERIENCING
      DISCRIMINATION?

Among the Roma, certain groups stand out as being particularly likely to report
experiencing discrimination based on their ethnicity. Firstly, discrimination is indicated more


198
     The data used in this chapter is derived from the 2011 UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey, in which
Roma and Non Roma respondents are asked about their feelings and experience of discrimination - in a variety of
settings. For example, questions were asked on whether people personally felt discriminated against, in Romania, on
the basis of their ethnicity / because they are Roma - while looking for paid work, while at work, while looking to
rent or buy a house, by people working in private or public health services, or by people working in schools. The
sections below elaborate on the results. For questions on discrimination, only one randomly selected adult (15+)
individual was sampled per interviewed household. As such, this chapter mainly depends on data gathered from a
sample of approximately 750 adult Roma respondents, and 350 non-Roma respondents living close by. For a more
detailed description of the methodology used to collect these survey data, see the Methodology chapter in this report.
199
    National Council for Combatting Discrimination (2009) The Phenomenon of Discrimination in Romania - Perceptions and
Attitudes.
                                                          196
frequently by Roma women than by Roma men. Since 2011, 28 percent of women reported
experiencing discrimination in the last 12 months, as compared to 23 percent of men. Secondly,
younger Roma report feeling discriminated against more frequently than those aged 45 and older.
However, whereas young women are less likely to report experiencing discrimination than young
men, older women are more likely to do so than older men200. As may be expected, relatively
wealthy Roma are much less likely to indicate experiencing discrimination than relatively poorer
Roma. In 2011, while 36 percent of Roma in the lowest income quintile indicated feeling
discriminated against in the last year, this figure is halved for Roma in the highest income
quintile.
Roma living in rural areas are less likely to indicate experiencing discrimination than
Roma living in an urban environment (see figure 6-2). In the 12 months preceding the
Regional Roma Survey (conducted in 2011), 23 percent of Roma living in rural areas reported
experiencing discrimination as opposed to 30 percent of those living in urban areas. This contrast
is also reflected in the identification of discrimination by respondents in different regions: the
highest levels of positive responses occurred in Bucharest, the capital, while the lowest levels
were reported in the South and West of the country, primarily agricultural areas.
FIGURE 6-2: PERCENTAGE OF ROMA WHO REPORTED EXPERIENCING DISCRIMINATION IN THE
LAST 12 MONTHS FROM 2011 BY RESIDENCE IN AN URBAN OR RURAL LOCATION, AND REGION

  40                         36
  35                                                       33                    32
                    30
  30                                   27                                                  26
                                                 25
  25       23

  20                                                                     17
  15                                                                                                 11
  10
      5
      0
          Rural   Urban   Bucuresti   Centru   Nord-Est Nord-West        Sud   Sud-Est   Sud-West   West
           Rural/Urban                                          Region

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).

6.2.2 IN WHICH SECTORS DID ROMA EXPERIENCE DISCRIMINATION THE MOST?

Roma report experiencing the highest levels of discrimination when looking to buy or rent
property: As Figure 6-3 shows, 31 percent of Roma who searched for housing over the five
years preceding the survey (between 2006 and 2011) experienced discrimination. The Roma
reported facing discrimination by people working in a public housing agency or by a private
landlord or agency. Women reported this more frequently, 40 percent of whom had experienced


200
   These results were confirmed in the regression models discussed below: Roma women between the ages of 45 to 54 years
were found to be 36 percentage points more likely to report feeling discriminated against, as compared to Roma women between
the ages of 15 to 24 years. This regression has been omitted from the Annex but is available on request.
                                                            197
discrimination, making it the sector in which women are most likely to feel discriminated
against.
Roma also report experiencing high levels of discrimination when looking for paid work. 30
percent of Roma reported that they had experienced ethnicity-based discrimination when looking
for work from 2006 to 2011. More women again indicated experiencing discrimination than men
(34 percent and 26 percent, respectively).
On the other hand, discrimination at work has the lowest self-reported rates of all areas, at
11 percent. Relatively few Roma who have jobs report ethnicity-based discrimination at work
by people who they work with or by their supervisors. This is not to suggest that Roma are free
from discrimination at work, however. Furthermore, as Figure 6-4 shows, discrimination on the
work floor is slightly higher among Roma women than among Roma men.
FIGURE 6-3: INCIDENCE OF DISCRIMINATION WITHIN THE LAST 12 MONTHS (GENERAL
DISCRIMINATION) OR THE LAST 5 YEARS FROM 2011 (SECTOR-SPECIFIC DISCRIMINATION)

 35                          30                                  31
 30        26
 25
 20
                                                                                   14                 12
 15                               11           11
 10
  5              3                                   2                                   2                 2
                                                                       0
  0
           General       Looking for work      At work         Searching for      Accessing         Accessing
                                                                 housing          healthcare        education

                                              Roma       Non-Roma peers

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011). All sampled Roma and non-Roma were asked
whether they experienced discrimination ‘in general’, over the past 12 months. For the various areas or sectors, only
those Roma and non-Roma who engaged in a specific activity, such as ‘looking for work’, were asked if they
experienced discrimination while being engaged in this activity. These sector-specific reports of discrimination refer
to the past 5 years from the time of the interview (2011), instead of just the past 12 months.




                                                         198
FIGURE 6-4: PERCEIVED DISCRIMINATION AMONG ROMA MEN AND WOMEN IN THE LAST 5
YEARS FROM 2011, BY SECTOR

             50
                                                                              40
             40              34
                      26
   Percent




             30                                                         23
             20                                       14                                        12     15             12      12
                                                8
             10
              0
                  Looking for work             At work                Searching for          Accessing                Accessing
                                                                        housing              healthcare               education

                                                               Male       Female



Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011). For the various areas or sectors, only those Roma
who engaged in a specific activity, such as ‘looking for work’, were asked if they experienced discrimination while
being engaged in this activity. These sector-specific reports of discrimination refer to the past 5 years from the time
of the interview (2011).
Generally, Roma who indicated experience of discrimination do not report it to the
relevant institutional bodies or civil society organizations. As Figure 6-6 shows, in the area of
housing, where discrimination has been most frequently felt by the Roma, only 13 percent
reported it to a relevant organization. The highest number of people reporting discrimination to
authorities did so while experiencing it at work. However, even this figure is only a quarter of all
those who experienced discrimination. Thus 75 percent Roma who felt discriminated against at
work remained quiet.
FIGURE 6-5: INCIDENCE OF DISCRIMINATION AND REPORTING OF SUCH DISCRIMINATION AMONG
THE ROMA IN THE LAST 12 MONTHS FROM 2011, BY SECTOR

             30

             25

             20
   Percent




             15
                     26                                                       2
                                         2
             10                                                                                  1
                                         11                                   13                                  1
             5                                                                                   9
                                                           1                                                      6
                                                           3
             0
                   General        While looking for   While at work     While searching   While accessing   While accessing
                                       work                              for housing       healthcare         education
                                              Sectors in which Roma experience discrimination


                              Experienced discrimination in the last 12 months and reported incident
                              Experienced discrimination in the last 12 months


Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011). Blue bars refer to the share of Roma having
experienced discrimination, but not having reported the incident.
                                                                      199
6.3 DISCRIMINATION AS A BARRIER TO INCLUSION

                         6.3.1   EXCLUSION FROM EARNING OPPORTUNITIES

Employment rates among both Roma men and women are extremely low in comparison to
the national population as highlighted in the chapter on employment, (also Figure 6-6 below),
even though the vast majority of Roma indicate to have a preference for stable employment.
FIGURE 6-6: EMPLOYMENT RATES - ROMA, NON ROMA NEIGHBORS AND NATIONAL POPULATION


                National, 63
                                                                    Non-Roma
                                                                   Neighbors, 48
      Percent




                                         Roma, 33




Source: General Population: Eurostat 2011; Non-Roma neighbors and Roma: UNDP/World Bank/EC regional
Roma survey (2011)201.
When analyzing the gap in employment between Roma and non-Roma neighbors, the
largest part of the gap is explained by different endowments in education, however a
remaining 20 percent is unexplained by measured endowments. This unexplained portion of
the gap could be at least partially attributed to discrimination in the job market (see Annex).

The attitudes and behavior of employers can compound and aggravate the problems of
employment discrimination against Roma. For example, an ERRC report found that job
vacancies are simply not open to Roma, as many companies practice a total exclusion policy. “In
many cases, employers even tell Roma that they are not being hired because they are
“gypsies”202, 203. Furthermore, employers often resort to the practice of requesting educational
qualifications for work that has no relation to the qualifications, or demanding a level of literacy
or numeracy that is not directly related to the job, in order to exclude Roma even from basic
employment. One Roma respondent described, “The Social Services representatives from town




202
    The Employment chapter in this report provides more qualitative evidence on discrimination experienced by
Roma in Romania when looking for work, and on the work floor in the form of unequal or with-held salaries.
203
    Among the 402 Roma surveyed in Romania, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Czech Republic, and Hungary, 64% of working
age Roma indicated experiencing discrimination, and an alarming 49% indicated that employers openly said they
were treating them differently because the individuals were Roma, and a further 5% heard the same from labor offices.
European Roma Rights Center (2005) The Glass Box – Exclusion of Roma from Employment.

                                                        200
hall told me that my educational level, completion of seven years of classes, is not enough for me
to be employed as a street cleaner”204.

ERRC research has demonstrated that these various types of discrimination in the labor
market constrain even the opportunities of qualified Roma. In fact, some types of
discrimination constrain them to jobs that are in some way connected to service delivery for
other Roma people only. “For example, a university-educated Roma can be a social worker for
Roma families, a teacher for Roma children or a Roma advisor in a government office, but they
are almost never simply a social worker, a teacher, or a public servant working in mainstream
functions that provide services for the majority population”205.

Even within the explained part of the employment gap, discrimination is likely to play a
role, through its impact on the education levels that Roma obtain. In other words, the
differences in educational opportunities could also be partly attributable to social exclusion,
including discrimination. As shown in section 6.2, in 2011, 12 percent of all Roma who interact
with educational institutions experienced discrimination in the preceding five years, and seven
percent experienced discrimination in the preceding 12 months. Through this indirect impact,
discrimination could in fact be responsible for a larger part of the gap in employment than the
model suggests.
Wage differences between Roma and non-Roma are also strongly impacted by ethnicity:
monthly wages are significantly lower among Roma than their non-Roma neighbors. In
2011, on average, Roma in Romania earned €80 less than their non-Roma neighbors per month.
€48 of this difference was found to be due to differences in characteristics displayed by the
Roma and non-Roma, such as differences in level of education and age. However, €32 of the gap
between Roma and non-Roma wages remains unexplained by differences in the level of
education and age. This portion of the gap could be attributed to unobserved skills or factors
such as discrimination, norms, and values. Self-reported experiences of discrimination and
secondary research206 provide suggestive evidence that discrimination plays a role in differential
outcomes between Roma and Non Roma, although more evidence would be needed to
conclusively state to what extent discrimination is causing this gap.

                                    6.3.2     UNEQUAL ACCESS TO SERVICES

Discrimination is manifest at many junctures in the provision of basic needs and services.
Results from the focus group discussions carried out with Roma communities207 confirm that the
discriminatory attitudes of service providers are essential barriers to access and quality of


204
      Ibid. The ERRC research in Romania was conducted in six districts, comprising of 78 interviews.
205
      Ibid.
206
    ERRC 2005 “The Glass Box – Exclusion of Roma from Employment”.
207
     A qualitative study was carried out in four localities in Romania (Bucharest, Telechiu village/Bihor County, Măieruș
village/Brașov County and Olteniţa town/Călăraşi County) to assess how discrimination affects Roma people’s motivations in
accessing services and how it impacts their wellbeing. The locations were selected to adequately represent socioeconomic and
spatial (rural, urban, integrated, segregated) differences among the Roma.

                                                               201
services. Attitudes of discrimination also affects Roma people’s motivations in attempting to be
proactive in participating in mainstream society - for example, through their decisions on sending
children to school, accessing healthcare facilities, or looking for paid employment.
In the area of education, for example, Roma pointed to situations of unequal treatment, of
the Roma children in comparison to their peers, by teachers. As a Roma mother from
Telechiu/Bihor explained: “[the situation] is not that good neither with the teachers, nor with the
colleagues [i.e. other children in the class]. The teachers are not teaching the Roma children as
they teach the non-Roma ones.” (Qualitative Research Sept-Oct 2013). At times, Roma stressed
circumstances of direct discrimination and humiliation of their children in school. A Roma father
from Măieruş/Brașov stated that “they used to call my [son] gipsy! Yes! Yes!” On the similar
note, a Roma mother from Telechiu pointed out: “they are talking meanly to the children and
behave badly towards them. And the colleagues call them gipsy; once my daughter came to me
crying because the teacher beat her because other colleagues did something during the break,
and she thought automatically that it is her fault.” (Qualitative Research Sept-Oct 2013).

Teachers also impact children through their expectations of them and their perception of
Roma children’s abilities. In a study conducted by the European Commission208, despite the
fact that Roma children expressed high aspirations for their future, teachers viewed them as
unmotivated students who are not interested in studying. Furthermore, a general perception
among older Roma parents was that the situation has worsened for the current generation of
school attending children who have been more exposed to discrimination than they were.“[There
are] big differences regarding the children, the teachers, the director. Before we were getting
along with each other, not like how it is happening now. We used to play together, even to eat.
Now the teachers and the children are making big differences between Roma and Romanians”
(female participant in focus group in Măieruş/Brașov).

Similarly, in the area of health, discrimination can manifest itself in the segregation of
Roma and Non-Roma patients and the lower quality treatment of the Roma. A Romani
CRISS report209 describes cases in which “Roma and non-Roma women are accommodated in
different [maternity] wards”210. During medical examination, the lack of interest of some medical
staff towards Roma patients is translated in “avoiding physical contact with the patients, non-
involvement of the patients and of their family in choosing the treatment, omission of the
explanations concerning the risks of administering a certain type of treatment, and using
aggressive procedures”. Other examples of discriminatory practices within the health system are:
rejection or redirection of Roma patients to other medical providers; examining Roma patients
only after all non Roma patients have been examined regardless of the order of visit, and the use
of derogatory language towards Roma patients. These types of differential treatment by health



208
  European Commission (2008) Come Closer – Inclusion and Exclusion of Roma in Present Day Romanian
Society
209
    Romani Criss (2012) Roma Health – Perspective of the actors involved in the health system – doctors, health, mediators and
patients.
210
    Ibid p16.
                                                             202
providers could partially explain why so few Roma patients visit health practitioners regularly,
and instead resort to delaying check-ups until they require emergency services.

The lack of access to services is further compounded by the lack of proper identity
documents – an issue linked to the attitude of local authorities and public officials towards
the Roma. The lack of identity cards not only prevents many Roma citizens from participating in
elections, but also prevents access to basic needs and services. One major hurdle has been the
required proof of residence, which many Roma are unable to show because of their informal
housing situations. This is aggravated by lack of literacy as well as discriminatory attitudes on
the part of authorities. As pointed out by a male focus group participant from Măieruş/Brașov: “I
cannot get my ID paper because I have to pay a fine and the local authority would not provide
me with the ID before paying the fine. Now I even have to pay, but before the election all of us
had ID papers for free, and in any circumstances” (Qualitative Research Sept-Oct 2013). The
lack of identity documents for registration, coupled with the hesitation to visit health care
facilities due to practitioners’ attitudes, further increases the incidence of medically unassisted
births, aggravating the problem of identity registration.

                                        6.3.3    SPATIAL SEGREGATION

Discrimination also manifests and impacts Roma well-being through segregation (of schools
and residences)211, and forced evictions. Together, these demonstrate the physical manifestation
of the social distance between Roma and Non Roma. In many ways, segregation is the result of
much more than discrimination. It is in fact the result of historical subjugation in the form of
slavery, mass evictions, and the various policies that disadvantaged Roma (described in the
chapter on housing). However, we know from research in other countries that “a subculture can
be created by dominant groups to implicitly exclude minorities, even when they can afford to
buy homes in their neighborhoods”212. As a result of historical subjugation and the more covert
discriminatory attitudes, neighborhoods have thus become “Roma neighborhoods” as Non-Roma
start leaving when clustering of Roma people increases. Similarly, parents move their children
out of schools, once more Roma children start attending the school. As evidenced in the chapter
on education213, school segregation has strong implications for the quality of education for
Roma. Higher proportions of Roma in a school is associated with lower quality of endowments
of the school: computers, specialized labs, sport fields, library, adequate number of books per
student, as well as fewer qualified teachers and school advisors. Similarly, segregated Roma


211
    European Roma Rights Center, Stigmata: Segregated Schooling of Roma in Central and Eastern Europe , Budapest, 2004;
Iulius Rostas(ed) Ten Years After: a History of Roma School Desegregation in Central and Eastern Europe, REF and CEU Press:
Budapest, 2012; Gabor Kertesi and Gabor Kezdi, School Segregation, School Choice and Educational Policies in 100
Hungarians Towns, Roma Education Fund, 2013.
212
    World Bank (2013). Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. Sustainable Development Network. Social
Development
213
    22% of Roma in Romania aged 7 to 15 who attend regular schools with the majority of schoolmates being Roma while the
share of Roma aged 7 to 15 who attend regular schools with the majority of classmates being Roma in Romania is 18% in
segregated schools and 9% in not segregated schools. Other research indicates even higher figures. Research conducted by
experts in 2010213 using survey and focus groups in 56 compact Roma communities and two samples of almost 1000 Roma each
reveals that 64.5% of the Roma pupils in primary school (classes I-IV) are studying on segregated classes while in the grades V
to VIII 53% of Roma children attend segregated classes.
                                                             203
areas are considered unsafe, unhygienic, and poor, “reflecting at once a judgment on the social
and economic character of the neighborhood”214. Segregation therefore also solidifies the process
of discrimination, as will be discussed in the next section.
The Government of Romania has recognized the issue of school segregation and issued a
Notification in April 2004 followed by a Ministerial Order in 2007 banning school
segregation of Roma. However, cases of segregation continue to be reported and some215 do not
provide for any specific sanctions. Roma school desegregation was a priority within the PHARE
Program, Equal Access to Education for Disadvantaged Groups, implemented by the Ministry of
Education in the period 2003-2007. However, no results on the implementation of the program
have been published by the Ministry of Education to date. Moreover, in spite of the formal
recognition of Roma school segregation as a factor which negatively influences the access to
quality education for Roma, the Ministry of Education did not include any provision on school
segregation of Roma within the new law on education.216
Similarly, the phenomenon of forced evictions also manifests direct forms of
discrimination. Human rights groups have often criticized Romania for the way the Government
ensures access to housing.217 A 2011 Amnesty International report on housing shows that the
Romanian legal framework regarding housing disadvantages Roma218. These reports revealed a
tendency among local authorities to forcibly evict Roma families and relocate them next to
garbage dumps, sewage treatment plants, or industrial areas on the outskirts of cities that could
be hazardous for their health. Moreover, these families find themselves isolated from society and
face additional obstacles to enter the labor market or obtain access to education. Such cases have
been recently reported in several municipalities - Baia Mare, Cluj Napoca, Miercurea Ciuc, and
Piatra Neamt. Though the National Council for Combatting Discrimination (NCCD) has
addressed several cases219 of discriminatory forced evictions, its sanctions have not had any
lasting impact on the phenomenon of forced evictions for the Roma.

6.4 STRUCTURAL AND BEHAVIORAL SOURCES OF DISCRIMINATION
A primary mechanism of discrimination of Roma in Romania is the belief of mainstream
society that the Roma do not want to lift themselves out of poverty. A range of constraints
and disadvantages, including the lack of opportunities, resources, and information, experienced


214
    World Bank (2013). Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. Sustainable Development
Network. Social Development
215
    Referred to NCCD as Ministerial order no. 1540/2007
216
    Law no. 1/2011 on national education published in the Official Gazette no. 18 of January 10th 2011.
217
     Romani Criss SHADOW REPORT FOR THE COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF RACIAL
DISCRIMINATION On the occasion of report of Romania, Bucharest, July 2010-07-27, available at:
http://www.romanicriss.org/PDF/Shadow%20report%20CERD%20Romania%20-2010.pdf; European Roma Rights
Center, Written Comments BY THE EUROPEAN ROMA RIGHTS CENTRE CONCERNING ROMANIA For
Consideration by the European Commission on the Transposition and Application of the Race Directive and on the
Legal       Issues   Relevant      to          Roma       Integration,     Budapest,      2013,     available at:
http://www.errc.org/cms/upload/file/romania-red-written-comments-5-april-2013.pdf.
218
    Amnesty International, Mind the legal gap. Roma and the right to housing in Romania, 2011, available at:
http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/EUR39/004/2011
219
    in Cluj Napoca, Miercurea Ciuc and Baia Mare
                                                      204
by the Roma are often reflected in their values (e.g. attitudes, preferences, aspirations) and
behavior (e.g. decisions and actions), which might have poverty-perpetuating properties. Some
of these values and behaviors make the Roma, as a group, vulnerable to becoming the subject of
ethnic stereotyping, which casts them as “having a negative attitude towards work and life,
wasting money on unproductive activities, and adopting poor and unhealthy lifestyles with no
motivation to break out of the poverty cycle”220. Such ethnic stereotyping leads to disapproval
and contempt, resulting in disrespectful and discriminatory treatment of Roma. This
understanding is shown to be common among local authorities and various types of service
providers, as cited in the PHARE Program and National Roma Agency study from 2008221.

Discrimination is also induced by poverty profiling, or service providers’ profiling of Roma
through assumptions on their lack of financial resources or high risk of default. Social
status and the perception of ability to pay are important factors in the accessibility of health
facilities and quality of treatment. Similarly, bankers often perceive slum-dwellers and informal
sector workers, particularly the Roma, to be a high-risk group of default and do not provide loans
to them. Housing providers often perceive the Roma to be a high-risk group that “does not play
by the rules” 222 and therefore do not lease property to them. As discussed in the housing chapter,
in the view of local authorities interviewed, Roma’s chances of getting access to social housing
are minimum, due to: (i) their perceived ‘lifestyle’ (“the Roma living in slums cannot adjust to
life in a multistory building”), (ii) their inability to make utility payments (since a large number
of Roma are unemployed and surviving largely on social welfare benefits), and (iii) their large
families (often 7-10 members) that would make them ‘unfit’ to live in the small 10-15 square
meter social housing units.

The historical mistrust between Roma and non-Roma people in Romania is argued to be
another major source of discrimination. Attempts to encourage non-discrimination have been
unsuccessful, because they fail to address meaningfully the animosity and mistrust between
Roma and Non-Roma groups deeply rooted in the history of Roma segregation and subjugation.
223
      Scapegoating of Roma, for example, is a form in which such historical mistrust is
manifested. In Romania, the public and some political authorities have been reported to blame
the Roma community for economic and social unrest. 224 According to a recent study conducted
by the National Council for Combating Discrimination (CNCD), about one in five Romanians
citizens believe that national minorities are a threat to the country, and a third view them to
represent problems.225



220
      European Commission (2008) Come Closer – Inclusion and Exclusion of Roma in Present Day Romanian Society
221
     European Commission (2008) Come Closer – Inclusion and Exclusion of Roma in Present Day Romanian
Society. p66.
222
    Interview with Goodbee representative on August 5, 2013
223
    Uzunova Iskra (2012)
224
    Open Letter by Romani Criss. 29th July 2011. And BBC report covered by Active Watch. 19. March 2013.
225
    According to a recent study presented by the National Council for Combating Discrimination (CNCD),
mentioned at http://www.romania-insider.com/study-most-romanians-wouldnt-vote-for-a-woman-president-nor-
accept-a-gay-relative/111342/.
                                                           205
Mistrust towards Roma by mainstream society is often a result of a popular understanding
(or lack of understanding) of elements of Roma culture and “Gypsy law”. The cultures and
norms of the dominant group in society could often actively disrespect groups they consider
subordinate. The dominant group could prevent the subordinate group from fully taking part in
society, by harming their dignity through disrespectful treatments, including (intentional and
unintentional) stereotyping and contempt for their cultures and practices.226 For example,
according to some authors227, certain elements of ‘Roma culture’ and customary laws228 are
interpreted by Non Roma people as a behavioral and cultural shortcoming of the Roma, and are
used as justification in discriminating against the Roma. When asked in a survey, Non-Roma
people claim that their attitude towards Roma is not prejudice but an outcome of the
unacceptable actions and way of life of the Roma229.

Prejudices, poverty-profiling, and historical mistrust are perpetuated by socialization and
the reproduction of negative stereotypes of Roma by the media. For example, parents still
scare children by saying: “if you do not behave yourself, the Gypsies will take you away" 230. The
media—including television, movies, and advertising—also perpetuate negative images and
stereotypes about the Roma, which has been well documented in research231. Articles and images
portray the Roma as provoking violence in cases of community riots or behaving aggressively. In
one analysis, “Non Roma people of the same community were found quoted (improbably)
speaking in grammatically correct Romanian while the Roma were presented as speaking
aggressively, vulgarly or incoherently”232.

In summary, conscious efforts would be required to (a) avoid further diffusion of negative
images of Roma by media; (b) increase interaction between Roma and non-Roma to foster
mutual understanding and challenge historical mistrust; and (c) make discrimination a notion that
is socially unacceptable in Romania.

6.5 LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR COMBATTING ROMA
    DISCRIMINATION
Over the last ten years, considerable progress has been made in putting together a legal
and policy framework to tackle the question of Roma exclusion. However this framework is
currently not effective in deterring acts of discrimination, due to: issues of interpretation and
scope of the law against discrimination, lack of resources and capacity of the implementing
body, lack of transparency in internal procedures, ineffective outreach to Roma groups, and



226
      World Bank (2013). Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank.
227
    Uzunova Iskra (2012)
228
    Such as a fervent believe in oral legal tradition, the concept of gaje (a Roma term encompassing all Non Roma),
and notions of purity and impurity of words and actions
229
    Open Society Institute 2005.
230
    ERRC (1999) Cutting edge: the Romanian press and Roma 1990-1994. Article by Cristina Hanganu.
231
      Bernath G and V. Messing (2011), European Commission (2008), ERRC (1999).
232
      ERRC (1999).
                                                             206
problems of coordination with other sectoral agencies whose involvement is necessary to combat
discrimination at the service delivery level. The section below discusses these in further detail.
Discrimination is defined by the Romanian law against discrimination – Government
Ordinance 137/2000 as: “any difference, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race,
nationality, ethnic origin, language, religion, social status, beliefs, gender, sexual orientation,
age, disability, chronic disease, HIV positive status, belonging to a disadvantaged group or any
other criterion, aiming to or resulting in a restriction or prevention of the equal recognition, use
or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social and
cultural field or in any other fields of public life.” The law also transposes the Race Equality
Directive and Employment Equality Directive of the European Union, into national
legislation233. Furthermore, the law defines the following forms of discrimination: direct
discrimination, indirect discrimination, incitement to discrimination, harassment, victimization,
and multiple discrimination, and sanctions the breach of the right to human dignity. The
provisions of the law against discrimination are complemented by numerous general laws in the
labor234, criminal235 and administrative fields, education236, healthcare237, unemployment238,
audiovisual media239, equal opportunities between men and women240, persons with
disabilities241, social assistance242, and combating violence at sport events243.
However, Romanian law against discrimination could better reflect ground realities in
Romania, for example by explicitly addressing racial segregation. The Romanian law against
discrimination formally complies with the Race Equality Directive (RED), which has become a
standard in assessing domestic laws against discrimination in the European Union. The RED,
nonetheless, sets only minimum standards to be transposed into national legislation by the EU
member states, and segregation, for example, is not expressly prohibited by the Directive244. As
a consequence, segregation is not included in the recent series of amendments introduced to the
non-discrimination legislation in Romania.




233
    Race Equality Directive: 2000/43/EC and Employment Equality Directive: 2000/78/EC.
234
    Law 53 of 24 January 2003, republished and amended, Art 6 (1) and Art. 159 (3).
235
    The Romanian Criminal Code - Law 15/1968 republished and amended, Art. 75 c1), Art 317and Art. 247.
236
    Law No 1 of 5 January 2011 on national education, amended, Art 2 (4), Art 3 (i), Art 3 (j), Art 118 (2), and Art.
50 (3)
237
    Law 95 of 14 April 2006 on reform in healthcare field, amended.
238
    Law no. 76 of 16 January 2002 on unemployment insurance system and employment stimulation, amended.
239
    Law No. 504 of 11 July 2002 on audiovisual, amended.
240
    Law 202 0f 19 April 2002 for Equal Opportunities between Women and Men, republished and amended.
241
    Law 448/2006 regarding the protection and promotion of the rights of disabled persons.
242
    Law 47/2006 establishing the National System of Social Assistance.
243
    Law 4/2008 on preventing and combating violence during sport events.
244
    Lilla Farkas, Segregation of Romani Children in Education: Addressing Structural Discrimination through the
Race Equality Directive, report prepared for the European Commission, July 2007, pp.24-31, underlining the high
potential of the RED to tackle racial segregation of Roma in education shows the difficulties in arguing such cases in
courts. For a detailed analysis on how racial segregation in education could be defined as a special form of
discrimination see Iulius Rostas, Judicial Policy-Making: the Role of the Courts in Promoting School
Desegregation, in Iulius Rostas, Ten Years After: A History of Roma School Desegregation in Central and Eastern
Europe, REF & CEU Press, Budapest, 2012, p 95-99.
                                                        207
The institutional body responsible for applying the law against discrimination is the
National Council for Combating Discrimination (NCCD). A quasi-judicial body, consisting
of a nine member Steering Committee with the equivalent rank of a deputy-minister, appointed
by the Parliament for a five-year mandate, the NCCD has found it challenging to combat
discrimination and perform its duties, partly due to its very broad mandate. It is held responsible
for implementing the law against discrimination245 overseeing harmonization of legal provisions
of different laws that are not in compliance with nondiscrimination principles, and for acting as a
policy-making body as regards non-discrimination246. In addition to addressing individual and
legal people’s complaints, NCCD is also responsible for initiating investigations ex officio, and
mediating between parties. Despite this broad mandate of the institution, NCCD is understaffed
and underfinanced, as reported by the President of NCCD in different interviews247.
The NCCD is staffed with decision-makers that may not be formally trained in “judicial
interpretation technique”, and whose decisions therefore run the risk of restricting
fundamental rights like free speech and assembly. The criteria for being nominated as a
member of the NCCD Steering Committee do not include the requirement of law studies or
judicial expertise248. The experience in human rights is often not considered by the political
parties when nominating their candidates249. Human rights groups have expressed doubts about
the capacity of the proposed candidates to apply the law against discrimination due to lack of
expertise.250
There are no transparent internal procedures to guarantee that the cases are timely and
comprehensively addressed, result in a formal report with evidence, and that the cases are
resolved within the period prescribed by the law. The procedural non-transparencies make it
impossible to assess the standards applied by NCCD in examining cases. There are no clear
references to how the decisions were made, how the law applies to particular facts in a specific
case, and justification behind their arguments251. In addition, NCCD does not publish its
decisions on its website regularly. Its website is not updated periodically and no decisions since
2008 have been made available to the public. This has a direct effect on those concerned with
such cases, including victims and their defenders, as timely access to NCCD decisions could lead


245
    Preventing discrimination, mediating between the parties, investigating, finding and sanctioning discrimination,
monitoring discrimination cases, as well as providing legal assistance to victims of discrimination. Government
Ordinance 137/2000, Art. 19.
246
    Government Ordinance 137/2000, Art. 18.
247
    Civil Society Monitoring Report on the Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy and Decade
Action Plan in 2012 in Romania, Budapest, 2013, p.50.
248
    The selection criteria to be nominated as a member of the Steering Board of NCCD are: to have a university
degree, no criminal record, experience in human rights and non-cooperation with the repressive communist secret
police. Although there is no specific requirement for candidates to be law graduates, there is a requirement that two
thirds of the Steering Committee members to be law graduates. Art 27 of the Ordinance 137/2000.
249
    Opinion expressed by civil society organization during a consultative workshop with stakeholders (Bucharest,
September 25, 2013)
250
    Romani Criss and Roma Civic Alliance, Shadow report for the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination On the occasion of report of Romania Bucharest , July 2010-07-27, p.10-11. Though it is under the
authority of the parliament, in practice, the relatively loose criteria for selection make the members of the NCCD
Steering Committee dependent on the will of the political party that nominated her/him.
251
    Whereas internationally, discrimination cases typically include such information in case decision files.
                                                        208
to an improvement of the complaints submitted through references to similar cases. Many cases
could also be aided by direct references to previous NCCD decisions. But the NCCD has not
published to date any investigation reports it conducted, or that was used as a proof in
discrimination cases. Thus, by increasing transparency, NCCD could enhance the prevention
effect of its decisions and investigations. The spread of such information would also enable
active citizenship among the Roma who can learn of such cases.
Data also reveals a need to spread awareness and information that there are formal
channels for Roma to air their feelings of injustice. As Figure 6-8 shows, a large majority of
the Roma population in Romania (69 percent of all surveyed Roma) is unaware of the existence
of any organizations that can offer support or advice to people who have been discriminated
against. The knowledge of the possibilities of grievance redress, and examples of successful
cases or at least of other Roma who have reached out to public bodies for help, might also induce
active citizenship and reduce the feelings of helplessness and resignation that are seen among
many Roma caught in a cycle of discrimination and poverty. Data however shows that
knowledge of laws against discrimination is slightly better, with only 29 percent respondents
thinking that there are no laws against discrimination. However, as the section below
demonstrates, the existence of a legal framework has to be supported by equally strong capacity
of institutions implementing the law for it to be effective in realizing Roma inclusion. The
section below discusses these legal and institutional frameworks and their challenges and
limitations.
FIGURE 6-2: RESPONDENTS WHO KNOW OF                        FIGURE 6-3: RESPONDENTS WHO THINK THAT
ORGANISATIONS IN ROMANIA THAT CAN                          THERE ARE LAWS IN ROMANIA FORBIDDING
OFFER SUPPORT OR ADVICE TO PEOPLE WHO                      DISCRIMINATION      AGAINST     ETHNIC
HAVE BEEN DISRIMINATED AGAINST.                            MINORITIES

                 Roma,                                                     Roma, Non-                      Non-
                                                                          Male, 45 Roma             Roma, Roma
                Male, 12 Non-                    Non-
                                                                                 neighbors         Female,
                                                                                                         neighbors
                         Roma                    Roma
                                                                                 , Male, 40          36 , Female,
                       neighbors              neighbors
                                        Roma,                                                                36
                       , Male, 8              , Female,
                                       Female, 8
                                                   7
      Percent




                                                                Percent




                     Roma      Non-Roma neighbors                              Roma       Non-Roma neighbors


Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).
The low rates at which NCCD admits and sanctions complaints also reflects the limited
access of discrimination victims to remedy. According to NCCD’s last annual report, only 16
percent of the received complaints were declared admitted.252 Moreover, though the law against




252
  National Council for Combating Discrimination, Report on the implementation of the race directive in Romania,
2003-2010, p. 29, available at: http://www.cncd.org.ro/files/file/Raport%20D43_2000_CNCD_final.pdf
                                                          209
discrimination requires NCCD to use monetary fines253, in practice, it also issues warnings or
recommendations only - that are not provided for by the law against discrimination. As stated in
the last annual report, in 2012 NCCD has issued only 35 fines but 55 recommendations, 58
warnings.254
Finally, in spite of being amended in March 2013 at the requests of civil society, the law
against discrimination still does not include more adequate remedies as a part of re-
establishing status quo antes - equal opportunity plans, diversity management trainings, duty to
adopt equality and non-discrimination principles.

6.6 POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR COMBATTING DISCRIMINATION
Two key policy documents are aimed at combating discrimination against Roma in
Romania. They are: National Strategy for Implementing the Measures for Preventing and
Combating Discrimination for the Period 2007-2013 Strategy (hereinafter the NCCD Strategy)
adopted by the NCCD, and the National Roma Inclusion Strategy (NRIS). The responsible
institutions for implementation and coordination of different institutional activities are NCCD
and the National Agency for Roma (NAR).
The National Strategy for Implementing the Measures for Preventing and Combating
Discrimination for the Period 2007-2013 (the NCCD strategy) is NCCD’s strategy for
combatting discrimination, adopted through an order of the President of NCCD255. The NCCD
strategy, however, falls short of defining clear measures to achieve the priorities and goes only as
far as analyzing existing gaps.
NCCD strategy lacks the involvement of other state institutions in preventing and
combating discrimination in Romania. The NCCD strategy requires coordination and
involvement of other sectoral line agencies for fighting discrimination. However, there is no


253
    fines ranging from 1,000 and 30,000 RON (approx. EUR 220 – 6,670) when the victim is an individual; and
between 2,000 and 100,000 RON (approx. EUR 450) when the victims of the discrimination are a group. These
sanctions were introduced only in March 2013, as Romanian Government amended the law against discrimination in
view of the upcoming case before the European Court of Justice and the threat to face legal actions from the side of
the European Commission. See Adrian Marin and Ágnes Csonta, Discrimination of Roma Communities: Romania
National Report, Fundaţia Secretariatul Romilor and Centrul de Resurse Juridice, Bucuresti, 2013, p. 13.
254
             NCCD            Annual          Report           2012,          p.          31,        available       at:
http://www.cncd.org.ro/files/file/Raport%20de%20activitate%20CNCD%202012.pdf. In the past, for the period
2003-2010, NCCD has received 823 complaints of alleged discrimination based on race or ethnicity, found
discrimination in 129 cases and issued the following sanctions: 61 warnings, 29 fines, 27 recommendations, in 5
cases it just found discrimination but did nothing further, in 4 cases it applied both a warning and a recommendation,
in 2 cases a fine and a warning and in 1 case a fine and a recommendation. NCCD Report on the implementation of
the        race       directive      in        Romania,         2003-2010,          p.       32,      available     at:
http://www.cncd.org.ro/files/file/Raport%20D43_2000_CNCD_final.pdf
255
    The NCCD strategy is organized in four chapters referring to the functions and scope of the strategy, its objectives and
priorities, its applications and implementation and financing. The strategy identified five objectives – (1) effective protection and
remedies, (2) equal opportunities in employment, (3) access to public services, (4) diversity awareness in media, culture and
sport, and (5) zero tolerance policy towards discrimination - each one followed by priorities and some measures to be taken by
NCCD in cooperation with other institutions. Order no 286 from 29 of August 2007 regarding the approval of the national
strategy for implementing the measures for preventing and combating discrimination for the period 2007-2013, published in
Monitorul Oficial, part I, No 674 from 3 October 2007.
                                                               210
formal action plan for NCCD involvement in the decisions of sectoral ministries. The NCCD
does not have the power to assign responsibilities to other institutions through an order of its
President. Thus, in spite of the NCCD strategy’s label as a “national strategy”, it is challenging
for NCCD to formally involve other institutions in preventing and combating discrimination in
Romania by having them commit to the objectives, priorities and measures foreseen in its
strategy. This has burdened NCCD to implement the policy on its own.
An analysis conducted by the civil society organizations in Romania in 2013 confirms the
limited cooperation between NCCD and other ministries and agencies256. The report
underlines the fact that there is no cooperation between NCCD and the Ministry of Education in
combating school segregation of Roma children or cooperation with other line ministries during
policy-making. Reportedly, according to a member of the NCCD Steering Committee, NCCD
received no answer from the Ministry of Health when the latter was asked to issue guidelines to
hospitals in order to avoid segregation of Roma patients. 257 Moreover, the NCCD President
accepts that the institution does not have enough capacity to carry out the screening of the
government policies.258
The Strategy of the Government of Romania for the Inclusion of Romanian Citizens
Belonging to the Roma Minority for the Period 2012-2020 (hereinafter NRIS) only limitedly
address discrimination against Roma. Discrimination is only generally defined in the NRIS,
without a proper analysis of how discrimination manifests itself at the sectoral level. Out of the
seven objectives of the NRIS, only two refer to discrimination (both in education)259. Similarly,
the sectoral action plans are of a general character and in areas like health, housing, employment,
and culture, no measures that address discrimination against Roma are presented. The state
structure in charge with the elaboration and coordination of the strategy is the National Agency
for Roma (NAR), set up as a governmental agency in October 2004. NAR is the governmental
structure that implements policies and the Government’s strategy for Roma inclusion, and
cooperates with line ministries and state institutions in carrying out its mandate. To date, NAR
has not published any report on the implementation of the NRIS.
The principles of equality and non-discrimination do not appear to be sufficiently
mainstreamed in policy-making in Romania. Since the government standards on adopting
policies (specified by the Government of Romania)260 oblige all proposed policies to be


256
   Civil Society Monitoring Report on the Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy and Decade Action Plan in
2012 in Romania, Budapest, 2013, p.50-52.
257
    Civil Society Monitoring Report on the Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy and Decade
Action Plan in 2012 in Romania, Budapest, 2013, p.50.
258
    Civil Society Monitoring Report on the Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy and Decade
Action Plan in 2012 in Romania, Budapest, 2013, p.51.
259
    “(1) Ensuring an equal, free and universal access of the Romanian citizens belonging to Roma minority to quality
education at all levels in the public education system, in order to support the economic growth and the development
of a knowledge-based society. (2) Promoting inclusive education within the education system, including by
preventing and eliminating segregation, as well as by fighting against discrimination based on ethnicity, social
status, disability or other criteria that affect children and young people from disadvantaged groups, including
Roma.” These objectives are further copy-pasted as specific objectives in education.
260
    The Government of Romania has specified standards for policy making. These standards refer to the procedures
for elaborating, monitoring and evaluation of public policies at central level, 260 the types of policy documents and
                                                           211
accompanied by an assessment of its responsibilities, estimate costs, and estimate impacts, the
principles of equality and non-discrimination could be mainstreamed in every policy proposal by
assessing whether the policies affect Roma and Non Roma in an equal and non-discriminatory
manner.

6.7 EXISTING INITIATIVES
As the legal and policy analyses show, a major part of the challenge in combatting
discrimination is the lack of transposition of laws and policies into practical settings at the
sectoral level, as well as the commitment of public authorities to effective implementation.
Moreover, legislative changes alone cannot easily alter discriminatory attitudes and negative
stereotypes and historical mistrust between Roma and Non Roma. Little has been done at the
sectoral level to combat discrimination. The lack of national level programs or projects
combatting discrimination, especially at the level of service delivery, is a major policy gap.
However, a number of smaller scale approaches are worth noting for their goals of tackling some
of the causes of discrimination.

One approach to tackling discrimination has been to increase the “cultural competency” of
service providers. For example, as the education, health, and social protection chapters describe,
Roma mediators and counselors have produced positive impacts by being a bridge between
Roma communities and schools/health facilities, or between the Roma people and public
officials. Intercultural education and mediation programs serve to close the communication gap
and lead to mutual awareness and understanding between different groups. In the area of health,
the “Nondiscrimination in the Universities of Medicine and Pharmacy from Romania” program,
financed by the Open Society Foundation, trains health care providers in four universities - Iasi,
Cluj Napoca, Tirgu Mures, and Bucharest – to increase their knowledge, respect, and
understanding of Roma health patients. Courses on diversity and sensitivity to minorities are
given to students as well as university teachers, and practical training is given to students to
promote respect for the Roma minorities. The program also undertakes advocacy to promote
teaching courses on ethics and non-discrimination in the health system, and provides technical
and monitoring support within the universities. Also, an advocacy campaign is directed at the
Ministry of Education, and the Ministry of Health, to adopt legal instruments to recognize and to
recommend the course to other medical education institutions in Romania.

Cultural competency programs aim to dispel the ethnic stereotypes imposed upon Roma
people. Although no comprehensive evaluation of the above mentioned program is available,
some elements of good practice to take into account based on this program should not be
overlooked. Some key principles of similar programs include: buy-in of the health care provider,
integration of training into medical courses, continuation of the module through the entire
duration of medical education (graduate and postgraduate) – “with the first few years focusing on
basic skills (for example, awareness about beliefs of certain groups) and the last few focusing on
techniques for reaching specific groups that are more discipline specific, and finally, an in-depth


their content260, the content of the motivation documents accompanying any policy document including impact
assessment260, and procedures for the adoption of policy documents260.
                                                   212
understanding of the socio-cultural background of minority groups. Randomized control
evaluations of [similar] cultural competence training, though rare, show that such training can
improve the attitudes of health care providers and improve patient satisfaction”261.

Another approach in addressing discrimination is the promotion of community level
integrated programs. It aims to simultaneously tackle multiple sources of Roma
disadvantage, so as to address the lack of trust and negative stereotypes. The Ruhama
Foundation’s Early Childhood Education and Care programs are one such example. The
program includes a counseling and support center for both parents and children, motivational
programs targeting children who are at risk of school drop-out, the building of Multi- Functional
Community Centers to serve as a childcare center, and summer kindergartens for Roma and non-
Roma children that have not attended public kindergarten. As part of the early childhood care
integrated programs, funds are also allocated to improving living conditions (housing repairs,
water connections, etc.), and to the promotion of Roma and Non Roma interactions within
communities (picnics, social gatherings).

The rationale behind such programs is to simultaneously tackle the multiple sources of
discrimination and exclusion - such as poverty and low human capital endowments (constraints
leading to behaviors that foster the stereotype of the culture of poverty), as well as lack of
cooperation and social interaction between Roma and Non Roma. Programs are based on the
understanding that an investment into early childhood education will bring a greater change in
the long term for a child when her family also has access to electricity, potable water, and
interacts with Non Roma parents. In the longer term, these experiences show the need for
integrated public policies and programs for Roma experiencing discrimination and poverty.

A third good practice is the promotion of participatory community level programs to bring
together disadvantaged Roma and Non Roma groups so that they can learn to appreciate
their common experiences and backgrounds, and work together to solve common
problems. The PACT Foundation’s program “Learning, Participation, Trust” is one example,
which is designed to empower marginalized and disadvantaged groups from communities in the
south of Romania. The program stimulates the participation of citizens living in small rural and
small-medium urban communities (up to 30.000 inhabitants) to associate and collaborate, acting
in a collective way inside structured entities at the community level. The program, on the one
hand, promotes citizens’ participation in public matters, at the benefit of the community as a
whole, and, on the other hand, facilitates dialogue between citizens, community groups and
various social and political actors, by involving them, together, in different actions for their
community.

The promise of such participatory projects is corroborated by evidence from a behavioral
experiment using trust games262. It provides robust evidence that inclusive ground level


261
   ibid. p223
262
    Bracic A (2013) EU Accession, Membership and Human Rights: Discrimination against the Roma in Slovenia and Croatia.
Dissertation Working Paper.
                                                          213
activities aimed at improving relations between Roma and non-Roma helped reduce
discrimination. In the trust games, the non-Roma subjects were randomly paired with Roma or
non-Roma partners, and the goal was to compare the way non-Roma subjects behaved when
partnered with a Roma to the way they behaved when partnered with a non-Roma. Such games
have proven to be effective in revealing discrimination in a wide variety of field settings. The
results suggested that Roma/non-Roma interaction softens the public mood and reduce inter-
group anxiety. Events such as concerts, theater and dance classes, and social gatherings could be
used to allow Roma and non-Roma to interact.

6.8 RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the findings of the study discussed above, this section presents recommendations
for (1) addressing the sources of discrimination; and (2) addressing the acts of
discrimination both by Non Roma population against Roma in general and by public
service providers. The roots of discrimination, such as negative stereotypes and mistrust need
to be combated by reducing negative portrayal of the Roma and increasing interactions between
Roma and non-Roma to foster mutual understanding. Acts of discrimination need to be strictly
sanctioned on a zero-tolerance basis through effective and consistent application of the law
against discrimination. Sources of discrimination at the service delivery level could be reduced
by strengthening the cultural competency of public officials (teachers, health care providers,
police, mayors) and by increasing the numbers and capacity of mediators who serve as the bridge
between Roma and service providers. In this regard, the recommendations are aimed to (a)
strengthen the legal and institutional frameworks to enforce the law against discrimination in
order to more effectively deter and penalize unlawful acts of discrimination; (b) increase the
coordination and capacity of entities responsible for implementing measures combatting
discrimination; (c) scale-up promising measures that could address discrimination at the level of
service delivery; (d) foster interaction and mutual understanding between Roma and Non Roma;
(e) reduce projection of negative images of Roma by media; (f) make discrimination a socially
unacceptable notion.

6.8.1 POLICY GOAL 1: STRENGTHEN THE APPLICATION OF THE LAW AGAINST
      DISCRIMINATION

To foster a culture of zero-tolerance to discrimination, the law against discrimination and the
institutional arrangements for its enforcement could be strengthened. It could be done by further
clarifying how unlawful acts of discrimination will be sanctioned, making the public more aware
of the law, and increasing the capacity of the enforcement bodies to consistently apply the law.

       POLICY MEASURE 1A: REVISIT THE LAW AGAINST DISCRIMINATION TO INCREASE ITS
                           APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEABILITY

The law against discrimination could be strengthened to further clarify (a) penalties
corresponding to each type and nature of acts of discrimination (e.g. denial/unequal quality of
service provision, exclusion from job openings, unequal pay); and (b) the entities responsible for
enforcement. It could also consider including: a definition of racial segregation as a form of

                                               214
discrimination; explicit provision and effective mechanisms to enforce a law against school
segregation; and the procedures on relocation (eviction) to protect affected people.

         POLICY MEASURE 1B: AMEND THE INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK OF THE NCCD TO
                              INCREASE ITS EFFECTIVENESS

The mandate and capacity of the NCCD could be further clarified and the legal basis for
assuming such roles fortified, especially with regard to its roles as (a) an investigator of
suspected cases of discrimination and (b) enforcer of penalties. The functioning of the NCCD
could also be enhanced by (a) revising the appointment procedure of the Steering Committee to
ensure its technical capacity and independence from political influence; (b) revising its reporting
procedures to increase the transparency of the decisions it makes; (c) creating channels of
effective dissemination at all levels (national, regional and local) in order to increase the public
awareness of its functions and the services it provides; and (d) budgeting realistic funds to
undertake its functions.
        POLICY MEASURE 1C: ESTABLISH AN ASSISTANCE SERVICE SYSTEM FOR VICTIMS OF
                     DISCRIMINATION TO ADDRESS THEIR SITUATIONS

Victims of discrimination are often not aware of the existing framework for addressing such
situations. Even in situations when they would be aware, they frequently lack the knowledge and
means to make full use of the mechanism to deter and combat discrimination. An assistance
service system could be created at county level (equipped with specialized human resources,
office, equipment, budget). It could provide victims of discrimination with assistance in
addressing instances of discrimination and help them through legal options, including complaints
to the NCCD or in civil courts. The assistance service, for example, could be provided in a form
of telephone hotline, to which Roma could access at any time to seek guidance on the use of the
mechanism to report and address discrimination.

6.8.2 POLICY GOAL 2: PRIORITIZE AND MAINSTREAM CONCRETE ACTIONS TO
      COMBAT DISCRIMINATION AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL

         POLICY MEASURE 2A: REVISE THE NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR IMPLEMENTING THE
                MEASURES FOR PREVENTING AND COMBATING DISCRIMINATION

The current NCCD Strategy could be revised to reflect a comprehensive strategy for combatting
discrimination. It will be critical for the strategy to define clear objectives, targets, a set of
concrete actions to achieve them, the entities responsible for implementing them, and a
monitoring and evaluation framework, all supported by realistic budgetary grounds. Such a
strategy would enable scaling-up of promising measures at the national-level. The strategy could
be formed as part of the NRIS, or as a new National Strategy for Implementing the Measures for
Preventing and Combating Discrimination for a period beyond 2013, and help mainstream
measures to combat discrimination across ministries and agencies. It would be important for the
strategy to follow the standards of the Romanian government for policy formulation and have an
adequate statutory power that implies respective accountability of the entities responsible for its

                                                215
implementation. Some of the concrete actions to be considered for inclusion in the strategy are
presented below.
The Equality Act 2010 from the United Kingdom provides a good practice example of how the
responsibility for non-discrimination can be placed in the hands of government authorities and
service providers, with a clear monitoring of compliance, so as to foster a proactive approach to
promote equality. Under the act, specific obligations are assigned to public bodies, which
include, inter alia: (a) eliminating unlawful discrimination, victimization and other conduct
prohibited in the Equality Act 2010, (b) removing disadvantages suffered by people in accessing
services due to their characteristics, (c) taking steps to meet the needs of discriminated groups,
and (d) encouraging people from discriminated groups to participate in public life where it is
disproportionately low.

6.8.3 POLICY GOAL 3: CREATE MECHANISMS TO PROMOTE INTERACTION AND
      FOSTER MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN ROMA AND NON ROMA


        POLICY MEASURE 3A: CREATE A NATIONAL-LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK
          TO FUND PROJECTS THAT REQUIRE COLLABORATION AND GENERATE MUTUAL
                        BENEFITS BETWEEN ROMA AND NON-ROMA

A project funding scheme could be established at the national level to fund local-level,
integrated, and/or participatory projects of mutual interest to Roma and Non Roma
disadvantaged groups, that require collaboration between the two. Such projects will facilitate
collaboration and increased interaction between the two groups and could help foster increased
mutual understanding and respect, thereby reducing a key source of discrimination. Such a
scheme could be established through calls of proposals to be launched under Operational
Programs of the EU Funds. The Ruhama Foundation’s Early Childhood Education Programs and
the PACT participatory programs mentioned above are examples of such projects.

6.8.4 POLICY GOAL 4: STRENGTHEN NATIONAL LEVEL PROGRAMS TO COMBAT
      DISCRIMINATION IN SERVICE DELIVERY


          POLICY MEASURE 4A: INCLUDE CULTURAL COMPETENCY MODULES IN TRAINING
                                      CURRICULUMS

Cultural competency modules could be developed and introduced within the mandatory
curriculum for the initial and continuous formation of public officials (teachers, health care
providers, policemen, public servants, mediators). The module would include materials on
diversity and sensitivity to minorities, and provide practical training to students to promote
respect for the Roma minorities. The module for health care providers, for example, could build
on the module developed through non-discrimination in the Universities of Medicine and
Pharmacy from Romania project.


                                               216
Box 6.1: Potentials of the Role of Roma Mediators and Counsellors
Romania has been a pioneer in involving Roma mediators, introduced by Romani CRISS, a
Roma NGO, as early as in 1992 as part of a community conflict mitigation program. Romania
was also the first country in the region to institutionalize the Roma health mediator program in
2002.

Roma mediators serve as a bridge between Roma communities and schools or health facilities, or
between the Roma families and public officials. Qualitative research conducted for this report
suggests that these mediators can play an important role. Local health mediators, for example,
can contribute to changing the social norms that have discouraged the uptake of health services
by addressing the social stigma associated with accessing services of counseling, reproductive
health services, and testing for sexually transmitted infections. Roma school mediators are said
to also have had a positive impact on a wide range of areas, including a decrease in the number
of school dropouts and non-enrolment cases, improvement of school attainment and academic
performance of Roma students, reduction of absenteeism among students, and combating the
segregation of Roma and non-Roma students in classes and contributions to the desegregation of
schools. Roma mediators are reported to have achieved improvements in the communication
between the school and the Roma community, in the attitude of teachers towards the Roma and
in promoting the overall development of the Roma communities, outside their role in the field of
education.

A regional qualitative review of Roma health mediators of the Open Society Public Health
Program conducted by OSF shows that mediators have generally had success in changing the
knowledge and attitudes of health care providers.263 The mediators report reduction in
discriminatory behaviors and use of abusive language by doctors with whom they work. They
also believe that they have helped physicians to gain better understanding of Roma and enhanced
their ability to provide care through more effective interactions with Roma patients.

          POLICY MEASURE 4B: INTODUCE A THIRD-PARTY OMBUDSPERSON FUNCTION TO
          MONITOR OBSERVANCE OF NON-DISCRIMINATION PRINCIPLES IN PUBLIC SERVICE
                                        PROVISION

Ombudspersons could be deployed to monitor the observance of non-discrimination principles
by public service providers (e.g. healthcare system, social assistance programs, teachers) either
on a regular basis or on a demand-basis. In case of non-observance, respective providers could
be forwarded to be dealt with by the law against discrimination or re-trained through the
aforementioned cultural competency modules (Policy Measure 4A).               The function of
ombudsperson could be assigned to the NCCD or to another institution.


263
       Open Society Foundations (2011).               Roma Health Mediators: Success           and   Challenges.
http://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/sites/default/files/roma-health-mediators-20111022.pdf


                                                      217
                POLICY MEASURE 4C: SCALE-UP ROMA MEDIATOR PROGRAMS

Roma mediators and counselors have produced positive impacts by being a bridge between
Roma communities and schools, or between the Roma people and public officials; also serving
as a deterrent to discriminatory practices by public service providers. Their numbers could be
increased to cover more communities and provide more extensive support to Roma. The Chapter
on institutional mechanism provides recommendations on clarifying a mechanism for securing
funding for health and education mediators (Policy Measure 3B).

6.8.5 POLICY GOAL 5: SEEK REDUCTION OF THE MEDIA CONTENTS THAT
      PERPETUATE NEGATIVE STEREOTYPES ABOUT THE ROMA


         POLICY MEASURE 5A: INTRODUCE A SURVEILLANCE MECHANISM TO DETECT AND
              SEEK REDUCTION OF NEGATIVE IMAGES OF THE ROMA IN THE MEDIA

In cooperation with the governing body regulating the national media industry, the contents of
TV, movies, and advertisements that perpetuate negative stereotypes about the Roma could be
monitored and identified. When identified, the governing body could send an advisory warning
(which could be followed by a sanction), to the producer/emitter of the content, raising their
awareness of the implications such contents can have to society.

6.8.6 POLICY GOAL 6: MAKE DISCRIMINATION A SOCIALLY UNACCEPTABLE
      NOTION IN ROMANIA


               POLICY MEASURE 6A: LAUNCH A NATION-WIDE CAMPAIGN AGAINST
                                     DISCRIMINATION

An intensive nation-wide awareness campaign could be launched to make discrimination a
notion that is socially unacceptable in Romania. Role models and opinion leaders could be
engaged in the campaign to transmit strong messages to condemn discrimination as a wrong and
disgraceful conduct that should not be tolerated by society.




                                             218
6.8.7 IMPLEMENTATION

                             Summary Table of Policy Recommendations
Recommendation                   Entity(ies) best       Impact                Time frame     Monitoring indicator
                                 placed to implement    (Critical impact;     Short:  <  6
                                 the recommendation     High impact;          months;
                                                        Enabling condition)   Medium: 6-18
                                                                              months;
                                                                              Long: >18
                                                                              months
Policy Goal 1: Strengthen the Application of the law against discrimination
Policy Measure 1A: Revisit       Ministry of Justice    Critical impact       Medium         The      law   against
the law against discrimination                                                               discrimination      is
to increase its applicability                                                                revised (YES/NO)
and enforceability
                                                                                             The      law    defines
                                                                                             specific       penalties
                                                                                             corresponding to each
                                                                                             type of forbidden act of
                                                                                             discrimination
                                                                                             (YES/NO)
                                                                                             The      law    defines
                                                                                             enforcing       entities
                                                                                             corresponding to each
                                                                                             type of forbidden act of
                                                                                             discrimination
                                                                                             (YES/NO)
Policy Measure 1B: Amend         NCCD (initiate the     Enabling              Medium         The       institutional
the institutional framework of   amendment)             condition                            framework    of     the
the NCCD to increase its                                                                     NCCD is amended
effectiveness                                                                                (YES/NO).
                                                                                             The        institutional
                                                                                             framework        clearly
                                                                                             defines the mandate
                                                                                             and capacity of NCCD
                                                                                             (YES/NO).
                                                                                             The        appointment
                                                                                             procedure    of    the
                                                                                             Steering Committee is
                                                                                             revised (YES/NO)
                                                                                             %        of     Steering
                                                                                             Committee      members
                                                                                             selected through the
                                                                                             new         appointment
                                                                                             procedure     (technical
                                                                                             criteria)
                                                                                             Reporting    procedures

                                                       219
                                                                                          of its decisions are
                                                                                          revised to increase
                                                                                          transparency
                                                                                          (YES/NO)
                                                                                          % of decisions on
                                                                                          reported     cases     of
                                                                                          discrimination
                                                                                          disclosed to the public
                                                                                          New       dissemination
                                                                                          channels created to
                                                                                          increase the public
                                                                                          awareness      of    its
                                                                                          functions    and    the
                                                                                          services it provides
                                                                                          (YES/NO)
                                                                                          %       of     (Roma)
                                                                                          population aware of the
                                                                                          services provided by
                                                                                          NCCD
Policy Measure 1C: Establish    NCCD                    Enabling          Long            Assistance     service
an assistance service system                            condition                         system     established
for victims of discrimination                                                             (YES/NO)
to address their situations
                                                                                          # of (Roma) victims of
                                                                                          discrimination
                                                                                          accessing the assistance
                                                                                          service
                                                                                          #     of     cases     of
                                                                                          discrimination resolved
                                                                                          through the support of
                                                                                          the assistance service
Policy Goal 2: Prioritize and mainstream concrete actions to combat discrimination at the national level
Policy Measure 2A: Revise       NCCD, NAR, with         High impact       Medium          The national strategy is
the National Strategy for       other       relevant                                      revised (YES/NO)
Implementing the Measures       ministries.
                                                                                          The strategy defines
for Preventing and Combating
                                                                                          clear        objectives,
Discrimination
                                                                                          priorities, and targets
                                                                                          (YES/NO)
                                                                                          The strategy presents a
                                                                                          set of concrete actions
                                                                                          to achieve the targets
                                                                                          (YES/NO)
                                                                                          The strategy defines the
                                                                                          entities responsible for
                                                                                          implementing         the
                                                                                          concrete actions and
                                                                                          provides      budgetary

                                                       220
                                                                                         estimates (YES/NO)
Policy Goal 3: Create mechanisms to promote interaction and foster mutual understanding between Roma and
non Roma
Policy Measure 3A: Create a       NAR,        Managing      Enabling          Long       The            national
national level implementation     Authorities       of      condition                    implementation
framework to fund projects        Operational Programs                                   framework to fund
that require collaboration and    of EU Funds                                            collaboration projects
generate mutual benefits                                                                 created (YES/NO)
between Roma and non-Roma
                                                                                         #    of collaboration
                                                                                         projects funded
                                                                                         # of Roma and non-
                                                                                         Roma participating in
                                                                                         /benefitting       from
                                                                                         collaboration projects
Policy Goal 4: Strengthen national level programs to combat discrimination in service delivery
Policy Measure 4A: Include        Ministries         of     High impact       Medium     Modules      developed
cultural competency modules       Education,    Health,                                  (YES/NO)
in training curriculums           Labor
                                                                                         # of public service
                                                                                         providers   received
                                                                                         training on cultural
                                                                                         competency
Policy Measure 4B: Introduce      NCCD                      Enabling          Medium     # of discrimination
a third-party ombudsperson                                  condition                    cases reviewed by
function      to       monitor                                                           ombudspersons
observance        of       non-
discrimination principles in
public service provision
Policy Measure 4C: Scale-up       Ministries         of     High impact       Medium     # of Roma mediators
Roma Mediator Programs            Education,    Health,                                  deployed
                                  Labor
                                                                                         #   of    communities
                                                                                         supported by Roma
                                                                                         mediators
Policy Goal 5: Seek reduction of the media contents that perpetuate negative stereotypes about the Roma
Policy Measure 5A: Introduce      Ministry            of    Critical impact   Medium     # of occasions in which
a surveillance mechanism to       Communications and                                     media           creator/
detect and reduce negative        Information Society                                    broadcaster    received
images of the Roma in the                                                                advisory warning
media


Policy Goal 6: Make Discrimination a Socially Unacceptable Notion in Romania
Policy Measure 6A: Launch a       Ministry          of      High impact       Short-     % of population who
Nation-wide         Campaign      Communications and                          Medium-    consider discrimination
against Discrimination            Information Society,                        Long       an unacceptable notion.

                                                           221
Ministry of Education




                        222
REFERENCES
Amnesty International (2011) Mind the legal gap. Roma and the right to housing in Romania, available at:
http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/EUR39/004/2011

Kenneth Arrow (1971) The Theory of Discrimination. Working Papers 403, Princeton University, Department of
Economics, Industrial Relations Section

Barbu, Daniel (2011) Roma and the public discourse in Romania: Best practice guidelines, Bucharest: Romani
Criss.

Becker Gary (1957) The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Bernath Gabor and Vera Messing (2011) Pushed to the Edge. Research Report on the Representation of Roma
Communities in the Hungarian Majority Media. Budapest: Central European University

Duminica, Gelu & Ivasiuc, Ana (2010) A school for everybody? Access of Roma children to quality education,
Bucharest: UNICEF.

European Roma Rights Center (1999) Cutting edge: the Romanian press and Roma 1990-1994. Article by Cristina
Hanganu.

European Commission PHARE (2008) Come Closer – Inclusion and Exclusion of Roma in Present Day Romanian
Society. Report by Cosima Rughinis.

Center for Legal Resources, Romani CRISS (2011) Press release: Are we all equal before the National Council for
Combating Discrimination?, 15 June 2011.

Civil Society Monitoring (2013) Report on the Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy and
Decade Action Plan in 2012 in Romania, Budapest Decade Secretariat Foundation.

Das M (2013) Discrimination in the Labor Market. Background Paper for the World Development Report 2013.
Social Development Department. The World Bank.

European Commission, Country factsheet Romania, available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/discrimination/files/country_factsheets_2012/romania_en.pdf

European Commission (2011) Compendium of Practice on Non Discrimination/Equality Mainstreaming.
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.

European Roma Rights Center (2005) The Glass Box – Exclusion of Roma from Employment.


European Roma Rights Center (2004) Stigmata: Segregated Schooling of Roma in Central and Eastern Europe,
Budapest.

European Roma Rights Center (2013) Written Comments By The Europe Roma Rights Centre Concerning Romania
For Consideration by the European Commission on the Transposition and Application of the Race Directive and on
the     Legal    Issues    Relevant     to     Roma       Integration,  Budapest,    2013,    available     at:
http://www.errc.org/cms/upload/file/romania-red-written-comments-5-april-2013.pdf.

Farkas, Lilla (2007) Segregation of Romani Children in Education: Addressing Structural Discrimination through
the Race Equality Directive, report prepared for the European Commission, July 2007.

                                                       223
Fundacion Secretariado Gitano (2011) The situation of Roma in Romania, Soros Foundation, available at:
http://www.soros.ro/ro/comunicate_detaliu.php?comunicat=195

Fundamental Rights Agency (2009) EU-MIDIS European Union Minorities and Discrimination Survey.

Fundamental Rights Agency (2009) Housing conditions of Roma and Travellers in the European Union
Comparative report, Vienna, October 2009.

Glick P (2008) – “Scapegoating and the Breakdown of Ethnic Relations” in Explain the Breakdown of Ethnic
Relations (eds) Victoria Esses and Richard Vernon. UK: Blackwell Publishers

Guglielmo, Rachel and Waters, Timothy (2005) Migrating Towards Minority Status: Shifting European Policy
Towards Roma. Journal of Common Market Studies, Vol. 43, No. 4, pp. 763-785.

Kertesi, Gabor & Kezdi, Gabor (2013) School Segregation, School Choice and Educational Policies in 100
Hungarians Towns, Budapest: Roma Education Fund.

Marin, Adrian & Csonta, Ágnes (2013) Discrimination of Roma Communities: Romania National Report, Bucuresti:
Fundaţia Secretariatul Romilor and Centrul de Resurse Juridice.

National Council for Combating Discrimination, Report on the implementation of the race directive in Romania,
2003-2010, p. 29, available at: http://www.cncd.org.ro/files/file/Raport%20D43_2000_CNCD_final.pdf

National Council for Combating Discrimination , Annual Report 2012, available at:
http://www.cncd.org.ro/files/file/Raport%20de%20activitate%20CNCD%202012.pdf.

National Council for Combatting Discrimination (2009) The Phenomenon of Discrimination in Romania -
Perceptions and Attitudes.

Romani Criss and Roma Civic Alliance (2010) Shadow report for the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination On the occasion of report of Romania Bucharest, July 2010-07-27, available at:
http://www.romanicriss.org/PDF/Shadow%20report%20CERD%20Romania%20-2010.pdf;

Romani CRISS (2011) Study on the Perception of Discrimination Among Roma. available at:
http://www.romanicriss.org/PDF/Stereotipuri,%20prejudecati%20%20perspectiva%20romilor%20cercetare%20201
1.pdf

Romani CRISS (2011) Roma School Participation, Non-Attendance and Discrimination in Romania.

Romani CRISS (2012) Roma Health – Perspective of the actors involved in the health system – doctors, health,
mediators and patients. available at: www.romanicriss.org

Rostas, Iulius (ed) (2012) Ten Years After: a History of Roma School Desegregation in Central and Eastern Europe,
REF and CEU Press: Budapest,;

Rostas, Iulius (2012 a) Judicial Policy-Making: the Role of the Courts in Promoting School Desegregation, in Iulius
Rostas, Ten Years After: A History of Roma School Desegregation in Central and Eastern Europe, REF & CEU
Press, Budapest, 2012.

Communication from the European Commission on an EU framework on National Roma Integration Strategies up
to 2020, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/social_determinants/docs/com2011_173_en.pdf



                                                       224
Roma Education Fund Romania (2011) Early School Dropout - Causes and Effects. [original title in Romanian:
Părăsirea timpurie a școlii - cauze și efecte, Studiu derulat în școli cu clase V-VIII din regiunile Centru, Nord-Est și
Sud-Muntenia unde ponderea elevilor romi este minim 10%]
Summary available at: http://www.oportunitatiegale.ro/pdf_files/Studiu_OE.pdf

Soros Foundation Romania (2010) Equal and legal on the job market [Egal si legal pe piata muncii available at:
http://www.soros.ro/ro/program_articol.php?articol=251

Soros Foundation Romania (2007) Roma Inclusion Barometer. Report by Gabriel Bădescu, Vlad Grigoraş, Cosima
Rughiniş, Mălina Voicu, Ovidiu Voicu.

The phenomenon of discrimination – perception and attitudes, the National Council for Combating Discrimination
(NCCD), 2009, available at: http://www.cncd.org.ro/files/file/Fenomenul%20discriminarii%202009.pdf

World Bank (2013). Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. Sustainable Development Network.
Social Development.




                                                          225
LAWS AND REGULATIONS

Directive: 2000/43/EC
Directive: 2000/78/EC
Government Ordinance 137/2000, republished and amended.
Law no. 1/2011 on national education, amended.
Law 53/ 2003, republished and amended.
Law 15/1968 The Romanian Criminal Code - republished and amended.
Law 95/2006 on reform in healthcare field, amended.
Law 76/2002 on unemployment insurance system and employment stimulation, amended.
Law 504/2002 on audiovisual, amended.
Law 202/2002 for Equal Opportunities between Women and Men, republished and amended.
Law 448/2006 regarding the protection and promotion of the rights of disabled persons.
Law 47/2006 establishing the National System of Social Assistance.
Law 4/2008 on preventing and combating violence during sport events.
Ministry of Education, Ministerial order no. 1540/2007
Order no 286/2007 of the President of the National Council for Combating Discrimination.




                                            226
                                          ANNEX

                                    REGRESSION ANALYSIS

TABLE 6-1: REGRESSION MODELS SHOWING INCIDENCE OF DISCRIMINATION AMONG ROMA AND
NON-ROMA

                                                  Model 1:     Model 2:    Model 3: Non-
                                                              Roma Only     Roma Only
                                                     All


Roma                                              0.185***

                                                  (0.022)

Gender - Female                                    0.020        0.032          0.008

                                                  (0.022)      (0.033)        (0.023)

Rural household                                   -0.071***    -0.099***      -0.027

                                                  (0.025)      (0.036)        (0.029)

Age                                               -0.002***    -0.003***     -0.002**

                                                  (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)

Income quintile: 2 vs. 1                          -0.054*      -0.085*        -0.017

                                                  (0.028)      (0.045)        (0.026)

Income quintile: 3 vs. 1                          -0.055**     -0.087*        -0.011

                                                  (0.028)      (0.045)        (0.028)

Income quintile: 4 vs. 1                          -0.053*      -0.102**        0.020

                                                  (0.029)      (0.045)        (0.043)

Income quintile: 5 vs. 1                          -0.077***    -0.136***       0.013

                                                  (0.027)      (0.043)        (0.046)

Education level: Primary vs. none                 -0.082***    -0.122***      -0.012

                                                  (0.022)      (0.034)        (0.030)

Education level: Secondary vs. none               -0.056*       -0.076        -0.029


                                            227
                                                          (0.030)      (0.051)          (0.033)

Region: Central vs. Bucharest                              -0.047       -0.064          -0.021

                                                          (0.037)      (0.061)          (0.029)

Region: North East vs. Bucharest                          -0.065*       -0.099          -0.021

                                                          (0.037)      (0.065)          (0.022)

Region: North West vs. Bucharest                           -0.024       -0.022          -0.031

                                                          (0.041)      (0.066)          (0.026)

Region: South vs. Bucharest                               -0.107***    -0.149***

                                                          (0.028)      (0.051)

Region: South East vs. Bucharest                           -0.048       -0.065          -0.023

                                                          (0.039)      (0.067)          (0.023)

Region: South West vs. Bucharest                          -0.082***    -0.111**

                                                          (0.031)      (0.056)

Region: West vs. Bucharest                                -0.123***    -0.209***        -0.014

                                                          (0.022)      (0.037)          (0.030)

Observations                                               1,058         740              203


Pseudo R-squared                                           0.161       0.0736           0.134

Dprobit             estimations.        Standard             errors       in           parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).




                                   DECOMPOSITION ANALYSIS

A number of different model specifications used in the decomposition analysis are summarized
below. According to some of these models, the gap in employment between Roma and non-
Roma is explained entirely by differences in endowments, including differences in age and
education level (this applies to the shaded cells in table 1-2). This means that according to these
models, if Roma were to have the same endowments as their non-Roma neighbors, there would
not be a gap in employment at all. Models 1 and 2 present estimates of the unexplained part of
                                                228
the gap: these models compare the actual gap in employment to the gap that would be predicted
based on a model in which ethnicity as well as the specified background characteristics are
taken into account. In these models, about 20% of the gap in employment between Roma and
non-Roma remains unexplained, and at least part of this gap could thus be attributed to
discrimination in the job market.
TABLE 6-2: DECOMPOSITION OF THE GAP IN EMPLOYMENT BETWEEN ROMA AND NON-ROMA:
SHARE OF THE TOTAL GAP THAT IS NOT EXPLAINED BY MEASURED ENDOWMENTS

                                                                      Overall       Women           Men

         Simple controls, using a pooled model as the reference
    1                                                                    23             0            41
         model

         Elaborate controls, using a pooled model as the
    2                                                                    20             2            37
         reference model


Source:            UNDP/World             Bank/EC              Regional            Roma          Survey           (2011).
Notes: Simple controls include: gender (only in the overall model), age and education level. Elaborate controls
include all of the ‘simple controls’, as well as living in a rural vs. urban environment, and the region of residence.

Among those Roma and non-Roma neighbors who earn a wage, most model specifications
indicate that approximately half of the gap in wages remains unexplained after taking into
account different endowment levels. This is particularly striking given that the wage gap is, on
average, very large: whereas non-Roma earn an average of €195, Roma only earn an average of
€115 in monthly wages. For men, the unexplained part of the gap is particularly big: up to 64%
in some model specifications.
TABLE 6-3: DECOMPOSITION OF THE GAP IN WAGES BETWEEN EMPLOYED ROMA AND NON-ROMA:
SHARE OF THE TOTAL GAP THAT IS NOT EXPLAINED BY MEASURED ENDOWMENTS

                                                                      Overall       Women           Men

         Simple controls, using a pooled model as the reference
    1                                                                    45            30            54
         model

         Elaborate controls, using a pooled model as the
    2                                                                    52            35            61
         reference model




                                                          229
                                               7     HOUSING
As part of the ‘Access to Basic Services and Living Conditions’ dimension of exclusion, housing
is of critical importance. This chapter starts with an overview of the housing conditions of the
Romanian Roma and gaps that exist between them and the non-Roma. It then presents the
government housing programs and laws, followed by a discussion on how these might be
impacting the Roma and other population groups in terms of affording access to decent housing
and infrastructure. The last section presents a set of recommendations that address Roma-
specific problems in the housing sector, and also some suggestions in the broader housing
market that can help make these targeted Roma interventions more sustainable. The most
important recommendation is to ensure tailor-made delivery of services and solutions at the
local level.
The data analysis presented in this chapter is primarily based on the 2011 EU/UNDP/WB
Regional Roma Survey.264 Some additional findings are also reported from a recent report by
Impreuna, “The Roma in Romania: From Scapegoat to Development Engine”, 2013.265


7.1 INTRODUCTION
A significant proportion of Roma in Romania face challenges in the housing sector –
including poor quality houses, inadequate infrastructure, overcrowding, and lack of tenure
security. Some 63 percent of the Roma live in rural areas266 in a traditional village-type setting,
where the quality of the housing structure is typically very basic and the infrastructure often
inadequate. Of the remaining Roma residing in urban areas, about a quarter live in slum or
dilapidated dwellings. This is in sharp contrast to their non-Roma neighbors, less than 5 percent
of whom, both urban and rural, live in inadequate housing conditions.
Although there are more Roma in rural areas, housing for the 37 percent of Roma living in
urban areas poses a more serious challenge. Given their low incomes – a consequence of
widespread unemployment – and inability to afford or access decent quality market-based
housing, to have to compete for a very limited stock of government-subsidized social housing.
As a result, most urban Roma are relegated to live in overcrowded conditions, in slums, old and
poorly-maintained multi-story housing (formerly workers’ housing during the communist
period), or social housing units with inadequate infrastructure.267


264
    This Survey was carried out in 6 countries: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Slovakia, and Romania. In each country, approximately 750 Roma and 350 non-Roma households
living in the same neighborhoods or vicinity were interviewed. The sample focused on those communities where the
share of the Roma population equals or is higher than the national share of the Roma population. This approach
covers 89 percent of Roma population in Romania. See introductory chapter for more details.
265
    The sample used in this report covers Roma and other ethnic communities across Romania, whereas the Regional
Survey sample covered only communities where the majority of the residents are Roma.
266
    Toth & Dan, 2011 (p11)
http://www.undp.ro/libraries/projects/Economia_Sociala_si_Comunitatile_de_Romi_Provocari_si_Oportunitati.pdf
267
    Most urban Roma do not live in social housing. The housing stock in Romania is now about 8.5 million units,
and the social housing stock is 1.4 percent, or 122,538 units (Census 2011). In rural areas, there are 26,156 social
housing units (in fact, State property units) representing 21.34 percent of the total. That implies that in urban areas
                                                         230
Inability to pay rent is another problem attributed to low income levels of the Roma, and is
predominant mainly in urban areas. Some 54 percent of urban Roma report to have difficulty
paying rent, versus 39 percent of rural Roma, and a higher share of urban Roma face the risk of
eviction (Regional Roma Survey, 2011). In this, they are not alone: other poor non-Roma in
comparable income brackets also face similar challenges with respect to housing and
infrastructure, and the vast majority of the Romanian population, including lower-middle income
households, cannot afford market-based housing in urban areas (see Box 1).
BOX 1: ROMANIA’S HOU SING SECTOR: THE BROADER CONTEXT

While Romania fares quantitatively well in terms of the number of housing units for its
population – some 8 million dwellings for 20 million people – the health and quality of the
housing sector leaves much to be desired. Much of the existing stock is very old – a third is more
than 50 years old, 55 percent between 25 and 50 years old, and only about 13 percent built after
1990 – and suffers from poor maintenance and deteriorating infrastructure.
There is currently no national level housing policy, and Government interventions are limited to
a handful of programs, the two main ones being social housing and youth housing. The social
housing program – intended for those earning below the National Average Gross Income (Euro
477 per month in May 2013 ) – falls far short of the prevailing demand. The program for youth
housing – the government’s primary program aimed at households under 35 years of age – is not
targeted to the poorest or most needy population groups, and moreover, too small to make a dent
in the overall stock. Laws pertaining to the rental market – various forms of taxes including
VAT, rent ceiling – have together resulted in fostering a ‘hidden’ or black market for rental units,
and impeded a healthy growth of housing supply. The little new housing that is being constructed
is largely by the private sector for the wealthy population.
After the communist era, Roma families which occupied previously ‘nationalized’ plots—that
were then privatized and returned back to the former owners—were often either evicted or
decided to leave voluntarily because they could not afford the rent. With little or no access to
social housing, many of these households either forcibly occupied buildings that had been
abandoned (such as former workers’ housing blocks, etc.), or squatted on precarious lands (near
garbage dumps, sewage treatment plants, etc.).

The Raxen Report (2009)268 on Romania points to spatial segregation as one particularly
important housing challenge. Spatial segregation is highly correlated with early school-leaving,
low labor market participation rates and costly access to other services (public transport, health
facilities, etc.). The Regional Roma Survey (2011) finds that the majority of Roma households,



there are only 96,382 units. It is also important to note the large variations between the official and unofficial Roma
population: according to the 2011 Census, the official/ self-declared Roma population is 619,007 persons. The
unofficial estimate is about 3 times that, at 1.8-2.2 million. The share of the Roma living in urban areas (37%) is
therefore about 250,000 according to official estimates, and about 800,000 according to unofficial estimates. “[in the
last few decades there has been a] decrease in the number of households from the block (32.9% in 1992, 21.3% in
1998 and 8.3% in 2006) and an increase in the number of "court house" type housing occupied by the Rom. Most of
these households are in rural areas or improvisations on the outskirts of cities.” (Toth & Dan, 2011, p. 18).
268
    FRA Raxen Report 2009
                                                         231
56 percent, live in a settlement where the dominant ethnicity is Roma, underscoring the high
level of spatial segregation.
FIGURE 4: PERCENTAGE OF ROMA HOUSEHOLDS LIVING IN PREDOMINANTLY ROMA COMMUNITIES
IN THE THREE REGIONS OF ROMANIA

                80      66
                                              56                  60
                60                                    54
                                   44
      Percent




                40
                20
                0
                     Bucharest   Central     North   South       West

                                           Roma

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).
The precariousness of the Roma in Romania is underlined by the fact that a
disproportionate number of them are poor (84 percent are at-risk-of-poverty269) and face
the worst social exclusion and living conditions. Furthermore, their poverty is not the result of
some short term economic downturn, but rather the outcome of centuries of subjugation and
incarceration. Similarly, their current housing conditions are a consequence of policies and
events over the past century. The most recent was their forced ‘settlement’ during the communist
era, followed by mass evictions resulting from the restitution of formerly-nationalized housing
(see Box 2).
BOX 2: HISTORY OF THE ROMA 270

The current state of the Roma in Romanian society is attributable to their history, which entailed
centuries of slavery, with no rights, including land or property rights. When slavery was
abolished in 1864, they were not given any land or financial compensation. This situation caused
them to turn to occupations (with low economic potential) that they had done during their period
of enslavement, such as woodwork, purchasing and selling empty bottles or marginal operations
such as fortune telling and begging. Being dependent on the “masters” for such a long time
caused the Roma to have no means by which to earn a living and maintain a standard of living.

During the Communist era, they were forced to drop their ‘private’ professions and ‘assimilate’
with the rest of society. Thus, the majority of Roma were employed in agriculture, forestry,
building and construction, and food processing, and ‘settled’ in plots on the outskirts of towns or
in rural areas, or in houses that had been nationalized. After 1989, two critical things happened:




269
  Persons with a disposable income below 60% of the national median income equivalent.
270
   Source: Oprean, Oana, "The Roma of Romania" (2011).Theses and Dissertations, College of Liberal Arts and
Social Sciences, DePaul University.

                                                     232
-     One, with the collapse of communism and the centralized economy, jobs became scarce and
      the Roma were the first to be let go. The unemployment rate of Roma skyrocketed. The only
      jobs available were those that required unskilled labor, such as helping around farms in local
      villages and street sweeping.
-     Two, at the same time, state-owned housing got privatized en masse. Formerly privatized
      houses were returned to their original owners as part of the restitution process, and the
      ‘tenants’ occupying these dwellings were to be accommodated in government-provided
      social housing. There was neither an adequate social housing stock to accommodate all the
      former tenants, nor sufficient government resources to take care of all the lower income
      households and evictees. Moreover, many of the Roma were unable to afford even the basic
      rent levied in social housing units. As a result, they were once again left to fend for
      themselves, and many found themselves in the ‘slums’ and ‘ghettos’ in the urban centers.
With the politicization of the housing sector and the pressure to address the Roma issue,
the tendency of the public sector has been to undertake visible project-based interventions
in select areas with poor housing conditions. However, this has been done without
understanding or programmatically addressing the underlying causes of poor living conditions.
Such standalone projects that occur in ‘vacuum’ and bear little relationship to the bigger picture
– of the past (Roma history) or the present (housing context) – are not sustainable.
Given that housing conditions are linked to other socio-economic outcomes such as health,
labor market participation and education, a focus on housing is particularly important for
social inclusion. Slums where poor households live under substandard conditions are logical
places to focus multi-dimensional inclusion efforts to reintegrate these places and their residents
physically, socially, economically and financially back into the broader Romanian society.
Hence, a much more comprehensive approach to housing is needed, one that addresses the
deficiencies of the housing market, while effectively targeting the limited public sector resources
to assist the poor. It is in this light that this chapter presents the Roma housing story.
7.2 QUANTITATIVE EVIDENCE ON ROMA HOUSING CONDITIONS
Although the socio-economic conditions for Roma and non-Roma households are quite
similar at the neighborhood level, the actual housing and infrastructure conditions for
Roma households are consistently worse than for the comparator non-Roma households.
The Regional Roma Survey finds that 30 percent of Roma households live in a dilapidated house
or slum, compared to 5 percent of comparator non-Roma households.271 Slum conditions and
dilapidated housing are especially common among Roma households living in segregated
communities, 51 percent of whom live in slum dwellings. Only about half of the Roma
households in urban areas have access to relatively decent housing – whether newly constructed,
or made of traditional materials in old settlements, or social housing provided by local
authorities. The remaining 40-45 percent lives in low-quality multi-story blocks, or ‘slums’ or
temporary camps with poor quality structures and inadequate infrastructure, (compared to 20
percent of the neighboring non-Roma). In rural areas, about a third of Roma households live in
poor quality housing houses (Figure 2).

271
  According to the Impreuna study, in comparison to the non-Roma, twice the percentage of Roma live in houses
made of poor quality materials; and 50 percent of the Roma live in lower comfort ranking dwellings.
                                                    233
FIGURE 5: PERCENTAGE OF ROMA, BY HOUSING CONDITIONS


                New house in good condition
      Older house in relatively good condition
                    Apartment in bloc-of-flats
                          Ruined house/ slum
  Refugee housing (camp/adapted building)
                                                 0     10     20   30   40       50

                                            Rural    Urban

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).

7.2.1 ROOM OCCUPANCY / OVERCROWDING
Roma households in Romania live in more overcrowded conditions than non-Roma
households. In general, more than 2 persons per room is considered overcrowded in the
European context.272 Some two thirds of Roma households surveyed live in dwellings with more
than 2 people per room; in comparison, only 25 percent of nearby non-Roma households
experienced this level of overcrowding. The median number of rooms available to non-Roma
households in the lowest income tercile is 2, and is equal to that in the highest income tercile of
Roma households. The median number of rooms for non-Roma households is 3. The share of
Roma households in Romania with only one or two rooms in the dwelling is as high as 57
percent, whereas among their non-Roma peers, this is 32 percent.
The poorest Roma households in Romania tend to live in smaller dwelling units, and this is
especially important when taking into account the size of the household, as Roma
households are generally larger. The average dwelling size of a Roma households is 40 m2
compared to 77 m2 for a non-Roma household. Roma households in Romania have an average
household size of 5.8 (ranging from 6.8 for the poorest Roma quintile to 4.8 for the top quintile),
much larger than the 3.8 recorded for non-Roma families (ranging from 4.6 to 2.9). According to
the Impreuna report, the average living surface area per person in a Roma household is half that
for a non-Roma household. Roma in the lowest income tercile live in the most cramped
conditions, with an average of 30 m2 per dwelling, compared to 50 m2 for the richest income
tercile. Overcrowding is a more serious problem in urban areas compared to rural, particularly
those living in housing blocks or flats. Roma have access to 10 square meters per household
member on average, whereas among non-Roma, each household member has an average of 25
square meters (UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey, 2011).




272
    This can be considered a rough proxy for EU standards, see the following link for more information.
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Glossary:Overcrowding_rate
                                                        234
TABLE 4: SIZE OF THE DWELLING

                       Roma Income Terciles:                             Aggregates:
                   1            2             3                      Roma       Non-Roma
Number of rooms available to the household:
Mean              2.2          2.3           2.9                      2.6                3.2
Median             2            2             3                        2                  3
Square meters in dwelling:
Mean              41           43            61                        54                77
Median            30           32            50                        40                60
Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).


7.2.2 ACCESS TO BASIC AMENITIES
In addition to overcrowding, Roma households are significantly more likely to lack basic
amenities such as indoor toilets and kitchens. Only about 17 percent of Roma households in
Romania have indoor sanitation (toilet, bathroom, sewage connection) while about 44 percent of
nearby non-Roma families have these amenities. The poorest Roma families are least likely to
have access to indoor sanitation. Among Roma households in the lowest income tercile, less than
10 percent have toilets inside their homes.
FIGURE 6: PRESENCE OF SANITARY PROVISIONS IN THE HOUSEHOLD (% OF HOUSEHOLDS)

                120                                                                                             98
                100           90                                                                           86
                                                           82 75
                 80
      Percent




                         62
                 60                            43                                41                 49
                 40                                                         18                 17
                                          17
                 20
                 -
                      Kitchen inside   Toilet inside   Latrine / Toilet Connection to      Shower /      Electricity
                                                           outside     public sewerage     Bathroom       supply
                                                                        or waste water      inside
                                                                             tank

                                                       Roma      Non-Roma

Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).
About 83 percent of Roma households in Romania do not have access to drinking water
indoors, compared to 66 percent of their non-Roma neighbors. More than 70 percent Roma
households lack access to indoor piped water while only 52 percent of the non-Roma households
nearby do not have access to indoor piped water.273 Some 10 percent of Roma in urban areas do
not have any reliable source of potable water, compared to 4 percent in rural areas. For the non-
Roma, this number is less than 2 percent.


273
   When comparing data for Roma in Romania to those for Roma in other countries in the region, Roma in Romania
are the worst off in terms of access to drinking water inside their dwelling.
                                                               235
Waste collection is much more problematic in rural areas compared to urban areas.
Collection of waste is problematic for Roma households. Some 36 percent of Roma households
report irregular or no collection of waste. Among nearby non-Roma comparator households only
18 percent report not having access to regular waste collection. In rural areas, 30 percent of
Roma report that the waste is never collected, which is almost twice as high the share among
urban Roma.274
TABLE 5: URBAN-RURAL DIFFERENCES IN BASIC AMENITIES

                                                      Urban                 Rural
Bed for each household member                          49                    57
Kitchen inside                                         65                    60
Toilet inside                                          31                     9
Connection to public sewerage                          36                     8
Shower / bathroom inside                               29                    11
Source: UNDP/World Bank/EC Regional Roma Survey (2011).


7.3 QUALITATIVE EVIDENCE ON ROMA HOUSING CONDITIONS
This section presents the key housing typologies of the Roma, both rural and urban, based
on observations from a brief field visit to Romania by the author in August 2013. This is not
a statistical or comprehensive representation; the intention, rather, is to qualitatively illustrate the
different types of Roma housing, so that policies to improve their living conditions may be better
tailored to their specific needs. Accordingly, Roma housing is described below under seven
typologies – 2 specific to rural/ peri-urban areas (Traditional Settlements; Peri-urban Informal
Settlements), and 5 characteristic in urban areas (New or Improved Housing; Traditional
Settlements, Social Housing, Multistory Flats, and Informal Settlements or Slums).
7.3.1 RURAL TRADITIONAL SETTLEMENTS
Some two-thirds of rural Roma houses, mainly located in traditional settlements, are of relatively
decent quality, while the remaining third constitute dilapidated structures. Infrastructure (water,
sanitation, electricity) in these settlements is very minimal or non-existent.
FIGURE 7: TRADITIONALLY CONSTRUCTED HOUSES IN OLD ROMA SETTLEMENTS




274
      Regionally, only Macedonia has lower waste collection rates than Romania.
                                                         236
7.3.2 RURAL: PERI-URBAN INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS
Informal settlements in rural and peri-urban areas constitute relatively smaller communities of
20-30 households. The houses typically have 1-2 rooms, and are of relatively poor structural
quality, constructed with adobe, wood, and tin sheets. The sanitation is extremely poor: a single
pit latrine may be shared by many households. Similarly, for water, there may be a shared well.
These areas are mostly occupied by younger and larger families with several (>3) children each.
Most young adults are unemployed, and live on social welfare allowance and sometimes the
informal economy (mostly metal/ garbage collection) or as a day laborer.
FIGURE 8: COMMUNITY AT THE OUTSKIRTS OF BUZÃU




This community in the outskirts of Buzãu had one well for the entire community, and no toilets. This is a
relatively new settlement that has been established next to an old traditional Roma community.

7.3.3 URBAN: NEW OR IMPROVED HOUSING
At the top end of the Roma income spectrum are those who have managed to extricate
themselves from the vicious cycle of poverty. Their newly constructed houses are a symbol of
(newly acquired) wealth acquired from overseas or from remittance money sent by a family
member. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this attempt to integrate with the rest of society has
worked for some, but for others it has created more societal cleavages: while still considered
‘outsiders’ by the non-Roma, they are now despised by their poorer Roma neighbors.
FIGURE 9: ROMA SETTLEMENTS I N OLTENIŢA AND BUZÃU




These photos were taken in various Roma settlements in Olteniţa and Buzãu, where new houses -- and some very
fancy -- are sprouting up, reportedly with remittance money.

7.3.4 URBAN: TRADITIONAL SETTLEMENTS
Traditional Roma settlements in urban areas are mostly located on the peripheries of cities and
towns. The houses are of relatively decent quality: older houses are made of traditional adobe,
and the newer or renovated ones of brick/ concrete. The plots are relatively large (400-800 m2),
which some families use for planting fruit trees and vegetables, raising poultry, and keeping their

                                                      237
horses/ carts. Some are entrepreneurs with small metal workshops; many work as collectors of
recyclable materials (scrap metal, glass bottles etc.), and sell to recycling centers.
FIGURE 10: TRADITIONAL ROMA SETTLEMENT IN BUZÃU




These photos are from an old Roma settlement in Buzãu. The Roma have been living here for many decades now,
but often do not have legal property documents. Left: A relatively newly constructed house on a roughly 800m2 plot
with a pit latrine and a water point. Many houses are either being constructed here or being improved by the owners.
Center-left, center-right, and right: This is a beautiful traditional Roma house, built of mud (plastered walls) and
wood shingles. The compound is large, divided into three lots, and occupied by three siblings and their families. One
of the households works in the public sector (school teacher), and another runs the traditional metal recycling
business – collecting waste metal, and smelting and molding it into metal pots for sale. Even in relatively well-off/
established households such as these, it is difficult to expand the business because of limited or no access to finance,
and part of this is to do with the absence of land/ property title to use as collateral.
These areas are not connected to the city water/ sanitation network, but there is typically one pit
latrine and water point or well on each plot. In the old neighborhoods, most people inherited their
houses from parents/grandparents, so have de facto rights to the property but often do not have
legal property documents. Most of these households are employed or self-employed in the
informal sector. Although engaged in productive work, they typically cannot access financing:
this is partly because of the banks’ low appetite for risk (the Roma are considered a high risk
group), and partly because of the absence of the property title as collateral – discussed later in the
chapter). This limits their ability to improve their homes or expand their businesses.
7.3.5 URBAN: SOCIAL HOUSING
The social housing units being occupied by the Roma are typically 10-15m2 units, with a rent of
Euro 10-15 per month, plus utilities. Most buildings, particularly the older ones, have common
toilets on each floor that are poorly managed. These buildings are often old and dilapidated, or
sometimes retrofitted/ upgraded by the local authorities. The Roma compete with many other
higher ‘priority’ groups for a very small stock of social housing; as a result, less than 2 percent of
Roma households live in social housing. These are typically the smaller Roma households with
1-4 members, but there are also cases where more than 4-5 people live in a single-room unit
(attributed to more children, inter-generational cohabitation, and extended family members).
One of the issues commonly raised by the residents is that the utility fee is linked to the room in
the accounting system; when a tenant leaves without paying, the debt associated with the unit is
passed onto the next tenant. Cancelling of this ‘historical’ debt is administratively difficult and,
therefore, new tenants often receive the room with a pre-existing debt. This becomes more
complicated in buildings with mixed ownership, i.e. partly private and partly (government-
owned) social housing. In most of these cases, an accumulation of debt affects not only the
‘delinquent’ tenant; the entire building runs the risk of getting disconnected from the public
utilities due to accumulated debts of one or more households.
                                               238
FIGURE 11: SOCIAL HOUSING UNITS




Left and center-left: This is a building in Brãila that currently houses orphaned/ abandoned children from public
residential care centers. The City has a plan to resettle these children to another place, and convert this into a social
housing. The rooms are roughly 22 m², and there are two toilets and two showers on each floor. Center-right and
right: This is a social housing building in Brãila housing mostly Roma households. It is an old dilapidated building,
but the units are relatively bigger with high ceilings. The common toilets reportedly do not work (center-right
photo), so many households have resorted to building their own toilets in the units. Some better off residents have
undertaken major renovations, including plastering/ painting walls and laminating the floors. Many residents have
been living here for over 25 years. They complain about this place but do not want to leave because there is no other
place they own or can afford to rent.
Furthermore, criteria for allocation of units are established by local authorities, a process which
is not always transparent, and has too much room for discretion. For example, when the poorest
households (i.e. those earning less than Euro 150 per month) compete with other poor but
relatively better-off households for social housing, the chances are that the more ‘livable’ social
housing units go to the latter, and the smaller (~10-15m2) units to the former.275 This means that
for the most vulnerable households which typically have larger households (due to more
children, inter-generational cohabitation and/ or extended family), the chances of getting
excluded are likely even higher. For the Roma at the absolute bottom of the income pyramid
(Euro 0-150 income range), the chances of getting access to social housing are even smaller for
several reasons attributed by some local authorities, some of which include: (i) their perceived
‘lifestyle’ (“the Roma living in slums cannot adjust to life in a multistory building”), (ii) their
inability to make utility payments (since a large number of Roma are unemployed and surviving
largely on social welfare benefits), and (iii) their large families (often 7-10 members) that would
make them ‘unfit’ to live in the small 10-15 m2 social housing units.
7.3.6 URBAN: MULTISTORY FLATS
These are areas of low-quality blocks of multi-story flats. These buildings were typically built
before 1990 for the workers of the former socialist enterprises. In most cases, they served as
former hostels for single workers, but also include other types of buildings such as former
workers’ colonies. They typically accommodate 150-500 inhabitants. Referred to as “ghetto”276,
both by their inhabitants and by other local people, these buildings house mostly ethnically




275
    The Roma and other poor households may in fact be currently living in larger dwellings averaging between 30
and 50 m2 compared to these social housing units.
276
    This report does not subscribe to the use of the term 'ghetto'. The term has been used to match the locally used
terminology and to distinguish it from social housing.
                                                          239
mixed communities, but with Roma people over-represented.277 The apartments typically have
only one room measuring about 9-15 m2, are overcrowded – often with numerous families, and
many children – and lots of furniture. There are only one to two bathrooms per floor which are
mostly shared. Common spaces are typically ill-maintained, and sometimes temporarily occupied
by homeless people. Nevertheless, from the inside, some units are well organized and clean (as
shown in the photos below).
Mostly, residents of these buildings do informal work, and supplement their income with child
allowance and other social welfare benefits, MGI (Minimum Guaranteed Income), handicap
benefits, illness pensions, and simply living by collecting recyclable materials. Paying for
utilities (electricity, water, sewage, garbage) is often a challenge. Typically, the larger the
number of apartments with beneficiaries of MGI (Euro 20-65 per month), the larger is the
number of rooms with unpaid utility bills - for example, during winter, the electricity bill alone
may reach more than Euro 45. Hence, from time to time, the electrical power is cut off for the
entire block of flats – due to historical debt, or due to non-payment by some residents.
FIGURE 12: URBAN DILAPIDATED DWELLINGS




Left: Old dilapidated workers’ housing block in Olteniţa, now occupied by Roma and other poor
communities. Center and right: The interior of a 12 m2 unit occupied by a 3-member Roma household –
neat and clean from the inside. ‘G’, the head of the household, is a construction worker; his daughter ‘C’, is
an 8th grader, and wants to become a doctor one day; and his wife is a cleaner. G has thermo-insulated his
unit from the exterior, improved the door and window frames, and even added a toilet to his unit. G moved
here as a single man 25 years ago, and has lived here since. He says he would like to get a better place since
this is a “ghetto” and people do not manage the building, but he has no access to finance to build or buy a
house.

7.3.7 URBAN: INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS (“SLUMS”)
Most slums in Romania have little or no infrastructure – at most a shared tap and 1-2 pit latrines
for the entire community. In others, the infrastructure may be developed along a main street but
is not available in the rest of the area. Many are located in hazardous areas, for example, on or
near landfills, in flood prone areas, and so on. As a result, many of these areas are insanitary and
highly exposed to health and environmental risks.
Most residents of these areas do not possess identity papers or own any property. As discussed
earlier, this is attributed largely to their history (inability to own land or property), and also to the
restitution process post-1989: many of these households either lost their homes (evicted former-


277
  The Roma became over-represented in the ghettos after 1990, because the households that became better-off
moved to better areas, leaving behind the poorest ones, mostly Roma.
                                                         240
tenants) or gave up their dwellings (because they could not afford the rent). These families, being
poorer and larger in size, likely did not get past the long waitlist for social housing, and housed
themselves in makeshift shelter in these precarious locations.
The households are relatively large, with several children each. Typically, most adults are
unemployed, apart from 3-4 months in a year when they cross over to other European countries,
to ‘make money’. They take their children to ‘work’ with them, as a result of which many are not
enrolled in schools.
FIGURE 13: INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS IN BUZÃU AND BRÃILA




Left and center: Informal settlements in Buzãu: 2-3 pit latrines in the entire settlement, water for drinking is
often taken from a dirty stream nearby; many children not attending school, very poor quality houses.
Right: Informal Settlement in Brãila, located on an old dumpsite.
7.4 BARRIERS TO ACCESSING QUALITY HOUSING AMONG ROMA
Poverty. As already highlighted in other chapters, many Roma are poor: The median household
income of the Roma, according to the Regional Survey, is Euro 128, compared to Euro 316 for
their non-Roma neighbors. The median per capita monthly income of the Roma is Euro 50,
which is a third of the neighboring non-Roma (Euro 155), and the same as the median income for
poorest quintile of their non-Roma neighbors. This income does not include money earned from
informal sector work, but is useful to present in the context of the National Average (Individual)
Net Income of Euro 347 per month.278 Indeed, nearly half (45 percent) of Roma households
report having difficulty making rent or utility payments (19 percent among non-Roma
neighbors).
Lack of property documents. According to the National Agency for Cadaster and Land
Registration (ANCPI), the estimated proportion of Roma that have property documents is very
low in Romania, which has a detrimental effect on security of tenure and access to housing, more
generally. While precise data does not exist, ANCPI estimates that in the 50 rural Administrative
Territorial Units (UATs) where systematic land registration was planned under a project
supported by the World Bank, about two-thirds of Roma households had no property documents
for the land and buildings they possessed.279




278
     Source: National Statistics Institute – Romania: data for May 2013, cited from http://www.romania-
insider.com/net-average-income-in-romania-down-in-may/27817/
279
    The Impreuna Study, on the other hand indicates that 12.5 percent of the Roma have no property papers. This is
down from 37 percent in 1998, but still high compared to the comparator figure of 1.6 percent for the non-Roma.
                                                          241
Lack of access to building permits. A number of permits and documents are needed to erect or
demolish buildings, and these are expensive.280 The poorest people, including the Roma, often
can neither afford these permits, nor the cost of a trial, and without the proper property
documentation, are likely to be more vulnerable to actions leading to their displacement (e.g.
forced evictions). The absence of a ‘legal’ property document also limits these households’
access to finance, as described below.
Lack of finance. Many lower income households, including the Roma, in urban areas could be
eligible borrowers and would like to take a loan and buy or build a house, but have no access to
financing because they are informally employed or self-employed and have no property titles to
provide as collateral.281 According to the 2011 Regional Survey, 99.7 percent of the Roma had
no access to mortgage loans, and 96 percent had no access to microfinance. Although the
microfinance industry in Romania has grown significantly since 2005, the focus has been largely
on clients in rural areas (agriculture-related business loans). Bankers perceive slum-dwellers and
the informal sector workers, particularly the Roma, to be a high risk group that “does not play by
the rules”. Currently only one bank (Provident) offers loans for small business in urban areas, but
the interest rate is over 90 percent compared to 15 percent in rural areas.282 NGOs like Habitat
for humanity (HfH) offer home improvement loans, but the scale of the operation is very limited.
HfH also experimented with a subsidized housing finance / construction schemes, but the
performance has been less than satisfactory (see Box 3). In the absence of access to any loans,
lower income households lack the ability to start a business or improve their economic situation,
which might eventually help them graduate to the level of a housing loan and improve their
living conditions.
BOX 3: NGO EXPERIENCE WITH HOUSING FINANCE LOANS FOR ROMA

Habitat for Humanity (HfH) offers home improvement loans in the range of Euro 750-1,500 at
zero percent interest; the borrower must cover 24 percent VAT per the contract regulations. HfH
also initiated a housing/ finance program called "New Builds" targeted to rural households
including the Roma. However, the program did not perform well, and is likely to be terminated
soon. It involved the construction of 64 m2 houses for 3-4 member households, costing roughly
Euro 25,000 , but ‘sold’ to the poor households at a subsidized amount of Euro 16,000, supported
by zero percent interest loan contracts for 20 years. Loan repayment was about Euro 60 per
month. Attributed partly to the way the program was designed and managed, it ended up creating


The report states that the desirability effect may induce distortions in how respondents choose to answer, so the
percentage might be misleading.
280
    The construction permit is the sum of the following costs: Euro 12 for a permit from the urban planning
committee; between Euro 12-115 for other documents (notices and agreements); a construction plan costing between
Euro 10-12 /m2; plus a geotechnical study, amounting to Euro 200; the actual construction permit costs 0.5 percent
of the total value of the investment as estimated by local authorities; 0.05% of the total cost of the investment – the
house – represents the tax payable to the Association of Architects in Romania. So, for someone poor, including the
vast majority of Roma, building a house legally is very expensive, mostly unaffordable. (Source: “Civil Society
Monitoring Report on the Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy and Decade Action Plan in
2012 in Romania”, Decade of Roma Inclusion Secretariat Foundation, 2013.
281
    Most MFIs require either a collateral in the form of a property title (for an individual loan), or a group guarantee
(in a group loan).
282
    Source: Interview with Goodbee representative on August 5, 2013.
                                                         242
disincentives for repayment, recording a 50 percent default rate. Some of the defaulters were
genuine cases of financial distress, but mostly HfH reported a ‘perception’ issue amongst
beneficiaries – of the NGO’s inability to take recourse in the event of mass non-payment by the
borrowers. This has set a bad record in the industry, and now making it even more challenging to
get banks interested to invest in this line of business (microfinance or housing microfinance).
Spatial segregation. Although segregation may obscure this to a certain extent, discrimination is
another causal factor for poor quality housing. Segregation potentially minimizes experiences of
discrimination in relation to housing, because contact with the majority population is limited.
However, many Roma communities are prone to forced eviction, as stated in a report by the
European Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA). There have been several instances of abuse
where Roma communities have been forcibly evicted (e.g. in Cluj, Baia Mare, Piatra Neamt), or
further isolated by building walls to block them from the neighboring settlements (e.g. in Baia
Mare). According to a report by the National Council for Combating Discrimination (NCCD),
however, the vast majority of cases of discrimination against the Roma that are reported are
related to employment and personal dignity.283 Only two Roma housing-related complaints were
filed in 2011 – one in Cluj, and the second in Baia Mare, both mentioned in Box 4.
BOX 4: FORCED EVICTIONS AND ACTIONS FOSTERING SEGREGATION

According to a 2013 report by Amnesty International, local authorities continue to forcibly evict
and relocate Roma to inadequate and segregated housing.
- About 76, mostly Romani, families, who had been forcibly evicted from the center of the city
  of Cluj-Napoca in December 2010, continued to live in inadequate housing conditions on the
  outskirts of the city, close to the city’s rubbish dump and a former chemical waste dump. In
  meetings with the evicted families, the local authorities made a commitment to start moving
  them from the area in 2013 as part of a project developed with the UN Development Program.
- On 18 April 2013, the court of Cluj-Napoca rejected another request from the National
  Railway company to remove approximately 450 people, mainly Roma, living in the
  settlement in Cantonului Street, in the city of Cluj-Napoca thus preventing a possible forced
  eviction. Many of the residents had been moved to the area by the municipality since 2002.
- In April 2013, a Court of Appeal quashed the decision of the National Council for Combating
  Discrimination (NCCD) to fine the municipal authorities of Baia Mare for erecting a concrete
  wall separating blocks of houses inhabited by Roma from the rest of the residential area. The
  Court held that the wall was a proportionate response to the risk of traffic-related injury and
  that it did not ethnically segregate the Roma residents. The NCCD announced that it would
  appeal the decision.
- In May and June 2013, the municipality of Baia Mare forcibly evicted about 120 Romani
  families from the town’s biggest settlement of Craica. The families were moved to buildings
  that were not adapted for residential use, and equipped with limited infrastructure.
- In August 2013, the municipality of Piatra Neamț relocated about 500 Roma living in housing
  units on the margins of the town to a completely segregated accommodation 2 km away from
  the nearest bus stop.




                                              243
Discrimination. The scale of discrimination in the housing sector remains unclear. In a survey
conducted by the FRA on housing discrimination, only 3 percent of Roma respondents in
Romania indicated that they had experienced discrimination when looking for housing in the past
five years, whereas this was 31 percent among sampled Roma in the EC/World Bank/UNDP
Regional Roma Survey (2011). That said, some caution needs to be exercised in interpreting the
relatively low levels of discrimination experiences found by FRA, because the Roma may not
frequently look for a house or an apartment to rent or buy.284 Also, there is no data to ascertain
the number of housing-related cases that go unreported.285 Reasons for not reporting
discrimination may include a combination of people’s lack of awareness of their rights and the
ability to organize themselves to demand their rights. 286 These stem from powerlessness and
poverty amongst the vast majority of the Roma, which in turn, has roots in the long history of
their subjugation and incarceration. The informality of these settlements also means that the
residing households cannot access – or are explicitly denied access – to basic infrastructure
services such as water and sanitation.
7.5 GENDER ISSUES
According to FRA, gender does not appear to affect experiences of discrimination in
relation to housing. However, in terms of the negative impact of poor quality housing and
infrastructure, Roma women are likely to suffer more than men in several aspects:
-     Women are likely to spend more time at home and are responsible for household-related
      activities.
-     The lack of a source of drinkable water represents a disproportionate burden on women
      and children to bring water from sources situated far from home.
-     There are higher risks of accidents for women who prepare meals in inadequate conditions
      and who perform household tasks in precarious infrastructure conditions, such as
      improvised electricity connections.
-     Segregated settlements far away from jobs, coupled with a lack of infrastructure and
      transportation, limits women’s ability to participate in the labor market.
-     Informal settlements exposed to evictions increase the risk of violence, particularly gender-
      based violence against Roma women and girls. Further, forced evictions negatively impact
      Roma women and their access to and use of social networks of neighborhood solidarity.
7.6 HOUSING-RELATED INSTITUTIONS AND PROGRAMS
There are several government institutions / agencies responsible for housing, and many on-
going national-level programs intended to expand the reach of formal sector housing and



284
    FRA (European Agency for Fundamental Rights). Housing discrimination against Roma in selected EU Member
States - An analysis of EU-MIDIS data, 2009.
285
    As mentioned in the Discrimination chapter in this report, by far most of the Roma who experience
discrimination do not report this to the authorities.
286
    Only a quarter (24%) of all respondents stated awareness of laws that prohibit discrimination in relation to
ethnicity when securing housing. In contrast, 35% did not know of any laws and further 41% of respondents were
unsure or had no opinion. (Source: Housing discrimination against Roma in selected EU Member States - An
analysis of EU-MIDIS data, 2009.)
                                                     244
finance. This section describes some of these institutions and programs that are relevant to Roma
housing.

[Note: A more analytical discussion on the impacts and outcomes of these policies and programs
will be covered in the next section on Main Findings – both with respect to Roma-specific issues
as well as broader housing market issues, including the absence of a housing policy, the
decentralization of housing without local capacity or financing, untargeted government subsidies,
hidden rental markets, and so on.]

7.6.1 PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS

Romania’s Ministry of Regional Development and Public Administration (MRDPA) is
responsible for the implementation of housing programs, for improving living conditions,
and for ensuring access to housing for Romanian citizens. MRDPA has the authority to
approve and finance, through the State budget, the construction of social housing for those with
low incomes, especially young couples, and provides housing for tenants evicted from property
as a result of the re-establishment of property rights for formerly nationalized homes.287 MRDPA
also provides support to young people (up to 35 years old) for building privately-owned housing
units by granting plots of land: 250-500 m2 in urban areas, and up to 1,000 m2 in rural areas.
The National Housing Agency (Agentia Nationala pentru Locuinte, or ANL)288 operates
under the authority of MRDPA, and is responsible for new residential construction on sites
provided by the local authorities for this purpose. This includes subsidized rental houses
(with option to purchase) for the youth (see Box 5), as well as market-based houses for sale.
ANL’s budget allocation for 2013 is Euro 17 million, up six-fold from Euro 2-3 million in 2012;
this year's allocation is focused solely on Youth Housing.
BOX 5: ANL’S HOUSING INITIA TIVES

Youth Housing: Started in 2001 as the responsibility of the ANL, this program involves
construction of subsidized rental housing for youth and young professionals. Some 30,800
dwellings have been completed to date, compared to a demand of some 150,000 units by local
authorities. The program targets young people who cannot otherwise afford to buy an apartment
or rent a privately owned housing unit. The housing units are built on sites provided by local
authorities, in accordance to the town planning regulations. The cost of land and supporting
infrastructure is borne by the local authorities, who also manage the units: they allocate units to
eligible renters, collect rents, and maintain the property. All applications for youth housing are


287
   Source: Roma Situation in Romania, 2011 – Between social inclusion and migration, Soros Foundation.
288
    ANL was established under Law 152/1998 in 1999 as a self-financing institution of public interest, a channel
through which the State may provide housing assistance to its citizens. ANL has a national network of territorial
offices and collaborates with builders, financial institutions, local and central administration authorities, and foreign
organizations. The initial mandate of ANL was twofold: a) mortgage lending for various housing-related purposes
and the construction of new residential units (subsidized and market-rate); and b) provision of subsidized rental
residential units for the youth. After completion of the pilot program on mortgage lending, and a successful public-
private partnership with several banks, the Agency stopped its lending activities. Further, in 2005, subsidies for
private dwellings were cancelled because of their interference with the private market.
                                                          245
evaluated using criteria pre-established by the ANL; this includes an age limit (<35 years), a job
in the city, and no prior ownership of property in the town/ city.1
Market-based housing: ANL also builds houses for sale (as a developer) in the Euro 400-
600/m2 range. These are cheaper than housing available in the open market (@ Euro 600-
1,000/m2), but still fetches a target profit of 3 percent for ANL. The banks grant mortgage loans
to eligible applicants who are registered in the ANL database and wish to purchase these new
residential units.
The Ministry of Labor, Family, Social Protection and Elderly provides subsidies for energy
consumption (heating, electricity) to qualifying low-income families. According to the
Government Emergency Ordinance (OUG) 70 / 2011, state subsidy is provided for low income /
vulnerable households289 to cover the heating expenses (centralized heating, natural gas and
wood) during the cold season, i.e. November through March.290 The percentage of consumed
thermal energy that is subsidized by the state budget depends on the income of the individual or
the income per capita of the household member.291
7.6.2 LOCAL AUTHORITIES
The Local Authority, using its own resources or with financing from the State, is expected
to build/ provide subsidized rental housing (social housing) for low-income households292,
i.e. those earning less than the National Average Income per capita (Euro 477 gross, or Euro 347
net per month). These income limits are adjusted annually by Governmental Decision. In
addition to the overarching income-based qualification293, local authorities establish additional


289
    Those with income within the limits stipulated in Article 7 (1), i.e. the net monthly individual income less than
786 lei and household income less than 1,082 lei.
290
     Source: http://www.dreptonline.ro/legislatie/oug_70_2011_masurile_ protectie_sociala_perioada_sezonului_
rece. php#
291
    The subsidy depends on the average net monthly income per family member, as follows:
90% for net average monthly income (NAMI) for the individual or per family member is up to 155 lei; 80% for
NAMI between 155.1 lei and 210 lei; 70% for NAMI between 210.1 lei and 260 lei; 60% for NAMI between 260.1
lei and 310 lei; 50 % for NAMI between 310.1 lei and 355 lei; 40 % for NAMI between 355.1 lei and 425 lei; 30%
for NAMI between 425.1 lei and 480 lei; 20% for NAMI between 480.1 lei and 540 lei; 10% for NAMI between
540.1 lei and 615 lei. 5% for NAMI between 615.1 lei and 786 lei.
By March 31, 2013 MLFSPE received from municipalities a total of 1,125,349 applications for heating aid.
Compared to the winter of 2011-2012, the number was lower by approximately 211,000 (16%) applications. The
distribution of the heating aid for 2013-2014 is as follow: 20.2% for centralized heating; 21.4% for natural gas and
58.4% for households that are using wood. (unpublished data, data provided by MLFSPE)
292
    In the housing sector, the Local Council has the responsibility to: (i) develop implement, monitor local policies
according to general principles of national policy; (ii) monitor the local housing market by careful evaluation of
supply and demand; (iii) facilitate access to housing for specific categories of families and individuals, and establish
their own priorities; (iv) secure special funds for new housing for socially disadvantaged individuals and
households; (v) provide and develop land for new housing; (vi) allocate land in local government ownership to
social housing; (vii) finance the development of social and emergency housing from local budgets; (viii) provide
technical assistance, finance, and consultancy for consolidation of the housing stock against seismic damage; (ix)
support urban renewal and rehabilitation policies, including housing; and, (x) implement specific programs to
support local actions and community management. (Source: Country Profiles on the Housing Sector: Romania,
UNECE, 2001).
293
    The Housing Law HL 114 / 1996 defines “social housing” as a dwelling which is allocated by a public authority
(City Hall) with a small rent (subvention) to individuals or families in a precarious economic situation, i.e. those
                                                         246
criteria for allocating social housing; these could be different per authority, and could include,
for example, some assessment of the household’s income level to ensure payment of monthly
utility bills. The final decision on who receives a social housing unit is taken by the Local
Council after considering the proposals of the social commissions that analyze the housing
applications at local level. The large investments required for construction of any new social
housing, together with the low returns and the high liability in terms of maintenance of these
assets, means that local authorities are heavily dependent on the national government, in
particular ANL, to finance these projects. As a result, this program is lagging behind the delivery
targets.
The social housing stock is owned and managed by the local authorities and is not for sale.
Monthly rent for social housing may not exceed 10 percent of the renter's household monthly net
income (calculated for the past 12 months), in addition to some nominal maintenance fees. They
rarely exceed a tenth of the market prices.
7.6.3 NATIONAL AGENCY FOR ROMA: NEW NATIONAL ROMA INCLUSION
      STRATEGY
The National Agency for Roma (NAR) works and coordinates with other line ministries to
implement programs aimed at improving the living conditions of the Roma. Its programs related
to improving housing conditions for the Roma population are reflected in the “Roma
Inclusion Decade”294 and the new National Roma Inclusion Strategy (NRIS) 2013-2020 (see
Box 6). However, there is no information available on the status of implementation of the
NRIS objectives or on the budgetary allocations or specific actions to be taken by the
mandated implementation bodies.
BOX 6: NATIONAL ROMA INCLUSION STRATEGY (NRIS)

One of the main objectives of the NRIS is to ensure decent living conditions and access to
infrastructure and public services for disadvantaged Roma communities. This objective is
planned to be reached by implementing the following interventions.1
- Measures to increase the sustainability of the inclusion of Romanian Roma minority,
  increase trust and fight against poverty: This measure only indirectly deals with housing
  and affordable access to infrastructure and social services.
- Measures to improve the quality of housing – modify and complete legislation: This
  measure is pending. Discussions and public meetings in which the legislation concerning
  housing and the quality of dwellings have been held since 2009, but legislative changes
  have not taken place yet.
- Developing social housing pilot program “Social dwellings for Romani communities”,
  coordinated by the ANL: This measure was adopted in 2008 and was considered under


who cannot afford to buy or rent a house from the free housing market. Households with an income lower than the
national average net income in the preceding 12 months, and meeting the following conditions are eligible to apply
for a social house: a) do not own a house; b) have not sold a house after 01.01.1990; c) have not benefited from state
support (loans or subsidies) for a house; and d) do not possess, or occupy as tenant, another house.
294
    The Roma Inclusion Decade 2003-2013 set up four core housing objectives but, unfortunately, none have
been accomplished.
                                                        247
    the Strategy of the Government of Romania for improving the conditions of the Roma
    (2001-2011). Some 300 homes are planned to be built by MRDPA/ ANL in 9 counties
    (11 localities) identified by the Local Authorities and the NAR in the 8 development
    regions of Romania. Local authorities are expected to provide the land and supporting
    public infrastructure.
- Construction of social housing for tenants evicted from homes returned to original
  owners (as part of the restitution process): There are no data about the ethnic background
  of those who have access to this program.
- Construction of social housing: There are no data about the ethnic background of those
  who have access to this program.
- “Revival of the Romanian village – construction of 10 houses for specialists” is a
  government program that supports the building of houses for certain categories of people,
  but meant to bring/ keep young professionals in rural areas. There are no data about the
  ethnic background of those who have access to this program. Currently, there are requests
  from some 1,522 local authorities to construct 13,055 dwellings in rural area across
  Romania.
- Infrastructure development – 10,000 km of inter-county and local roads. There is no
  information about the ethnic composition of the communities that have benefited from
  this program.


7.6.4 OTHER GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS
Assistance for financing housing (loan guarantees, direct and indirect subsidies): Specific
initiatives in this area include the following:
-    Lower down payment requirement (5 percent as opposed to 20 percent) on mortgage loans
     for first time home-buyers, guaranteed by the State (Ministry of Finance).
-    Loan guaranty by Government, reduction in VAT (from 24 percent to 5 percent), and an
     interest rate subsidy of 1-2 percent on Euro loans for first-time home buyers purchasing
     houses costing less than Lei 380,000 (~ Euro 86,000).
-    Subsidy of 30 percent for units completed in previously ‘unfinished’ buildings: Construction
     of private housing units through the completion of unfinished residential buildings whose
     construction commenced before January 1, 1990. MRDPA approves and coordinates the
     annual programs. Local authorities select the applicants based on social housing criteria.
-    Subsidy of up to 30 percent of house value: For all the categories of people who qualify for
     social housing, the State provides a ‘rebate’ or subsidy of up to 30 percent (of the house
     price) but not more than Euro 10,000, if the housing unit is built by an authorized
     developer/construction company. Local authorities receive the subsidy applications and pay
     it to the entitled persons after the construction works are finished.
Subsidies for retrofitting and thermo-insulation: Starting in 2006, the Government started
programs to retrofit / refurbish existing housing stock to protect against seismic risk and to
improve energy efficiency. The project financing is as follows: 34 percent from the State budget;
33 percent from the Local Authority’s budget (+ERDF); and 33 percent from funds of the owner
                                              248
associations (+ERDF). The investment required from private owners is a meager Euro1,000-
1,700 for an average 60 m² apartment.
7.7 ANALYSIS: SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
Housing is an economic issue with a history of segregation. The data presented in this chapter
shows that the living conditions of the Roma are worse than their non-Roma neighbors. This may
be attributed, at least in part, to the fact that the Roma are poorer than their non-Roma neighbors.
However, while this economic argument applies more generally, it is also important to highlight
the historical context of the Roma and their poverty, which has persisted for centuries, as well as
to acknowledge continued discrimination against Roma. The (mis)perception that all Roma are
‘untrustworthy, lazy, uneducated, conniving thieves who make a living from conducting illegal
businesses’ is a deep-rooted mentality that has been around for generations and continues to
reinforce itself in many ways. The poverty and marginalization of the Roma is a manifestation of
these attitudes, and unless these attitudes change, the random acts of disempowerment and
discrimination that challenge their dignity will continue to be condoned.
Slum areas in Romania’s cities closely resemble slums in developing country cities like
Mumbai and Nairobi: improvised housing structures using temporary materials, poor or no
sanitation, poor quality or limited water supply, and so on. There is, however, an important
distinction between the two: unlike slums in other big cities, which are often used by rural
immigrants or other poor people as a ‘stepping stone’ to prosperity, in the case of Romania these
communities seem to be trapped in the vicious cycle of unemployment, poverty, lack of
education, poor housing and infrastructure conditions, and so on. In many of these slums, the
Roma constitute the vast majority of the population. Given the relatively higher densities in these
areas, and the fact that they are often in sub-optimal locations (garbage dumps, etc.), these areas
pose serious health and environmental risks, and need to be considered priority areas for
government action.
Roma generally face poor housing conditions, but there is a certain level of heterogeneity.
As described earlier, the Roma live in a wide range of housing typologies, depending on their
income levels and their location – urban, peri-urban, and rural. Improving their living conditions
will require a range of interventions, suitably packaged to meet the needs of each specific sub-
group. Also, housing needs to be seen as more than mere physical shelter; by definition, it should
have adequate physical infrastructure, social services (health, education), and security of tenure
(property titles).
In addition to the Roma-specific issues in the housing sector discussed above, there are
many inefficiencies in the overall housing market that will need to be addressed in order
make the process sustainable. Some of the key issues are presented below.
-   Lack of a comprehensive national housing policy. Romania does not currently have a
    national housing policy. There is no document that formulates long-term objectives,
    priorities, or direction for the housing sector, or evaluates and measures criteria for programs
    already implemented.
-   Decentralization of the housing sector: An unfunded mandate? With the decentralization
    of the housing sector, local authorities are responsible for providing social housing or other
    forms of housing subsidies to their residents. In cities where technical capacity and political
                                                249
      will exists, efforts are being pursued with local/ city funds or through ANL or State funds:
      construction of new social housing; renovation of old housing stock; sites-and services
      projects (mostly in rural or peri-urban areas) where residents of slums are allocated a plot of
      land free of cost by the government, and they build their own house; on-site upgrading in
      some cases, with electricity/ water connections, and so on. However, financing capacity of
      most of these smaller cities is limited. Hence, interventions related to housing – which are
      typically costly – are often ad hoc and arbitrary, and limited at best.
-     Government subsidies not targeting the poor. There are several housing subsidies that
      may be questionable from the equity perspective. One, all first-time home buyers are entitled
      to a VAT subsidy, so long as the house costs less than Lei 380K or Euro 86,364. With such a
      high cut-off limit, it appears that this subsidy is not targeting lower income households. Two,
      ANL’s Youth Housing program, as well intended as it is, targets ‘young’ households, who
      are not necessarily poor. And three, a government guarantee that is currently offered to all
      first time home buyers might be intended to spur the mortgage market, but does not target the
      poor. Furthermore, income based qualifications for subsidies in Romania are also
      questionable because there is reportedly a large difference between the official and the
      unofficial incomes in Romania.
-     'Hidden' rental market. The massive privatization of social housing resulted in an
      excessively high ownership rate on one hand, and to a degeneration of the rental market on
      the other. Official figures on housing indicate that 98 percent of the housing is privately
      owned. This, however, does not translate into 98 percent owner-occupied housing. Unofficial
      figures suggest that the rental market could be as large as 15-20 percent of the total housing
      stock in large cities like Bucharest. This might be attributed, at least in part, to the pro-tenant
      rental regulations and tax liability associated with rental units295, which has had two
      unintended effects: (i) ‘informalizing’ the rental market, denying both the tenant and the
      landlord any legal protection associated with an official contract; (ii) limiting the supply of
      rental housing, thereby making it much more expensive, and practically out of the reach of
      the lower income groups. Furthermore, starting January 1, 2014, the New Fiscal Code makes
      it obligatory for owners to pay 16 percent tax on rent plus contribution to State Health
      Insurance System (in 2013 this contribution was 5.5 percent); this new tax could further
      exacerbate the ‘informality’ in the rental market.
-     Heavy regulations, even in low-income areas. Areas with low average income would
      benefit from lower standards and more simplified / streamlined building permitting systems


295
   (i) Rent can be set no higher than 25 percent of the tenant’s household income, or 25 percent of National Average
Gross Household Income, whichever is lower For individual tenants of restituted buildings and housing for those
provided in Article 26 para (1) Government Emergency Ordinance # 40/1999 whose net monthly income per family
member is between average net monthly income in the economy and its double, the maximum rent may not exceed
25% of net monthly income the family. The provisions of Article 31 para. (2) and Article 33 of Government
Emergency Ordinance # 40/1999 apply accordingly. (Law 10/ 2001, Article 15, al. 3
http://www.cdep.ro/pls/legis/legis_pck.htp_act_text ?idt=66426 ) ; (ii) Eviction or contract termination due to
disputes resulting from disagreements on rent is not permitted; (iii) Rental income is subject to tax, and rental
contracts subject to taxation: The owner is obliged to pay 16% on three-fourths of the value of contract each
trimester (every 4 months). For example if you rent a flat for 1000 lei / month, then you have to pay taxes of 16%
from 750 lei, which means 120 lei each month or 360 lei every 3 months.
                                                       250
      that makes it easier for poorer households to ‘legalize’ their properties, and possibly leverage
      it for accessing finance.
7.8 POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
In the housing sector, change can start with the planning and design of housing options
that suit the Roma and their lifestyle, not the other way around.296 In other words, a one-
size-fits-all approach is the wrong approach. Instead, housing assistance needs to be expanded
beyond ‘social housing’ to include a menu of options that are not just more appropriate for the
recipient households and their lifestyles, but also more ‘value-for-money’ for the government,
more equitable, and more sustainable. And particularly in the case of the Roma, this needs to be
done jointly with the affected communities to help regain the trust that has been eroding for
centuries.
In all cases, it will be important to adapt the product to meet the needs of different
population groups, and not the other way around. This is particularly relevant for the poorer
communities, including the Roma - for example, most of these households cook outdoors using
charcoal or wood, which is a cheaper option than an electric stove (due to the high cost of
electricity). Housing solutions will need to be adapted to factor in these specifics. This is also to
say that ‘social housing’ as conventionally used in Romania is only one of the options amongst a
range of housing options that need to be explored for lower income groups (See Box 7).
Accordingly, the following may be considered for the various Roma housing typologies
discussed earlier, based on an integrated approach (linking with finance, community
participation, income generation, etc.):
rural areas:
-     Traditional settlements: Infrastructure upgrading (water, sanitation) and legalization
      (property titles) where possible only – not on hazardous lands, community buildings linked
      with livelihood development/ income generating activities; home improvement; microfinance
      / housing microfinance
-     Informal settlements: Infrastructure upgrading (water, sanitation) and property titles (where
      possible only, not on hazardous lands), community buildings linked with livelihood
      development / income generating activities.
In urban areas:
-     Traditional Roma settlements, New or Improved Housing: Infrastructure upgrading (water,
      sanitation) and legalization (property titles) where possible only – not on hazardous lands,
      linked together with microfinance for income generation
-     Informal Settlements (“Slums”), Multistory buildings (“Ghettos”): Social / subsidized
      housing (rental or ownership), infrastructure upgrading (water, sanitation) and legalization


296
   To cite a provocative, but real life example, moving a large low-income family with a horse-cart (an essential
component of their informal sector work), whether Roma or non-Roma, to live on the nth floor of a social housing
block, and expecting them to ‘change their behavior and lifestyle’ is not just a fallacy, it is the inappropriate
solution.
                                                      251
    (property titles) where possible only – not on hazardous lands, linked with community
    organization, education, and job creation.
BOX 7: OPTIONS FOR IMPROVING HOUSING CONDITIONS

-   On-site upgrading: Appropriate for existing informal / underserviced settlements which are
    not located in hazardous zones (e.g. landfill sites, flood-prone sites, etc.), where the
    settlement layout is conducive to infrastructure improvement with minimal displacement.
    With minimal disturbance to the existing houses, the residents can then improve their
    structures incrementally over time. This type of program will work better if linked to a
    financing program for home improvement (housing microfinance).
-   Site and services: This involves provision of a serviced plot (ideally no larger than 100-250
    m2 in urban areas), sometimes with the core unit (kitchen+bathroom+1 room) built on the
    plot. This could be linked with a program for housing construction loans or housing
    microfinance.
-   Social housing: Social housing can take a single- or multiple-story format. Since it is very
    expensive to build, particularly in Romania where the construction cost is so high, it might
    be more prudent for Local Authorities to retain and try to better manage their existing stock,
    and focus their resources on the other options, i.e. on-site upgrading and site-and-services.
-   Land pooling/
-   Urban revitalization/ mixed income neighborhoods
The following policy recommendations provide options for increasing the scale, efficiency, and
effectiveness of these interventions.
7.3.1 POLICY GOAL 1: SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF
      INTEGRATED PROJECTS IN THE HOUSING SECTOR THAT ARE AFFORDABLE
      AND PARTICIPATORY
The range of programs could be broadened to support integrated projects at the community level,
as well as facilitate home improvements at the individual household level.

       POLICY MEASURE 1A: ESTABLISH A SUPPORT FRAMEWORK TO EXPAND THE MENU OF
                                    HOUSING OPTIONS

The support framework could be established (or an existing framework could be strengthened) to
specifically facilitate the following actions:

-   Build institutional capacity of local authorities, and increase awareness amongst
    communities and civil society organizations about the value and cost-effectiveness of the
    various potential interventions in housing other than social housing.
-   Provide technical assistance at local levels to assess priority needs and develop infrastructure
    upgrading projects (including proposals for EU Structural Funds).
-   Integrate physical investments with sustainability measures that address the root causes of
    poor living conditions. These include: (a) income generation support such as vocational
    training (e.g. involve local population in infrastructure upgrading, which builds ownership,
    creates job opportunities, and develops skills), job search assistance, apprenticeship
    facilitation, second chance education; (b) transition and social integration support such as

                                                252
        conflict mediation by social workers, awareness campaigns, community activities to facilitate
        interaction and understanding; and (c) organizational support, such as facilitation of
        formation and running of residents’ associations / committees and capacity training
        (accounting, basic financial literacy, community decision-making) .

                POLICY MEASURE 1B: ESTABLISH A GUIDING FRAMEWORK FOR A PARTICIPATORY
                                               APPROACH

The framework could guide the application of the following elements in the development and
implementation of participatory housing projects:
- Emphasize ‘process’, not only ‘product’. It is important to understand that often participatory
   processes are time-consuming on one hand, and slow with respect to up front disbursement.
   Still, they are critical for success. Local housing improvement programs require a constant –
   and patient – engagement with the communities to identify the right interventions and to
   build ownership for the product. The communities must be drivers of the process297, and
   decisions-makers on the type of housing solution they want and / or need.
- Encourage inclusive developments, retain the social fabric. To the extent possible, any
   housing intervention must ensure that the existing social fabric is retained; this applies
   especially to the poorest and most vulnerable households. It is important to emphasize that,
   to the extent possible, there should be no such distinction made on the grounds of ethnicity
   between Roma- and non-Roma within the same community, i.e. segregation should under no
   circumstances be encouraged: otherwise the effort can prove to be very divisive and counter-
   productive.

                     POLICY MEASURE 1C: PROVIDE FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO
                         FACILITATE HOME IMPROVEMENTS BY INDIVIDUAL HOUSEHOLDS

-       Establish a program to provide training and materials to permit residents to plan, construct,
        and/ or improve their homes with particular emphasis on affordable technologies and
        materials, structural safety, and energy efficiency.
-       Explore potential to extend housing finance to credit-worthy borrowers through an in-depth
        feasibility analysis to identify the demand and hurdles for accessing finance for home
        purchase and improvements. 298 Potential forms of housing finance include: (a) small housing
        mortgage loans for those who can qualify and can afford market-based housing, (b)
        construction loans for building or expanding a house or establishing a business (shop,




297
      Martin R., Mathema A. Development Poverty and Politics: Putting Communities in the Driver’s Seat, Routledge, NY, 2010.
298
      It must be emphasized that these are loans, and must be given only to credit-worthy borrowers, not the poorest who cannot repay.
                                                                        253
      workshop), (c) housing microfinance or home improvement loans for renovating or
      expanding a house.299
-     Develop mechanisms for assessing credit-worthiness for informal sector workers, which are
      distinctly different from those in the formal banking system but have been tried and tested
      successfully across the globe.
-     Explore the potential to establish a guaranty fund to incentivize risk-averse banks and non-
      banking financial institutions to extend loans (for housing or business development) to
      creditworthy Roma and other low income households.
7.3.2 POLICY GOAL 2: IMPROVE TENURE SECURITY

               POLICY MEASURE 2A: FACILITATE REGULARIZATION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS

-     Fast-track regularization of property rights. The National Agency for Cadaster and Land
      Registration of Romania (ANCPI) is planning a systematic property registration activity in
      1,000 Territorial Administrative Units (UATs). Since property rights need to be regularized
      before they can be registered, it would be advisable to consider fast-tracking the
      regularization of property rights (issuance of land titles or at least certificates of possession as
      per amendments to Law7/1996)300. In addition to providing tenure security, such an
      intervention will provide the possibility for households to leverage their property as collateral
      for loans (for home improvement or business development).
-     Systematically apply measures to facilitate inclusion of vulnerable groups including Roma in
      the systematic land registration process proposed for 1,000 UATs. Measures include
      facilitation of regularization of property rights (as per above), and mediation activities to
      increase their knowledge of and active participation in the process.
-     Provide assistance to low income communities and households to undertake steps toward
      regularization and tenure security. For example, support local authorities to incorporate
      informal areas into city/village plans, formalize a lease, privatize public land, facilitate land
      purchase from private owner or land swapping among owners, etc.




299
    Microfinance, in general, is much more ‘formalized’ in ECA countries than other world regions, with loans in the
range of Euro 25,000. Moreover, microfinance for housing is relatively new in Romania. Hence, this sector will
require a more in-depth feasibility analysis to identify the hurdles and more clearly assess the demand for such
services. [As mentioned earlier, there is currently only one bank that provides microfinance in urban areas, and that
too at very high interest rates.] Mechanisms for assessing credit-worthiness for people working in the informal
sector are distinctly different from those in the formal banking system, but have been tried and tested successfully
across the globe, and should be developed for the informal sector in Romania.
300
    In Romania, a great majority of land is not registered, even when the titles exist. Therefore, land registration is
considered important for both poor and non-poor areas. The issue is when the titles do not exist, it is more difficult
to register the land in the systematic registration process. In this context, a law was amended (Law 7/1996) to
enable registration of possession (with a certificate of possession). If no one else claims the land against the
possessor within five years of the registration of the possession, the possession automatically converts to ownership,
and the title could be issued. The certificate of possession is issued by local authorities in the course of the
systematic land registration process.

                                                         254
             POLICY MEASURE 2B: REASSESS/ REVISE BUILDING STANDARDS AND PERMITTING
                             PROCESSES FOR LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS

-     Develop a more realistic set of housing and infrastructure standards for lower income areas,
      which encourages and facilitates incremental improvements over time.
7.3.3 POLICY GOAL 3: ADDRESS BROADER HOUSING MARKET ISSUES
In order to make interventions targeted to low income communities, including Roma, more
sustainable, inefficiencies in the overall housing market also need to be addressed.

                 POLICY MEASURE 3A: DEVELOP A NATIONAL HOUSING STRATEGY/POLICY 301

-     Identify priority areas, both where intervention is needed immediately (e.g. slums and ghettos
      in informal settlements), and where high and quick impact is expected (e.g. in traditional
      settlements in urban and rural areas where basic infrastructure improvements will be
      sufficient). In both cases, it is critical to identify communities that show a keen interest to
      participate actively in the improvement of their neighborhoods. Maps of deprived /
      marginalized communities being developed by MRDPA with World Bank support could be
      used to identify priority target communities.
-     Propose a program of interventions with robust monitoring and evaluation mechanisms,
      rather than a list of piecemeal solutions/ projects that cannot be scaled up.
-     Clearly define responsible bodies as well as financing sources and allocate realistic budgets
      for the responsible bodies (including local authorities) to perform their functions in the
      housing sector. In case the EU Structural Funds are to be accessed to finance their functions,
      ensure adequate support to the local authorities in accessing these funds (applying the
      recommendations in Chapter 8).

               POLICY MEASURE 3B: RE-ASSESS GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS AND SUBSIDIES

-     Re-evaluate regulations in the rental sector to promote the development of more ‘affordable’
      rental options and expand the availability of formal private rentals.
-     Revisit government subsidies that are ‘leaking’ to wealthier groups, and focus government
      resources on the poor (social housing, infrastructure upgrading etc.).
-     De-link the debts of (utility bills of) previous tenants attached to the property, in order to free
      current and future tenants from debts for which they are not responsible.




301
  The Ministry of Regional Development and Public Administration (MRDPA) is in the process of initiating the development of a national level
housing strategy/policy to promote a comprehensive approach to the housing sector.



                                                                   255
7.3.4 IMPLEMENTATION
Table 1 below presents the primary implementing agency and time-frame for each of the tasks in
the recommendations section.




                                                                                                                                   Suggested Monitoring
                      Entity(ies) best placed




                                                                                             Medium: 6-18 mths;
Recommendation




                      recommendation
                      to implement the




                                                                          Short: < 6 mths;


                                                                                                                  Long: >18 mths
                                                             Time frame




                                                                                                                                   indicators
                                                Impact
POLICY GOAL 1: SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF INTEGRATED
PROJECTS THAT ARE AFFORDABLE AND PARTICIPATORY
POLICY                MRDPA/MLFSPE              Critical     Medium                                                                1. Support framework established
MEASURE                                         Impact                                                                             (YES/NO)
1A:                                                                                                                                2. # of Local Authorities, Civil
Establish a                                                                                                                        Society and Private sector partners
support                                                                                                                            received information/training on a
framework                                                                                                                          wider range of housing options and
to expand                                                                                                                          integrated housing projects
the menu                                                                                                                           3. # of Local Authorities, Civil
of housing                                                                                                                         Society and Private sector partners
options                                                                                                                            receiving TA to design and
                                                                                                                                   implement       integrated   housing
                                                                                                                                   projects
                                                                                                                                   4. Average budgets of integrated
                                                                                                                                   housing projects implemented with
                                                                                                                                   the help of the support framework
                                                                                                                                   5. # of towns/ cites where
                                                                                                                                   integrated housing projects have
                                                                                                                                   been or are being implemented
POLICY                MRDPA/                    Critical     Medium                                                                6. A guiding framework for
MEASURE 1B:           MLFSPE NAR                Impact                                                                             participatory      design    and
Establish a guiding                                                                                                                development in the housing sector
framework for a                                                                                                                    developed (yes/ no)
participatory
approach


POLICY                MRDPA/ NHA +              High         Long                                                                  7. Program to provide training
MEASURE 1C:           NAR + Ministry            Impact                                                                             and     materials      for   home
Provide financial     of Finance                                                                                                   improvements (yes/no)
and technical                                                                                                                      8. #      low     income/    Roma
assistance to                                                                                                                      communities (or households) where
facilitate home                                                                                                                    TA is provided on home
improvements by                                                                                                                    construction / improvement
individual                                                                                                                         9. Feasibility       study      on
households                                                                                                                         microfinance       and     housing
                                                                                                                                   microfinance completed (yes/no)
                                                           256
                                                               10. Feasibility    study    for     a
                                                               guarantee fund to provide housing/
                                                               microfinance loans to creditworthy
                                                               informal sector borrowers (yes/ no)
                                                               11. % of households with access to
                                                               microfinance/               housing
                                                               microfinance: (i) Roma; (ii) all
                                                               ‘low-income’ households
POLICY GOAL 2: IMPROVE TENURE SECURITY
POLICY               ANCPI + NAR +       High         Medium   12. # of property rights regularized
MEASURE 2A:          Local Authorities   Impact                (to Roma)
Facilitate                                                     13. # of property rights (by Roma)
regularization of                                              registered
property rights                                                14. #      of   informal    (Roma)
                                                               settlements regularized


POLICY               MRDPA/ NHA          High         Medium   15. A more relaxed set of building
MEASURE 2B:                              Impact                standards and regulations for low
Reassess/ revise                                               income areas developed (yes/ no)
building standards
and permitting
processes for low
income households


POLICY GOAL 3: ADDRESS BROADER HOUSING MARKET ISSUES
POLICY               MRDPA/ NHA          Critical     Medium   Indicators   to  measure the
MEASURE 3A:                                                    implementation of the Policy
Develop a national                                             Measure 3A:
housing
                                                               16. Priority areas, both where
strategy/policy
                                                               intervention is needed immediately
                                                               and where high and quick impact is
                                                               expected are identified (Yes/No).
                                                               17. A program of interventions
                                                               with robust       monitoring     and
                                                               evaluation mechanisms proposed
                                                               (Yes/No).
                                                               18. Responsible       bodies    and
                                                               financial resources are identified
                                                               (Yes/No).
                                                               Possible Indicators to measure the
                                                               implementation of the national
                                                               housing strategy/policy:
                                                               19. Ratio of households earning
                                                               less than 60% of national average
                                                               HH income benefiting from
                                                               government assistance in the
                                                               housing sector

                                                    257
                                                        20. Number of cities / counties
                                                        with on-going housing initiatives
                                                        for low income households,
                                                        including the Roma
                                                        21. Government expenditure for
                                                        housing: (i) Average per qualifying
                                                        household (Euro); (ii) average per
                                                        qualifying Roma household (Euro)
                                                        22. Average % of local housing
                                                        budget coming from transfers from
                                                        State budget
POLICY              MRDPA/NHA   /   High       Medium   23. Existing regulations/ policies:
MEASURE 3B: Re-     MoF             Impact              (i) rental housing; (ii) VAT for
assess government                                       housing re-evaluated (Yes/No)
regulations and                                         24. Existing      subsidies     and
subsidies                                               programs, e.g. youth housing, first-
                                                        time home buyers re-evaluated to
                                                        better target them to low income
                                                        households (YES/No)




                                             258
REFERENCES
Bădescu Gabriel, Grigoraş Vlad, Rughiniş Cosima, Voicu Mălina, Voicu Ovidiu, 2007, Barometrul Incluziunii
Romilor, Bucuresti: Fundaţia pentru o Societate Deschisă http://www.edrc.ro/docs/docs/cercetari/Barometrul-
incluziunii-romilor.pdf

Dan Adrian-Nicolae, (1999). România şi politica de locuire, în Cătălin Zamfir (coord.), Politici Sociale în România
90-98, Bucuresti: Expert
Dan Adrian-Nicolae (coord.), (2004), „Diagnoza locuirii: lipsa unei locuinţe şi locuirea în condiţii precare ”, ICCV/
CASPIS (http://www.iccv.ro/index.php/ro/download?task=view.download&cid=27 )

Dan Adrian-Nicolae, (2006), Politici de locuire: România încotro? O analiză comparativă a Rom âniei în contextul
ECE şi UE, Bucureşti: Editura Universităţii din Bucureşti

Dan Adrian-Nicolae, (2011), Locuinta si serviciile de locuire, in M. Preda (coord.), Riscuri şi inechităţi sociale în
România, Bucuresti: Polirom

Dumincã Gelu & Ivasiuc Ana (coord.), 2013, Romii din Romania. De la ţap ispãşitor la motor de dezvoltare ,
Bucuresti: Agentia Impreuna

Grigoraş Vlad, 2007, Condiţii de locuit şi probleme financiare la populaţia de romi , in G. Bădescu, V. Grigoraş, C.
Rughiniş, M. Voicu, O. Voicu, “Barometrul Incluziunii Romilor”, Bucuresti: Fundaţia pentru o Societate Deschisă,
http://www.edrc.ro/docs/docs/cercetari/Barometrul-incluziunii-romilor.pdf

Martin R., Mathema A., 2010, Development Poverty and Politics: Putting Communities in the Driver’s Seat ,
Routledge, NY

Moisă Florin, Rostas Iulius Albert, Tarnovschi Daniela, Stoian Iulian, Rădulescu Dani el, Andersen Tania-Ştefania,
2013, Civil Society Monitoring Report on the Implementation of the National Roma Integration Strategy and
Decade Action Plan in 2012 in Romania, Budapest: Decade of Roma Inclusion Secretariat Foundation,
http://www.romadecade.org/cms/upload/file/9270_file24_ro_civil-society-monitoring-report_en.pdf

Niţă Delia Luiza, 2009, Housing Conditions of Roma and Travellers, Romania RAXEN National Focal Point,
http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra_uploads/591-RAXEN-Roma%20Housing-Romania_en.pdf

Oprean Oana, (2011), "The Roma of Romania" . Theses and Dissertations, College of Liberal Arts and Social
Sciences, DePaul University

Zamfir Cătălin şi Zamfir Elena (Coord.) (1993). Tiganii intre ignorare şi ingrijorare. Bucureşti: Alternative

Zamfir Cătălin şi Preda Marian (Coord.) (2002). Romii în România. Bucureşti: Expert
Toth Alexandru; Dan Adrian-Nicolae si Briciu Cosmin, 2011, Economia socială şi comunităţile de romi. Provocări
şi                   oportunităţi,                Bucuresti:                   UNDP                   Romania
http://www.undp.ro/libraries/projects/Economia_Sociala_si_Comunitatile_de_Romi_Provocari_si_Oportunitati.pdf

* * * Amnesty International, 2013, Annual Report 2013. The state of the world's human rights – Romania,
http://www.amnesty.org/en/region/romania/report-2013#section-122-3

* * * Economic Commission for Europe, 2001, Country Profiles on the Housing Sector: Romania,
http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/hlm/prgm/cph/countries/romania/cp.romania.pdf, UNECE



                                                        259
* * * European Agency for Fundamental Rights, 2009, Housing discrimination against Roma in selected EU
Member States - An analysis of EU-MIDIS data, http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra_uploads/607-Roma-
Housing-Analysis-EU-MIDIS_en.pdf

* * * European Agency for Fundamental Rights / UNDP, 2012, The situation of Roma in 11 EU Member States.
Survey results at a glance, http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra_uploads/2099-FRA-2012-Roma-at-a-
glance_EN.pdf

* * * Fundaţia pentru o Societate Deschisă, 2006, Barometrul Incluziunii Romilor 2006 – baza de date, Bucuresti:
Fundaţia pentru o Societate Deschisă

* * * Institute for Real Estate Construction and Housing Ltd., 2008, Implementation of European Standards in
Romanian Housing Legislation, for Romanian Ministry of Development, Public Works and Housing, Austria,
http://www.rabo.org.ro/wp-content/uploads/RHL-Final-Report-080129-en.pdf

* * * Institutul National de Statistica, 2012, Recensamantul Populatiei si Locuintelor 2011 – date preliminare,
Bucuresti, INS
http://www.insse.ro/cms/files/statistici/comunicate/alte/2012/RPL_rezultate%20preliminare.pdf

* * * National Statistics Institute – Romania: data for May 2013, cited from

http://www.romania-insider.com/net-average-income-in-romania-down-in-may/27817/

*      *   *     Institutul National de Statistica, 2013, Câştigul salarial mediu în luna mai 2013,
http://www.insse.ro/cms/files/statistici/comunicate/castiguri/a13/cs05r13.pdf

* * * Institutul National de Statistica, 2002, Anuarul Statistic al Romaniei 2000, INSSE, Bucuresti
http://www.insse.ro/cms/files/pdf/ro/cap5.pdf

* * * Institutul National de Statistică, 2013, Anuarul Statistic al Romaniei 2012, INSSE, Bucuresti

* * * Ministerul Dezvoltarii Regionale si Administratiei Publice, http://www.mdrt.ro/

* * * National Agency for Housing– Romanian Government, http://www.anl.ro/

* * * National Agency for Roma – Romanian Government, http://www.anr.gov.ro/

* * * Romanian Government / National Agency for Roma, 2012, Strategy of the Government of Romania for the
Inclusion of the Romanian Citizens belonging to Roma Minority 2012-2020, Bucharest
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/discrimination/files/roma_romania_strategy_en.pdf

* * * Romanian Government, Law 114 / 1996 (Housing Law), Romanian Government – Official Monitor M.Of.
nr.     254/21     oct.      1996     and      republished   in M.Of. nr.   393/31      dec.    1997
http://www.cdep.ro/pls/legis/legis_pck.htp_act_text?idt=1614

* * * Romanian Government, Law 152 / 1998 (National Housing Agency), Romanian Government – (republished
in Official Monitor nr. 744 from 2.11.2009) http://www.anl.ro/userfiles/files/statice/33/LEGEAnr.152din1998.pdf

* * * Romanian Government, Law 10 / 2001 privind regimul juridic al unor imobile preluate in mod abuziv in
perioada 6 martie 1945 - 22 decembrie 1989, http://www.cdep.ro/pls/legis/legis_pck.htp_act_text?idt=66426



                                                       260
* * * Romanian Government, 2013, LEGE pentru modificarea şi completarea Legii nr. 571/2003 privind Codul
fiscal,      http://media.hotnews.ro/media_server1/document-2013-09-16-15589832-0-proiect-legeforfetar-imm-
13092013.pdf

* * * Romanian Government, 2011, Ordonanţă de Urgenţă Nr. 70 din 31 august 2011 privind măsurile de
protecţie             socială            în               perioada         sezonului          rece,
http://www.mmuncii.ro/pub/imagemanager/images/file/Legislatie/ORDONANTE-DE-GUVERN/OUG%2070-
2011.pdf

* * * Romanian Government, Ordonanţă de Urgenţă # 40/1999 privind protectia chiriasilor si stabilirea chiriei
pentru               spatiile           cu           destinatia               de                    locuinte,
http://www.anrp.gov.ro/uploads/pdf/ORDONANTA%20DE%20URGENTA%20Nr40-
99%20PROT%20CHIRIASI.pdf

* * * Soros Foundation , 2012, Roma Situation in Romania, 2011 – Between social inclusion and migration,
Bucharest: Soros Foundation http://www.soros.ro/en/comunicate_detaliu.php?comunicat=195#

* * * The Roma Inclusion Decade 2003-2013, http://www.romadecade.org/




                                                    261
      8   INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS FOR EFFECTIVE LOCAL
            SERVICE DELIVERY AND USE OF EU INSTRUMENTS

Like Discrimination, Institutional Mechanisms is another cross-sectoral topic that affects all thee
dimensions of exclusion. ‘Institutional Mechanisms’ includes anything from laws to policy
frameworks to local implementation mechanisms. This chapter discusses such issues. The main
recommendation in this crosscutting area is to increase accountability, with quality of local
service delivery being a key evaluation metric for those held accountable.

8.1   INTRODUCTION
This chapter presents diagnostics and policy advice for tackling institutional constraints for
local service delivery for effective Roma inclusion. It also assesses what can be done in this
regard to make government planning and budgeting systems more responsive to needs of local
Roma communities. Similarly, it reviews past use of European funds for Roma integration,
identifies shortcomings, and proposes measures to enable the government to improve the take-up
of these funds.
This chapter is structured as follows: section 8.2 presents the institutional set-up for the
implementation of the National Roma Inclusion Strategy (NRIS); section 8.3 then assesses issues
with its operationalization; finally section 8.4 discusses measures for addressing the main
constraints;.
A number of key sources are used in this chapter. This chapter makes use of available
documents (see reference list at the end of this chapter), information presented in the other
chapters and field work. The latter included conversations held from 10 - 23 October 2013 with
local Roma experts in Giurgiu, Teleorman, Calarasi and Prahova county. Representatives of the
Romanian Association of Communes (ACOR), Association of Romanian Towns (AOR) and
National Union of County Councils of Romania (UNCJR) were also interviewed.

8.2 INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS FOR ROMA INCLUSION
Two institutions mainly coordinate Roma inclusion efforts at the national level. In Romania,
the Ministry of Labor, Family, Social Protection and the Elderly (MMFPSPV –from here on
referred to as Ministry of Labor) is in charge of public policies and programs for social inclusion.
The National Agency for Roma (NAR) is tasked with promoting social inclusion of the Roma
through developing the NRIS and coordinating its implementation. It is a subordinated body of
the government. Two NRISs have been produced to date, each for a ten year period. They are
accompanied by a number of sectoral action plans and are implemented through the various
government ministries and NGOs. Monitoring of the NRIS is the responsibility of both the NAR
and the Ministry of Labor through a Joint Working Group.

The goals of the NRIS 2001-2010 were to improve the condition of the Roma in Romania.
The strategy aimed, among other things, to (1) improve service delivery to Roma, (2) remove
stereotypes, prejudices and discriminatory practices of civil servants, (3) create a positive change
in public opinion on Roma based on tolerance and social solidarity principles, and (4) stimulate
                                               262
Roma participation in the economic, social, educational, cultural and political life. The NRIS
2001-2010 covered a broad range of sectors and sub-sectors, varying from community
development and administration to housing, health care, justice and public order, child welfare,
education, communication and civic involvement. The strategy allocated responsibilities for
implementation to a variety of stakeholders.

To implement the NRIS 2001-2010, two institutional structures were formed at the national
level: the Joint Working Group on Roma Policies and the Ministerial Commissions on
Roma. The joint working group was in charge of the coordination and implementation of the
public policies for Roma. It included the state secretaries in the ministries responsible for the
application of the strategy. The NAR was in charge of coordinating this joint working group,
while also presenting the opinions of the NGOs. The Ministerial Commissions on Roma were
established within each of the ministries in charge of implementing the strategy. The president of
each Commission was one of the secretaries of state within the respective ministry. Each
Commission consisted of 4-5 members that were working on specific activities. The NAR was
also represented in these commissions. Regional Offices (RO) of the National Agency for Roma
were also established to support efforts at the regional level for implementing initiatives for the
Roma minority and to strengthen partnerships among public and private organizations.


                               Ministerial Commission
                                           2
        Ministerial              - NAR representative             Ministerial
       Commission 1             - Ministerial Secretary          Commission 3
   - NAR representative                                      - NAR representative
        - Ministerial                                             - Ministerial
          Secretary                                                 Secretary
                                    Joint Working
                                        Group
                                        - NAR
                                     - Ministerial
                                      Secretaries




                                 Regional NAR offices
                             - Public-Private Partnerships
                              - Regional Implementation

To support the implementation at the County level, County Roma Offices were formed in
addition to local Roma experts and mediators in social services such as health and
education at the municipality level. The County Roma Offices were structures within the

                                                263
prefect’s offices and subordinated to the Ministry of Administration and Interior302. Technically,
the activities of the County Offices on Roma were coordinated by the NAR. The Offices’ main
responsibilities included the organization, planning and coordination of the activities in line with
the NRIS. The Roma County Offices included 3-4 experts, one of whom had to be a member of
the Roma community. The Roma County Offices established Joint Working Groups, members of
which included deputy-prefects, representatives from the Regional Offices of the NAR,
representatives of local public services, health and education mediators, Roma inspectors and
teachers, and NGO representatives and representatives nominated by Roma communities.



       Ministry of Administration & Interior
                      / NAR
        County Office 1             County Office 2           County Office 3           County Office 4
          Organization,              Organization,              Organization,             Organization,
          planning and               planning and               planning and              planning and
       coordination of the        coordination of the        coordination of the       coordination of the
      activities in line with    activities in line with    activities in line with   activities in line with
       the Roma Strategy          the Roma Strategy          the Roma Strategy         the Roma Strategy


Local Roma Experts were appointed at the municipality level. These served to mediate
between the public authorities and the Roma communities. They were responsible for promoting
activities for Roma inclusion at the municipality level. They were employed and funded by the
local city hall, and were subordinated to the County Offices on Roma and to the Mayor. The
local Roma experts were required to be familiar with Roma issues and had to be recommended
by the Roma community.
The NRIS 2012-2020 was drafted during 2011 and is currently being updated. However, the
new strategy does not address lessons learned from the previous strategy in a systematic way as
no comprehensive evaluation of the 2001-2010 strategy was conducted. The NRIS 2012-2020
was produced through a group effort of line ministries coordinated at the highest level by the
vice-prime minster. Each ministry drafted its own priorities and measures. Regional and local
authorities and a coalition of civil society representatives were consulted, although this appears
to have been largely a formal process with little evidence that their suggestions were considered.
Overall the scope of the strategy is similar to its 2001-2010predecessor, and a number of
activities implemented under the previous strategy, such as the Roma health mediators program,
are continued. The stated aim of the new strategy is to ”ensure the social and economic inclusion
of Romanian citizens belonging to the Roma minority, by implementing integrated policies in the
fields of education, employment, health, housing, culture and social infrastructure”.



302
      Presently the Ministry of Internal Affairs
                                                           264
The proposed institutional set-up is not very different from the one proposed under the
previous strategy. At the central level the Inter-ministerial Working Group is coordinated by the
Vice Prime Minister and headed by the NAR president, in collaboration with two state
secretaries from the Ministry of Labor and the Ministry of Administration and Interior. Under the
previous strategy, the Ministerial Commissions for Roma (MCR)303 included only representatives
from the NAR, whereas this time, representatives from non-governmental Roma organizations
with relevant expertise can also be represented if this is seen as appropriate. The implementation
of the strategy will take place through the on-going decentralisation process of government and
relevant competencies will be shared between local and central public authorities.

At the county level, Joint Working Groups (JWG) are set up under the auspices of the
County Offices for Roma. They are composed of representatives from local decentralized
bodies of ministries, county counsellors, delegates from Roma communities and Roma NGOs.
The JWGs are established by order of the Prefect. Their role is to prepare the County’s Roma
Inclusion Plan based on needs of local Roma, and ensuring that Roma issues are adequately
addressed in the County’s development plans. The JWGs are also expected to support the
implementation of these measures by advising sectoral service providers and facilitating their
access to Roma communities.

As under the previous strategy, at the municipality level, Local Roma Experts are the main
interface between public authorities and Roma communities. The main activities of local
experts on Roma are further specified in the new strategy. They include establishing, at the local
level, local initiative groups (LIGs) and local working groups (LWGs). The LIGs are made up of
representatives of Roma communities and their role is to determine the main needs and priorities
of these communities. The LWGs are made up of the local Roma experts, representatives of local
public institutions, members of the Local Council, members of nongovernmental organizations
and a delegate of the local Roma community from the LIG. The LWG is in charge of developing
the Local Roma Action Plan inclusion to be endorsed by the Local Council through the local
development strategy.

8.3 IMPLEMENTATION   CHALLENGES                            OF      THE      NATIONAL          ROMA
    INCLUSION STRATEGY
The implementation of the NRIS 2001-2010 has led to a number of initiatives that appear
to be successful. The health and school mediators, for example, are felt to have led to positive
change (see the chapters on health and education). However, EU and NGO reports, as well as our
interviews with Romanian officials, demonstrate that implementation was affected by a number
of shortcomings. These relate to the operationalization of the institutional set-up, and to the
implementation of EU supported programs. These limitations will be discussed in this section.




303
      Established under Prime Minister’s Decision No 36/24.03.2011, published in OG No. 210/25.03.2011
                                                   265
      8.3.1 POOR COORDINATION, CAUSED BY A LACK OF UNIFORM LEGISLATION
                            AND WORKING INSTRUMENTS

The operationalization of the institutional mechanisms outlined in the previous section has
been hampered, first of all, by the lack of legal provisions and working instruments that
spell out how the various institutional actors are expected to work in a coherent, functional
and efficient manner. Legal provisions for addressing the needs of Roma are spread across a
range of different instruments. A quick legislative inventory conducted as a background for this
study demonstrates how complex the legal framework for service delivery is, especially at the
local level. A total of 58 laws, decisions and ordinances that relate to local service delivery were
identified, many of which cover multiple layers of government. Aligning all these different
existing legal arrangements and policies provides a challenge for authorities, especially at the
local level where institutional capacity is often low. Some measures proposed under the NRIS
are not always well grounded in the existing legal framework. Some did not fall under the legal
competence of a local authority, making implementation impossible. Also, the legal status of
important components of the mechanism, such as the local Roma experts, has been unclear.

There is a lack of coordination among the institutions responsible for implementation of
the NRIS 2012-2020. While such coordination appears to be the responsibility of the NAR, it
does not have a clear mandate and sufficient institutional leverage over sector ministries to make
that possible. Many measures to tackle Roma exclusion that are part of the NRIS need to be
mainstreamed in sectoral policies, such as activities by the Ministry of Education to prevent
school segregation of Roma. This requires effective coordination among sectoral ministries and
with the NAR. However, effective coordination between the NAR, the Ministry of Labor and
other ministries, based on well-defined procedures, is currently missing. The Ministry of Labor is
in charge of the implementation of policies in the areas of labour, family, social protection and
elderly, including the population belonging to the Roma minority, is the Ministry of Labor.
Under the Ministry of Labor, there are two directorates with responsibilities in the field of social
inclusion304. In addition, there is the Directorate General of the Managing Authority of the
Operational Programme Human Resources Development (MA SOP HRD), which is in charge of
managing European Social Funds (ESF). The role of the NAR in the implementation of the
policies and programs of the Ministry of Labor, or other line ministries referred to in the NRIS is
not well defined. The European Commission staff working document accompanying the NRIS
2012-2020305 states that “The strategy does not reflect an integrated approach. The strategy
would benefit from…. clear targets, responsibilities, budget allocations. Effective coordination of
implementation must be ensured”. This is also the conclusion of the Civil Society Report on the




304
  Directorate for Social Services and Social Inclusion and Directorate for Public Policies and
Communication, according to GD no. 10/2013
305
    The Commission staff working document accompanying the document National Roma Integration Strategies: a
first step in the implementation of the EU Framework SWD (2012) 133, 21 May 2012
                                                   266
implementation of the National Roma Inclusion Strategy, and this issue is also mentioned in the
Romanian Action Plan for the Decade of Roma inclusion 2005-2015306.

There are several operational programs responsible for using EU structural and cohesion
funds to support projects that are relevant for Roma, but the extent to which these reach
Roma or marginalised communities is not tracked. In order to achieve the objectives set out
in the National Strategic Reference Framework (CNSR) 2007-2013, which lays out the priority
areas to be financed by the EU Structural and Cohesion Funds, seven operational programmes
were established. Each programme was managed by a managing authority. However, no
monitoring system that enabled a systematic assessment of whether marginalised communities
are benefiting from these programs has been in place.
The current division of responsibilities and legal competences of local and national
authorities does not easily accommodate the institutional set-up for the implementation of
the NRIS. For example, the provisions of Government Decision no.1217/2006 on the
establishment of a national mechanism to promote social inclusion in Romania does not make
any specific references to the County Offices for Roma or even local Roma experts. Sectoral
measures for social inclusion of Roma are often expected to be carried out by local authorities,
without providing extra budgetary resources. This makes their successful implementation very
difficult. Moreover, local governments have often not been consulted in any depth on these
measures307. Vice versa, if the responsibility for implementing and funding a measure lies with
local authorities, national authorities have limited influence on decisions around these. This
affects, in particular, the County Offices for Roma, which have been created as part of the
strategy. These are working under the authority of the Prefect as well as under technical
coordination of the NAR. In practice, this means that they are often constrained to fulfil the
responsibilities given to them by the NAR. Roma experts of the County Office, for example, are
not invited to be part of the County social inclusion commission if the Prefect believes this is not
necessary. Similarly, Roma representatives at the municipality level are hired by local public
administrations (city halls) and are responsible for the development of actions for improving the
situation of Roma. They report to the County Roma Offices and to the Mayor, but are selected
and contracted by the city halls. The city halls can hire personnel according to their own criteria
and needs, depending on available financial resources, leaving the NAR and the County Roma
Office experts with little to say over who is hired. This undermines the independence of the local
Roma experts and their ability to fulfil their responsibilities, such as promoting the interests of
local Roma communities and making sure these are well reflected in local development plans. It
makes local Roma experts vulnerable to becoming political instruments for the re-election of
Mayors. Overall there is a lack of clarity on how local and national responsibilities are divided
and through what mechanisms local and national authorities could work together.



306  Roma Decade Inclusion Secretariat Foundation, 2013. Fundaţia Centrul de Resurse pentru Comunităţile de
Romi (coordinateur), Fundaţia Soros România, Fundaţia pentru Dezvoltarea Societăţii Civile n Centrul Romilor
pentru Politici de Sănătate – SASTIPEN.
307
    According to the Substantiation Note of GD 1221/2011, section 6 point 3, available on the website
http://www.gov.ro/nota-de-fundamentare-hg-nr-1221-14-12-2011__l1a115600.html, link
http://www.gov.ro/upload/articles/115600/nf-hg-1221-2011.pdf
                                                   267
Existing budgetary processes do not facilitate cross-sectoral integration. At the national
level, the division of work between the ministries favors a predominantly sectoral approach to
development and social policy, with each national ministry making efforts to spend their budget
allocation for meeting their output targets. The same logic is reproduced at the sub-national level,
either by the local offices of line ministries, or by local governments. On paper the latter do have
the authority to adopt and pursue integrated strategies, but a large part of their budgetary
allocations come in the form of earmarked transfers. In the words of a local decision-maker that
was interviewed as part of this study: "those who know the problems best have relatively little
power (and money) to act on them, and those with power and resources do not have direct
responsibilities and a direct interest to take part in such efforts to coordinate strategies across
sectors". The agenda for negotiating and drafting integration strategies for these domains at the
sub-national level is therefore severely constrained.

Local implementation is difficult to monitor under the current circumstances. At the local
level, the National Roma Inclusion Strategy emphasises the importance of Local Roma Action
Plans. It is the responsibility of the Local Roma Expert to introduce the Local Roma Action Plan
in the municipal strategies and development plans. However, given the lack of influence of NAR
on local public decision-making and the existing budget allocation mechanisms, with a large
proportion of funds earmarked for other purposes, this cannot easily be enforced by the NAR.
Our field work shows that the effectiveness of the Local Roma Expert highly depends on the
quality of the relationship between the Local Roma Expert and the Mayor. The mechanism for
consulting with Roma communities on this is also not clear.


   8.3.2 INSUFFICIENT RESOURCES AND LIMITED LINKS BETWEEN PLANS AND
                                  BUDGETS

During the five years preceding this study, budgets of local authorities were affected by the
economic crisis and subsequent fiscal tightening. Concerns about aggregate public deficits and
spending in the short term triggered a drive towards centrally imposed spending cuts and micro-
management of local budgets, which seriously affected the budgetary autonomy of local
governments. Local budgets have decreased substantially in relative terms (Fig 8.1). This has
also affected the ability of local governments to co-finance EU funded projects. Under these
budget constraints and their unpredictability, the local development strategies, including the
NRIS component, became no longer a reference document guiding decisions.




                                                268
               Fig. 8.1. Local government budgets, as % GDP
      10
           %


      9
                                 8.64          8.61
                 8.90                                        8.55

      8
                                                                           7.74

                                                                                         7.27
      7



      6
               2007       2008          2009          2010          2011          2012

Source: Ministry of Finance data

Policy measures proposed in the National Roma Inclusion Strategy are often not
accompanied by financial resources. This reflects a broader problem in Romania where
policies and plans tend to be disconnected from the budget process. The devolvement of
decision-making authority to the local level has often not been accompanied by a corresponding
decentralization of the budget. As a consequence, links between these plans and strategies, often
mandatory in the process of EU funds programming, and annual local budgets is weak. Often
there seems to be no relationship between these “hard tools” of decision making and the myriad
of “soft”, progressive strategies promoted by the upper tiers of governance, including the EU and
the NAR.

The NRIS suggests that additional measures for Roma inclusion at the local level could be
funded from "local budgets". This does not follow the budgetary rules 9. According to
officials interviewed, it is necessary that this strategy indicates the exact funding sources for
taking the stated measures, such as increasing a local service fee or tax, or in cases where funds
other than from the local budget are to be used, where this additional money could come from.
The local public finance act states that: After approval of local budgets, normative acts with
involvement thereof can be approved, but only with the specification of the sources for covering
the diminishing of revenues or the increase of budget expenditures pertaining to the budget year
for which those local budgets were approved"308.

The financing of local Roma experts serves as an example worth noting. Under an EU
funded project (by SOP HRD), 210 Roma individuals were trained and employed as local Roma
experts at the town halls. However, as soon as the project ended, and the salaries and the

308
      Law no. 273/2006 on local public finances, as subsequently amended and supplemented, art. 14, para. (5)
                                                             269
provision of utilities for functioning of the offices were no longer paid from the project budget,
many of the local Roma experts were laid off. By the time the project was completed in 2011
only 35 of the 210 town halls had agreed to hire local Roma experts that were trained under the
project. Interviews conducted as part of the field research for this chapter showed that the main
obstacles in hiring these experts are: lack of financial resources and the hiring freeze in the
public sector in 2009. This was reconsidered in 2013, when the hiring of experts was allowed.
However, approval is needed from national authorities. The hiring of Roma health mediators and
school mediators is another example. They are promoted by the Ministries of Health and
Education, but they must be hired by the local public administration authorities. Local public
authorities were made responsible for ensuring financial means for hiring these mediators.

The limited alignment of plans and budgets has been pointed out by NGOs and Romanian
think tanks. In their comments on the draft NRIS 2012-2020 a large number of NGOs stated
that: “The strategy should include specific references to financial resources planned to
implement the action plans from the state budget”309. Inconsistencies between the responsibilities
delegated to local public authorities and the financial resources available to carry on their
responsibilities, are also mentioned in the Study of local budgets between theory and practice by
the Institute for Public Policy in Romania (IPP)310

       8.3.3   LIMITED PUBLIC CONSULTATION AND LACK OF POLITICAL WILL

Consultation around policies related to social inclusion of Roma tends to be limited and
very formal, with little genuine debate about local issues. In practice, the consultation process
sometimes starts when a proposal of a law is already submitted by the initiator to the Parliament.
Most of the time there is no time for the consultation process because of the large number of
proposals. Representatives of local authorities, for example, have only been consulted on the
NRIS to a limited extent. This is a missed opportunity for making sure that measures to tackle
Roma inclusion better reflect current institutional responsibilities.
Officials of the Romanian Association of Cities (AOR) are not consulted on Roma issues.
Interviews with officials of the Romanian Association of Cities (AOR) indicated that they have
periodic consultations with the Ministry of Labor on different topics, such as social assistance,
children protection, disabled people, employment and salaries level. However, they claimed no
consultations are held related to Roma issues. The NAR has thus far not asked the AOR for
discussions or consultations on Roma matters. They also conveyed that because 30-40% of
current city mayors are elected for the first time, many are not familiar with specific approaches
to Roma inclusion. In that context, AOR officials interviewed appreciated the debates and
experience exchanges organized by the Open Society Foundation through the ‘Mayors Making
the Most of EU Funds for Roma Inclusion’ (MERI) project.



309
     The report was issued by a coalition of NGOs: Fundaţia Centrul de Resurse pentru Comunităţile de Romi
(coordinateur), Fundaţia Soros România, Fundaţia pentru Dezvoltarea Societăţii Civile n Centrul Romilor pentru
Politici de Sănătate – SASTIPEN, published by Decade of Roma Inclusion Secretariat Foundation, 2013, p. 52.
310
    Idem Page 34 and 63
                                                    270
There is a lack of political will among authorities to conduct open consultations with
targeted groups. According to a study by the Resource Centre for Public Participation (CeRe)311
authorities in Romania treat legislation on public consultation on policies as a formality.312
Moreover, CeRe mentioned that “It is clear that legislation is a necessary condition for citizen
participation, but (…) it is not a sufficient condition for ensuring a quality consultation
processes. The lack of political will on the part of the authorities to communicate proactively and
in a genuine manner with the public, has generally led to formal consultations, organized too
late in the decision-making process, in which 'gate keepers' always monopolize the central role
and in which citizens inevitably have little real impact.” Unwillingness to consult the Roma more
specifically reflects the broader problem that for many politicians promoting Roma inclusion is
seen as ‘political suicide’.

             8.3.4   LACK OF DEFINITIONS OF PROGRAM TARGET GROUPS

While strategies exist for promoting the social inclusion of Roma, Roma are often not
explicitly targeted in social inclusion programs. Social exclusion affects a range of different
population groups, including Roma and non-Roma. However, as highlighted in this report, Roma
often do form a particularly excluded group. Currently, specific social policies, programs and
investments are often targeted at disadvantaged population groups without specific
methodologies for measuring the disadvantage. Often reference is made to ‘vulnerable groups’,
‘person/family/group/community found in difficulty’ or ‘disadvantaged person/family/group’.
While there is not always a need to target Roma exclusively, the absence of specific criteria for
identifying these groups and the lack of clear methodology to measure these criteria makes
targeting of social programs at the local level difficult. The national system of indicators for
social inclusion313 only has indicators related to the poverty rate. The lack of a clear definition
and criteria makes it difficult for those responsible at the local level to understand what specific
groups the programs are aimed at, understand their needs, and design adequate measures.
There are unclear definitions of marginalized communities and they are not specifically
targeted in EU funded operational programs that could be highly relevant for them. In the
OP Environment for example, poverty criteria are used for targeting, but there are none on
Roma, in contrast to the OP Regional Development and OP Human Resources, which has
specific criteria for Roma. The Rural Development Fund instead uses World Bank poverty
mapping criteria for targeting. These issues makes it difficult to identify what part of the
European Structural Funds is directly aimed at reaching the Roma population (except, perhaps,
for the OPon Human Resources).



311
    The publication “Local Public Participation in Europe – Case Studies from Romania, Poland, Slovakia
and Belgium” is part of the project “Action and Reflection for Engaged Citizens”, Resource Centre for
Public Participation – CeRe, Unit for Social Innovation and Research – Shipyard, Centre for Community
Organizing – CKO, Forum Community Organizing – FOCO, European Think Tank Pour la Solidarite,
Central and Eastern Europe Citizens Network - CEECN
312
    Idem, page 14
313
    GD no. 488/2005 on the approval of the national system of social inclusion indicators
                                                 271
The NRIS explicitly targets Roma, but data on the ethnicity of program beneficiaries are
not collected systematically to monitor progress. The Ministry of Labor does not collect data
on, for example, how many of the beneficiaries of its social assistance programs or labor market
activation programs are Roma, except through some of its ESF funded programs. In response to
a number of questions posed to Ministry officials as part of the research for this chapter, officials
stated that "given the fact that the legislation in the field of social assistance and employment
provides for the principle of non-discrimination on grounds of ethnicity, gender, religion, etc.,
MMFPSPV (Ministry of Labor) does not collect data on ethnicity."314

         8.3.5 LOW LEVELS OF ACCESS TO STRUCTURAL-, COHESION AND RURAL
                  DEVELOPMENT FUNDS BY MARGINALIZED COMMUNITIES.

The overall absorption rate of Romania of EU structural and cohesion funds during 2007-
2013 was low. As of 30 June 2013, absorption stood at 26% of the EU allocation for 2007-2013,
that is, 5 billion euros, of the 19 billion euros allocated to Romania. The overall low level of use
of EU funds is caused by a few key factors. These are, among others:

           Lack of alignment between the legislation regulating the implementation of Structural
            Instruments and other pertinent national laws”315.
           The lack of administrative capacity both within managing authorities and among
            beneficiaries, partly caused by migration of skilled labor to large cities316.
           Lack of co-financing capability317.
           Unclear distribution of tasks at the national level.

The complementarity between the different OPs in terms of hard and soft measures has
been weak, according to the Annual Implementation Reports 2012318 (AIRs) submitted to the
European Commission by Managing Authorities. This complementarity is needed for making
sure infrastructure investments are complemented with adequate human resource development so
that service delivery can improve. The distribution of the soft or hard actions across the seven
operational programmes (Fig 8.1) made it difficult for applicants to combine these in order to
design integrated programs.




314
      Answers given by the officials from MMFPSPV to the questions formulated in writing
315
     Source http://www.fonduri-ue.ro/realizarea-de-evaluri-pentru-perioada-2009-2010-240-a2, accessed
on October 05, 2011
316
    see “Strategic Report 2010 on the Implementation of the Programs 2007-2013
317
    see Annual Implementation Report of the Managing Authorities of Operational Programs 2012
318
    It is the obligation of each Managing AuthorityManaging Authority according to the provisions of the
GD no. 457/2008 regarding the institutional framework for structural instruments coordination and
management, subsequently amended and supplemented to submit to the European Commission, until 1
July an Annual Implementation Report.
                                                        272
Table 8.1. Sources of hard and soft finance of European Structural and Cohesion Funds, by
Operational Program and funding source.

 EU SCF               POR          POS DRU POS CCE              POS T        POS M        PO DCA
                      ROP          OP HRD OP IEC                OP T         OP Env.      OP DAC
 ERDF (hard)
 ESF (soft)
 CF (hard)

The low access of marginalized groups (Roma and non-Roma) to these EU funds is
exacerbated by the lack of priority given to social inclusion of such groups by public
authorities. This is partly due to the lack of political priority given to social inclusion, and to
equality of opportunity more broadly. The application guidelines for European Structural and
Cohesion Funds did not give special attention to Roma issues and there were no indicators to
demonstrate during the implementation stage how the project contributes to social inclusion of
Roma.

Regulations around European structural and cohesion funds have put much emphasis on
the system of management and control. This has left little time to program managers for
ensuring policies and programs actually lead to results in the field. This is one of the most
debated topics within the EU Structural and Cohesion Funds. In 2011, the European Parliament
concluded that special emphasis should be placed on aspects relating to delivery of results and
achievement of objectives, without distraction from the constant need for checking inputs and
control and payment systems. It was concluded that a better balance should be found between, on
the one hand, the rules and procedures required for ensuring the legality and regularity of EU
expenditure and, on the other, making cohesion policy more performance-oriented and cost-
efficient.319 A study by the Soros Foundation Romania in 2010 concluded that "European funds
are relatively difficult to access and especially to implement; [..] there are no coherent strategies
for placement of funds according to the real needs of a community, area or region ”320.
However, the 2013 Strategic Report on Cohesion Policy and Program implementation 2007-
2013321 acknowledges the need for better monitoring evaluation: “The 2007-2013 programmes
have strong mechanisms for tracking the flow of money and absorption, but weaker ones for
setting, monitoring and evaluating objectives”. Proposals for regulating funding during the 2014-
2020 period put more emphasis on results, impact and performance.

8.4 PROPOSED MEASURES TO ADDRESS THE MAIN CONSTRAINTS
Successful implementation of the NRIS 2012-2020 requires an institutional mechanism that
takes into account the lessons learned during the past period and addresses the problems



319
    Report on absorption of Structural and Cohesion Funds: lessons learnt for the future cohesion policy of
the EU (2010/2305(INI))., A7-0287/2011, page 8
320
    Idem Page 29
321
    COM(2013) 210 final
                                                   273
identified in the previous section. Below, we identify a number of concrete suggestions for
tackling the most important problems.

  8.4.1 POLICY GOAL 1. CLARIFY INSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES THROUGH
        MORE UNIFORM LEGISLATION AND CLEAR WORKING ARRANGEMENTS.

Institutional arrangements for implementing the NRIS need to be aligned with legal
frameworks, at both the national and local level. Roma exclusion is a problem that cuts across
many different areas of intervention and tackling it requires simultaneous action on multiple
fronts. The NRIS identifies a set of priority measures and establishes a number of institutional
arrangements (see section 8.2). These measures have to reflect the legal competences of national,
regional and local institutions as established by current law. It is thus important that the
institutional arrangements for implementing the NRIS are aligned with the legal framework that
governs local public administration as well as with the specific legislation that applies for local
public services.

         POLICY MEASURE 1A: ISSUE A FRAMEWORK LAW THAT ENSURES THE UNIFORMITY
              OF RELEVANT LEGISLATION AND DESCRIBES THE COMPETENCIES AND
                   RESPONSIBILITIES OF KEY AGENCIES FOR ROMA INCLUSION

The new and previous Roma Inclusion Strategies provide additional tasks to sectoral ministries
as well as to national, regional and local authorities. In addition to that, the strategy spells out the
roles of the NAR, the Regional Roma Offices, the County Offices for Roma as well as the local
Roma experts. A framework law is important to spell out the functional relations between these
various institutions and players as well as the budgetary sources for their financing. An inventory
of all laws, government ordinances, government decisions or ministry orders related to Roma
inclusion could provide a good start. A coherent legislative package could then be initiated
which includes the framework law.

The current mandate of the NAR to coordinate and monitor Roma inclusion in Romania could be
strengthened and enforced to enable it to hold ministries to account for implementing the NRIS
and making progress on Roma inclusion. This requires that the NAR operates in a more
independent manner and that its capacity to design, plan, and monitor NRIS implementation - in
close consultation with other stakeholders - is strengthened.

  POLICY MEASURE 1B: CREATE WORKING INSTRUMENTS THAT SPELL OUT HOW THE
     VARIOUS PLAYERS WILL WORK TOGETHER ON ROMA INCLUSION AND THE
                        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NRIS.

The instrument would allow the institutional mechanism to be more comprehensive, coherent,
functional and efficient. Such working instruments would ensure effective arrangements among
national and local institutions sharing competencies into the areas covered by the NRIS.




                                                 274
 8.4.2 POLICY GOAL 2. STRENGTHEN THE LINK BETWEEN THE NRIS STRATEGY
                               AND BUDGET

For the NRIS to be truly meaningful a much stronger link is needed with the annual
budget process, at all tiers of governance.

         POLICY MEASURE 2A: PRODUCE A BUDGET ESTIMATE OF NRIS IMPLEMENTATION

It is important that the NRIS spells out for each of the objectives, what outputs needs to be put in
place to achieve each of its objectives, what activities should be implemented for that and what
financing is needed to realise these, and where this financing should come from (including
through EU Funds). This could then be mainstreamed or translated into clear sectoral action
plans that spell out what each of the Ministries will deliver and when, what financing is needed
for that, and through what budget items that financing will be made available.

    8.4.3 POLICY GOAL 3. STRENGTHEN PARTNERSHIPS AT THE LOCAL LEVEL


       POLICY MEASURE 3A: STRENGTHEN THE METHODOLOGY FOR ROMA CONSULTATIONS

The NAR needs to ensure that more substantial feedback from Roma, as well as Roma
experts and local authorities, is incorporated into social inclusion policies and plans of the
NRIS. The NAR could work more closely with the Romanian Association of Cities (AOR) and
the Romanian Association of Communes (ACOR) on issues related to Roma inclusion, and
consult them on the institutional mechanism for building true partnerships at the local level.
Representatives of local authorities including County Councils and Roma communities
themselves could also be more intensively consulted in the discussions around the institutional
mechanism for the implementation of the NRIS.

Feedback from stakeholders on proposed policies and ideas for Roma inclusion can also be
gathered through online platforms. Such technologies would allow people to submit
comments through the internet or via mobile phones. The growing global experience shows that
this approach can be effective and is relatively inexpensive (see Box 8.1). An essential element
of this is that policy makers provide feedback to these comments and are held accountable for
following through.

BOX  8-1: MOSCOW’S           ROADS      CROWD SOURCING        CITIZEN    REPORTING      PLATFORM
WWW.DOROGA.MOS.RU

The Moscow’s Roads portal aims at improving public service related to road maintenance
through citizen monitoring of the roads’ situation. This will inform the respective agencies about
people’s views which will serve as a basis for performance measurement. It was launched in
2011 the by Municipal administration.



                                                275
This is how it works. As tax payers, people have the right to know how the budget allocated for
the road maintenance is spent. At the same time, the public service providers must be
accountable for the work they undertake. So every person should be able to monitor the works’
quality and complain/suggest improvements through the following steps:
1. Access the portal, register as a user or apply through the mobile phone application
2. Report the complaint into one of the three sections available: road maintenance, traffic light,
   street light
3. Find the street or road on the Moscow’s map by either the portal’s web search or through
   spotting it on the interactive map.
4. A window will open to fill in the information on the street address, the issue reported, upload
   a photo reflecting the situation.
5. Within 24 hours the issue will be published on the website.
6. With 8 days, the responsible local service providers or government agency issue a response
   which is published to the website and also sent to the person who reported the issue.
7. The portal indicates if the issue was resolved or is in the process of being resolved
8. All complaints/suggestion are published on the web so that people can see what other
   peoplehave suggested or are concerned about.
The project has a strong commitment from city administration. The City Mayor instructed the
agencies responsible for street maintenance, all local mayor and district administration to very
closely monitor people’s inputs on the portal and act on them. Local authorities verify the
information and apply monetary sanctions for officials who have responded in an inadequate
manner on a monthly basis. Fines of up to 30% of a salary can be charged if an irregularity was
found. As of October 11, 2013, the site has been accessed by 27.394 people, who have
submitted 932 comments or complaints.



        POLICY MEASURE 3B: CLARIFY MECHANISMS TO SECURE FUNDING OF HEALTH AND
                                   SCHOOL MEDIATORS

Building trust and cooperation between municipalities, their mainstream local service
providers and Roma communities could be an integral element of all relevant
municipalities. Evidence shows that mediation can play an important role and contribute to
better access to local services for Roma communities, as well as a higher level of trust between
municipalities and Roma communities in general. However, clearer mechanisms are needed to
secure funding for such activities, and to ensure mediators have a strong mandate to fulfil their
duties with dual reporting lines to sectors and local governments and setting standards for
mediation in the whole country. The knowledge and information gathered by mediation could be
more actively used for developing mainstream policies and programmes.



                                                276
The mechanisms could be clarified to ensure they have a strong mandate to fulfill their duties
with dual reporting lines to sectors and local governments. Standards could be be set for
mediation in the whole country.

 8.4.4 POLICY GOAL 4. IMPROVE TARGETING OF MARGINALIZED COMMUNITIES


        POLICY MEASURE 4A: ISSUE A NORMATIVE ACT – A LAW OF POOR COMMUNITIES – TO
          SPECIFY THE METHODOLOGY FOR IDENTIFYING MARGINALIZED COMMUNITIES.

Such a law could reflect the following targeting methodology.
The poverty maps that are currently being created by the World Bank using small area
estimation techniques could be used for targeting geographical areas. These maps combine
the depth of the EU-SILC household survey with the breath of the 2011 population census. In
order to ensure that EU funds contribute to closing development gaps, as a minimum target,
those geographical areas that are most affected by poverty, as defined in the World Bank’s
poverty mapping exercise, could receive per capita EU funding of at least 50% above the
national average. It is recommended that the Ministry of European Funds monitors this regularly.
To reach this target, organisations operating in geographical areas most affected by poverty
could also be eligible for specific calls for these areas. These can be justified especially in the
area of human development (early childhood development, education, employment, health care).
This would also enable the application of the principle of ‘explicit but not exclusive’ targeting of
Roma.
At the neighbourhood level, targeting could possibly be based on city maps that identify the
geographical location of marginalised communities, using data from the population census
that are verified locally, as currently developed by the Ministry of Regional Development in
collaboration with the World Bank. For EU funded projects for the period 2014-2020, a financial
instrument can be established to ensure co-financing of the projects for these communities, or co-
financing could be waived.

          POLICY MEASURE 4B: ISSUE SPECIFIC CALLS FOR PROPOSALS FOR INTEGRATED
                     PROGRAMMES FOR DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITIES

Specific calls for proposals could be made for integrated programmes for disadvantaged
communities. Financial allocation of the integrated programme, that is, a program that tackles
the multiple dimensions of these communities simultaneously, can be broken down for each
locality, and local stakeholders including municipalities, NGOs and Roma communities can
develop a common set of project ideas best reflecting local needs. Such an integrated programme
offers numerous benefits: e.g. local needs can be reflected, explicit but not exclusive targeting of
Roma can be ensured, synergies between projects can be exploited, partnership between local
stakeholders can be strengthened, etc. For urban areas this can be done through the Community
Led Local Development (CLLD) approach using ERDF funds, combined with proposals related
to human capital development using ESF funding. However, integrated programmes could be
launched only if guarantees for effective support for community engagement are provided, for

                                                277
example by including a network of experts (Policy Measure 5A). This could be done through a
unit at the Regional Development Agencies equipped with expertise and with power for
coordination to help local stakeholders develop their of project ideas, and facilitate strong
community involvement in design and implementation.

 8.4.5 POLICY GOAL 5. BUILD CAPACITIES OF LOCAL COMMUNITIES TO ACCESS
                                  EU FUNDS


             POLICY MEASURE 5A: INCREASE THE SUPPORT TO LOCAL COMMUNITIES

Stronger support is needed to help local communities in designing and implementing
individual EU funded projects. Assistance is most needed for sharing experiences and
innovative practices of other communities facing similar challenges – covering expertise
regarding both inclusion and EU funding, and facilitating partnership between the municipality
and the Roma community. Community mobilisation and experts in inclusion project currently
involved with the Romanian Social Development Fund (RSDF) could play a central role. Two
options could be considered for their deployment:
    (1) Expand the mandate of the Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) to support project
        design, screening and implementation of the OP Human Capital and its ESF funded
        programs. A Community Mobilisation and Social Inclusion Unit could be established
        within the RDAs to provide adequate support to help local communities design and
        implement social inclusion proposals. Staff of this unit could be trained by RSDF experts
        through a training of trainers approach, with RSDF experts continuing to play mentoring
        role.
    (2) Mobilize the RSDF experts on community mobilisation and social inclusion to provide
        project planning and community mobilisation support directly to communities across the
        country. The RSDF could perhaps establish regional offices to provide their support to
        communities in an effective manner.

More intensive, long term service can be offered to areas with larger or more marginalised Roma
communities. Capacity building and technical assistance service could be offered to communities
for free, if costs can be covered directly by the managing authority from ESF funds.

In addition, the OSI supported ‘Making the Most of EU Funds for Roma’ (the MERI project),
where mayors from different countries exchange good practices on using EU money for Roma
Inclusion, could be expanded to further strengthen learning.

    POLICY MEASURE 5B: ALLOW SMALL PROJECTS TO BE ADMINISTERED BY NGOS
                           THROUGH GLOBAL GRANTS

Smaller projects implemented by local NGOs or communities can be best administered by
NGOs through global grants. This has already been tested in Romania with global grants (see
EEA/Norway Grant in Romania) and also with EU funds in older EU member states. NGOs (or
global grant administrators) could be selected through an open procedure. Development of the
                                              278
global grants and selection of NGO takes time, so it could be started in parallel to planning the
operational programmes. NGOs could get as much freedom as possible in developing their tools
(e.g. information requirements, control and support procedures) for managing the risks of NGO
beneficiaries or communities, as this is how they can keep their tools simple.

 8.4.6 POLICY GOAL 6. RAISE POLICY MAKERS’ AWARENESS OF PRINCIPLES OF
               EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY AND ROMA INCLUSION


       POLICY MEASURE 6A: ESTABLISH AN EQUALITY POLICY UNIT IN THE MINISTRY OF EU
                                        FUNDS.

Experience shows that without strong institutional mechanisms at the national level, EU funding
favours the more competitive social groups and localities. Principles of equality of opportunity,
non-discrimination and diversity are generally poorly understood by EU funding units of line
ministries, managing authorities, intermediate bodies, etc. Equality bodies contribute to
mainstreaming equality in general, but specific equality units within the EU funding institutions
can contribute more effectively to mainstreaming equality within the specific area of
development. Building such capacities is an on-going process that needs to be facilitated by an
equality policy unit within the Ministry of EU funds.

The equality policy unit could be responsible for:
      o Organising training for staff of national and local authorities, and equipping them
          with an understanding of the importance of non-discrimination, equal opportunities
          and Roma inclusion.
      o Providing guidance for staff of national authorities on how equality of opportunity
          can be promoted in various calls for proposals and projects and in various stages of
          the cycle from designing calls to selecting and monitoring projects.

       o Facilitating partnership with external experts (e.g. regular working groups, ad-hoc
         consultations on specific issues).

It is also important that the staff of relevant Ministries includes a growing number of
Roma employees, working partly on tasks linked to Roma inclusion but partly on other tasks.
Recruitment of senior Roma employees needs pro-active steps from the employers, which can be
assisted also by the equality policy unit. Setting up and operating the equality policy unit and its
trainings can be financed by ESF.

8.4.7 POLICY GOAL 7: STRENGTHEN MONITORING AND EVALUATION OF SOCIAL
                            INCLUSION PROGRAMS

Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is critical for results on Roma inclusion. Adequate
attention to its design and implementation are essential for adequate performance measurement
of inclusion interventions. This in turn will help enhance transparency and accountability of
service providers. Results-based M&E can ensure that stakeholders and partners provide
                                                279
continuous feedback on interventions for adjustments and that lessons of what works best are
captured in time and disseminated to all. Results-based M&E is also the cornerstone of
demonstrating results of inclusion programs and maintaining a domestic as well as international
(EU) support base for these. The Romanian National Reform Programme (NRP) 2011-2013 also
highlights the importance of monitoring and evaluation. It leaves the institutions responsible for
implementing the NRP measures to establish their own M&E measures. At EU level, the April
2011 EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies322 calls upon EU member states to
include strong monitoring and evaluation components. This section will discuss some concrete
M&E tools to strengthen the outcomes of Roma inclusion efforts. This list is not an exhaustive
list of all M&E tools, but a selection of tools already being considered by the Romanian
government and being promoted at EU level.

         POLICY MEASURE 7A: ENSURE THE NRIS HAS A CLEAR RESULTS FRAMEWORKS IN
                                        PLACE.

The National Roma Inclusion Strategy (NRIS) needs a clear results chain. The results chain
would consist of the overall goal, followed by a set of clear outcomes that need to be met to meet
that overall goal. Each of these outcomes should in turn be translated into outputs that need to be
delivered to realise each of the objectives. And for each of the outputs, the activities for
delivering these outputs should be spelled out. Matrices can be used to show the connections that
exist between the list of Roma inclusion objectives and Roma inclusion measures, between the
list of measures/ programs and a list of budget categories, and between the list of objectives in
the NRIS and the objectives of sectoral strategies and plans.

Once this is done, a results framework can be put together for communication and planning
purposes, Fig 8.3. Provides concrete example of a results framework for a labor market
activation program.




322
     COM(2011) 173 Final: An EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies up to 2020.
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/discrimination/docs/com_2011_173_en.pdf
                                               280
Figure 8.3: Example of a Results Framework




Once a results frame is developed, indicators should be attached to each of the outputs and
outcomes. Data sources should be identified for each of these indicators. Outcome data are
typically collected through surveys while output data are normally compiled through
administrative systems. This will enable the collection of baseline data to describe the situation
before the intervention and systematic reporting with qualitative and quantitative information on
the progress towards outcomes. Rather than focusing on reporting of inputs, this enables a
stronger focus on change that is generated by the intervention, including perceptions of change
by beneficiaries.

Result frames should be linked to a clear monitoring plan that includes indicators and data
sources and spells out the institutional responsibilities regarding data collection, data analysis,
reporting and use for decision-making.

           POLICY MEASURE 7B: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT AN NRIS MONITORING SYSTEM
               INCLUDING THE ASSIGNMENT OF INSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES

The design process of the NRIS monitoring system should ensure that stakeholder buy-in is
obtained. To achieve that, the design process could include: (1) a map of existing monitoring
arrangements that identifies the main stakeholders and analyses strengths and weaknesses; (2) a
clear statement of political commitment to effective NRIS monitoring; (3) champions who are
                                               281
able to advocate the value of a shared NRIS monitoring system across the government
administration; and (4) a structure for consultation and facilitation to assist NRIS stakeholders in
articulating their needs and expectations.

The following institutional design could be considered provided its implementation is
enforced and overseen by a political champion of Roma Inclusion: (a) a high level steering
committee – this could be similar to the Inter-ministerial Working Group as proposed in the
NRIS 2012-2020- to provide political support and oversight and supply a formal link to the
cabinet, e.g. for setting priorities and approving annual NRIS progress reports; (b) a unit
responsible for coordination throughout the system. This unit could be housed at the NAR and
act as the secretariat for the inter-ministerial working group; it could compile data and draft
progress reports; (c) an interagency committee or working group that facilitates interagency
cooperation and dialogue. This could be similar to the Central Department for Monitoring and
Assessment as proposed in the NRIS 2012-2020. It could be responsible for defining indicator
sets and monitoring priorities, for the production and delivery of sectoral data, and for preparing
reports and advising policy makers. Sector ministries could nominate a contact person for NRIS
monitoring. This could be a person or a dedicated M&E or statistical unit. Representatives could
include those from civil society; responsible for the national institute of statistics (NIS) is a key
actor in the system as it is an important data producer; it may also be responsible for setting
overall standards, developing information technology platforms and compiling data from sector
ministries.

        POLICY MEASURE 7C: STRENGTHEN THE DEMAND SIDE OF NRIS MONITORING DATA
        SPELLING OUT HOW THE DATA WILL BE USED IN PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS OF
                        NRIS MEASURES AND THE BUDGET PROCESS

Ideally the NRIS monitoring system spells out who will use the monitoring information and
for what purpose. It could promote an evidence-based dialogue between the government, civil
society, the EC and other donors on the NRIS policies and programs and their impact on Roma
poverty and exclusion. Possible entry points for the NRIS monitoring information to be used for
decision-making could be mapped. These could include: linking the NRIS monitoring
information to the budget process whereby information on the performance of NRIS measures/
program components is available when annual budget discussions are taken. At the very least
NRIS monitoring could be made available to CSOs, the media and the wider public in order to
strengthen the evidence base of the public debate on the performance of NRIS policies and
programs and how to make these more successful. Capacity strengthening of the monitoring unit
in the analysis and dissemination of NRIS monitoring data would be very important.

              POLICY MEASURE 7D: INCLUDE A BOOSTER SAMPLE FROM THE POOREST
            COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTRY TO COLLECT OUTCOME DATA FROM A MUCH
                        LARGER PART OF MARGINALISED POPULATION

Romanian household surveys could include a booster sample from the poorest communities
in the country, to collect data from a much larger part of marginalised population groups.
In addition to data on expenditure and incomes, employment, education, housing, health, finance,
                                                282
discrimination, etc., information on ethnicity could also be collected but the reliability of these
data could be strengthened through third party identification or the use of Roma enumerators.
This is particularly important for measuring progress in anti-discrimination. Such a booster
sample would enable better tracking of progress in social outcomes for Roma and non-Roma
communities, and enable a much deeper analysis of determinants of poverty. This could be done
for the EU-SILC, Household Budget Survey (HBS), and Labor Market Survey (LFS). The new
poverty map for Romania developed by the World Bank can be used as the sampling frame from
which to draw these extra households. The government can allocate EU structural funds to
implement this sampling booster. These questionnaires can also be used to add questions on
particular social inclusion policy issues and/or important indicators related to subjective well-
being.

        POLICY MEASURE 7E: GIVE ROMA COMMUNITIES AND NGOS WORKING IN THE FIELD
                   A STRONGER ROLE IN MONITORING AT THE LOCAL LEVEL

The best monitoring is often done by communities themselves. Community-based monitoring
is both a form of public supervision of project implementation, and an efficient way to mobilize
the community. Communities often know best what is happening to households in their areas.
They could be actively engaged in monitoring progresss in their own communities, using
quantitative and qualitative data. Community members can identify mistakes, make suggestions
for improvement, and provide feedback to the project coordinators. This can help increase the
efficiency and effectiveness of investments and other measures. At the same time, people will be
better informed and able to exercise their rights as citizens.

           POLICY MEASURE 7F. CREATE AN ONLINE PLATFORM FOR CITIZEN FEEDBACK

The Romanian government or NGOs could consider building an inexpensive online
platform that enables Roma and other citizens to provide feedback on NRIS policies and
programs including the service quality that they encounter. This will provide them with the
opportunity to send real-time feedback e.g. by SMS messaging. These platforms can be
combined with online maps of interventions and projects that show their location and perhaps
funding flows, so that comments on quality of these interventions can be directly put into
context. There is growing global evidence that this form of electronic feedback can enhance
transparency and strengthen accountability of service providers. This platform can also highlight
good practices and promote learning. In order to enable people without access to computers or
internet to provide feedback, the platform could be complemented by a telephone-based
interface.

        POLICY MEASURE 7G. UNDERTAKE SELECTED RIGOROUS IMPACT EVALUATIONS TO
               LEARN WHICH PROGRAMS ARE SUCCESSFUL AND COST-EFFECTIVE

The different chapters on education, employment, housing, etc. in the report provide policy
recommendations that can benefit from rigorous evaluations. Governments and academics

                                               283
around the world are increasingly using rigorous impact evaluations to pilot programs and
measure their effectiveness. Impact valuations can:

      Help provide answers to what measures work best for addressing some of the most difficult
       challenges;

      By demonstrating what works, they can build public support for proven programs;

      Encourage program designers, including governments and NGOs, to focus more on program
       results (outputs and impact);

      Help involve academic researchers and focus energies on acute social issues.
At EU level, impact evaluations are promoted through the EU PROGRESS facility. The
World Bank has integrated impact evaluations in many of its programs, and promotes them
through, for example, the Development Impact Evaluation Initiative (www.worldbank.org/dime)
and the Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund (www.worldbank.org/sief).

Prospective randomized evaluations - social policy experiments – are often considered to
provide the most rigorous evidence on project impacts. In these evaluations, a subset of
potential beneficiaries is randomly selected to receive the pilot program. Randomly selected
recipients and non-recipients are then followed over time and outcomes – e.g. employment or
education outcomes - are compared. Randomization ensures the two groups have identical
characteristics at the start of the program. Any differences that subsequently arise between the
two groups – for example in education or labor market outcomes – can, when assessed through
the appropriate methodology, be attributed to the intervention.

In some cases, there may be different ways of implementing the same policy. For example,
what is the appropriate amount for a cash transfer that seeks to encourage parents to enrol their
children into preschool? Or, is job counselling as cost effective as a subsidized traineeship? In
these, and many other cases, there are different policy options that can part of a social policy
experiment to assess their effectiveness. In addition, use can be made on the global expertise that
exists on these topics, as many such policies have already been tested, using randomized
evaluations, in other countries (Box 8-2).
BOX 8-2: RIGOROUS IMPACT EVALUATIONS BY THE DANISH LABOR MARKET AUTHORITY

The Danish Labor Market Authority (LMA) has taken a very proactive approach towards
building up evidence on its employment policies, including for vulnerable groups. Its
strategy consists of three complementary activities: (1) collecting existing evidence from
research reviews on comparable active labor market programs; (2) developing new evidence
through randomized control trials of selected LMA projects; and, (3) disseminate evidence to its
affiliated job centers, the Ministry of Employment, and the public at large. Information about job
center output is available for everyone on the internet323.



323
      www.ams.dk and www.jobindsats.dk
                                                284
In designing and carrying out these evaluations, the LMA works closely with external
evaluators – Danish academics – and a selection of its affiliated job centers. So far it has
completed 4 randomized control trials, 2 evaluations are ongoing, and a new one started in
August 2012 serving particularly vulnerable groups. In each evaluation, the comparison
group is offered the regular package of employment services, while the treatment group receives
something ‘extra‘. For example, the first evaluation consisted of an intervention whereby job
seekers were offered bi-weekly counseling as opposed to regular counseling every three months.
In an upcoming evaluation, a ‘social mentoring‘ pilot will be evaluated.

        POLICY MEASURE 7H. COMPILE RIGOROUS EVI DENCE ON ‘WHAT WORKS’ AND MAKE
                                 IT READILY AVAILABLE.

Systematically and selectively undertaking rigorous evaluations will uncover important
lessons on what works to address school participation, learning, job search, training, etc.
Knowledge dissemination is equally important. The knowledge portal set up by the Danish Labor
Market Authority is a good example of knowledge sharing on ‘what works’. Another good example
is the ‘What Works Clearinghouse (WWC)”, set up in 2002 by the U.S. Department of Education’s
Institute of Education Sciences (box below). The Romanian government can build on these
experiences. Key ministries can foster knowledge portals on ‘what works’, in close collaboration
with leading Romanian academic institutes and universities. The knowledge could also be shared
at    the   Council    of   Europe’s    Good   Practice    for   Roma     Integaration    Portal
(http://goodpracticeroma.ppa.coe.int/en).

BOX 8-3: EVIDENCE FOR WHAT WORKS IN EDUCATION: TH E “WHAT WORKS CLEARI NGHOUSE
(WWC)”


In 2002, the U.S. Department of Education’s Institute of Education Sciences (IES) created the
“What Works Clearinghouse (WWC)” (http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc). The goal was to have one
central source providing scientific evidence on the impact of different education initiatives. The
WWC reviews the research on the impacts of programs, practices, and policies in education and
identifies what works in education to allow educators to make evidence-based decisions. For
example, an educator interested in the effectiveness of interventions addressing Dropout
Prevention can get a quick overview – score card – and more detailed information from a single
webpage.




                                               285
Currently, it covers evidence on the impacts of programs aimed at: Children and Youth with
Disabilities; Dropout Prevention; Early Childhood Education; English Language Learners;
Literacy; Math; Science; Student Behavior.




                                           286
8.5 IMPLEMENTATION
                                 Summary Table of Policy Recommendations
Recommendation                 Entity(ies) best       Impact               Time frame     Monitoring
                               placed         to      (Critical  impact;   Short: < 6
                                                                                          indicator
                               implement    the       High       impact;   months;
                               recommendation         Enabling             Medium: 6-18
                                                      condition)           months;
                                                                           Long:    >18
                                                                           months
Policy Measure 1: Clarify institutional responsibilities through more uniform legislation and clear
working arrangements
Policy Measure 1A: Issue a     General Secretariat       Enabling            Medium        Law issued and
   Framework Law that          of the Government         condition                             clarifies
 ensures the uniformity of                                                                   institutional
  relevant legislation and                                                                 responsibilities
describes the competencies                                                                    (YES/NO)
 and responsibilities of key
     agencies for Roma
         inclusion



Policy Measure 1B: Create      General Secretariat       Enabling             Short            Working
working instruments that       of the Government         condition                           instrument
spell out how institutions                                                                drafted, consulted
 work together on Roma                                                                      on and issued
    inclusion and NRIS                                                                        (YES/NO)
     implementation.



               Policy Measure 2: Strengthen the link between NRIS strategy and budget
Policy measure 2A Initiate      NAR, MoF. Sector        High impact           Short        Budget estimate
  a clear budget estimate         ministries                                                 issued and
 for NRIS implementation                                                                  adopted (YES/NO)

Policy Measure 3: Strengthen partnerships at the local level, build trust and tackle discrimination
  (to be considered in conjunction with the recommendations presented in the chapter on addressing
                                            discrimination)
  Policy Measure 3A:           General Secretariat       Enabling             Short       Regulation widely
    Strengthen the             of the Government         condition                         consulted and
 methodology for Roma           and NAR, Min of                                              discussed
     consultations                Health, Min of                                             (YES/NO)
                                    Education
Policy Measure 3B: Clarify      Ministry of Labor,      High impact           Short            Budgetary
  mechanisms to secure         Ministry of regional                                       allocation made for
  funding of health and         Development and                                               mediators in
     school mediators                Public                                               budget of MoH and
                                 Administration,                                             MoE (YES/NO)
                               National Agency for
                                                                                          Amount of budget
                                      Roma
                                                                                          allocated    for
                                                      287
Recommendation                 Entity(ies) best        Impact               Time frame     Monitoring
                               placed         to       (Critical  impact;   Short: < 6
                                                                                           indicator
                               implement    the        High       impact;   months;
                               recommendation          Enabling             Medium: 6-18
                                                       condition)           months;
                                                                            Long:    >18
                                                                            months
                                                                                           mediators
                  Policy Measure 4: Improve targeting of marginalized communities
Policy Measure 4A: Issue a      Ministry of Labor,        Enabling            medium       Law discussed and
 normative act – a Law of          NAR, MoF               condition                         issued (YES/NO)
  Poor Communities –to
 specify the methodology
      for identifying
       marginalised
       communities.
 Policy Measure 4B: Issue      Ministry of EU funds      High impact           long           # of calls for
specific calls for proposals     and Ministry of                                             proposals for
for integrated projects for           Labor,                                                  projects on
      disadvantaged                                                                          marginalized
       communities                                                                           communities
                                                                                                 issued
     Policy Measure 5: Build capacities of local communities to access EU funds, and to ensure
                                     community engagement
   Policy Measure 5A:          Ministry of EU funds,     High impact          Medium        Unit established
 Increase the support to       Ministry of Regional                                           (YES/NO)
   local communities              Development,
                                                                                           # of communities
                                Ministry of Labor
                                                                                           assisted by the
                                                                                           central unit
                                                                                           #     of    projects
                                                                                           developed through
                                                                                           the assistance of
                                                                                           the central unit
Policy Measure 5B: Allow       Ministry of EU funds       Enabling             Short        # of small grants
   small projects to be                                   condition                         administered by
administered by NGO with                                                                          NGOs
      global grants
   Policy Measure 6: Raise policy makers’ awareness of principles of equality of opportunity and Roma
                                               inclusion
Policy Measure 6A.               Min of EU Funds          Enabling            Medium        Unit established
Establish an equality policy                              condition                         and operational
unit within the central                                                                       (YES/NO)
coordinating authority of
EU funds.

     Policy Measure 7: Strengthen monitoring and evaluation of the NRIS measures and programs @
Policy measure 7A. Ensure              NAR             Enabling                Long         Result frames of
the NRIS and its measures                                                                    key inclusion

                                                       288
Recommendation                   Entity(ies) best        Impact               Time frame     Monitoring
                                 placed         to       (Critical  impact;   Short: < 6
                                                                                             indicator
                                 implement    the        High       impact;   months;
                                 recommendation          Enabling             Medium: 6-18
                                                         condition)           months;
                                                                              Long:    >18
                                                                              months
have clear results                                       condition                            programs issued
frameworks in place.                                                                          spelling out how
                                                                                               results will be
                                                                                             achieved (YES/NO)

                                                                                             # (%) of inclusion
                                                                                             programs with a
                                                                                             results framework



Policy measure 7B. Design         NAR with sector                               Medium       Clear institutional
and implement a NRIS               ministries and                                             responsibilities
monitoring            system     National Institute of                                           assigned
including the assignment of           Statistics
institutional responsibilities

     Policy measure 7C.                  MoF               High Impact          Medium        Regulation issued
Strengthen the demand side                                                                   that spells out how
of NRIS monitoring data by                                                                    NRIS monitoring
 spelling out how the data                                                                     data (as well as
will be used in performance                                                                  monitoring data of
   assessments of NRIS                                                                        other programs)
 programs and the budget                                                                       will be used for
           process                                                                            budget allocation.

Policy measure 7D. Include       National Institute of   High Impact          Medium         Sampling    fame
a booster sample from the        Statistics                                                  adapted (YES/NO)
 poorest communities in
   the country to collect
   outcome data from a
    much larger part of
 marginalised population

Policy measure 7E. Give                  NAR             Enabling                Long        Regulations   for
Roma communities and                                     condition                           monitoring in OP
NGOs working in the field                                                                    program       for
a    stronger  role    in                                                                    marginalized
monitoring                                                                                   communities
                                                                                             include
                                                                                             communities
                                                                                             monitoring
                                                                                             themselves
                                                                                             (YES/NO)

Policy measure 7F. Create               NGOs                 Enabling           Medium        Online platforms
an online platform for                                                                        active and used
                                                         289
Recommendation                Entity(ies) best       Impact               Time frame     Monitoring
                              placed         to      (Critical  impact;   Short: < 6
                                                                                         indicator
                              implement    the       High       impact;   months;
                              recommendation         Enabling             Medium: 6-18
                                                     condition)           months;
                                                                          Long:    >18
                                                                          months
citizen feedback                                        condition                         and generating
                                                                                           attention from
                                                                                          decision makers
                                                                                             (YES/NO)

                                                                                         #    of     citizen
                                                                                         feedback received

Policy measure 7GC.           Min of Labor, Min of      Enabling             Long         Guidelines issued
Undertake selected rigorous        EU funds             condition                           and selected
impact evaluations to learn                                                              impact evaluations
which programs are                                                                          designed and
successful and cost-                                                                         conducted
effective                                                                                    (YES/NO)

                                                                                         #   of    rigorous
                                                                                         impact evaluations
                                                                                         conducted

Policy Measure 7H.             Min of Labor, ANR       High impact           Long         Website opened
Compile rigorous evidence                                                                  where info on
on ‘what works’ and make                                                                  ‘what works’ is
it readily available                                                                      made available

                                                                                         #    of   evidence
                                                                                         collected      and
                                                                                         published




                                                     290
REFERENCES
Centre for Industrial Studies - Italy (2009), Leeds Metropolitan University (UK), Study „An analysis of the Added
Value of European Structural Funding” requested by the European Parliament's Committee on Regional
Development

CeRe (2012) “Local Public Participation in Europe – Case Studies from Romania, Poland, Slovakia and Belgium”,
2012„
Civil Society Report on the implementation of the National Strategy for the Integration of Roma, Decade of Roma
Inclusion Secretariat Foundation, 2013

COM (2010) Cohesion policy: Strategic Report 2010 on the implementation of the programmes 2007-2013,
COM(2010)110 final

COM (2013) Cohesion policy: Strategic report 2013 on programme implementation 2007-2013, COM (2013) 210
final

EU (2012). Social economy and Roma communities - challenges and opportunities”, study published in 2012 and
drafted within the project “Social economy as a development solution for Romanian Roma communities” co -
financed by the European Social Fund through the Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources
Development 2007 – 2013
European Parliament (2010) Report on absorption of Structural and Cohesion Funds: lessons learnt for the future
cohesion policy of the EU (2010/2305(INI)), A7-0287/2011,

EU (2012). The Commission staff working document accompanying the document National Roma Integration
Strategies: a first step in the implementation of the EU Framework SWD (2012) 133, 21 May 2012

Fabrizio Barca (2009) An agenda for a reformed cohesion policy - A place-based approach to meeting European
Union challenges and expectations, (April 2009), Independent Report prepared at the request of Danuta Hübner,
Commissioner for Regional Policy

Institute for Policy Public Romania - IPP (2009) Study of local budgets between theory and practice for the Pro
Democracy Association (APD) in the project "Efficient management through public participation"
National Rural Development Programme 2007-2013, Annual Implementation Report (A.I.R) 2008, 2009, 2010,
2011, 2012

Operational Programme Administrative Capacity Development 2007 – 2013, Annual Implementation Report (A.I.R)
2008, 2009, 2010, 2011

Regional Operational Programme 2007 – 2013, Annual Implementation Report (A.I.R) 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010,
2011, 2012

Roma Decade Inclusion Secretariat Foundation, 2013. Fundaţia Centrul de Resurse pentru Comunităţile de Romi
(coordinateur), Fundaţia Soros România, Fundaţia pentru Dezvoltarea Societăţii Civile n Centrul Romilor pentru
Politici de Sănătate – SASTIPEN. Report was issued by a coalition of NGOs

Report „A Formative Evaluation of Structural Instruments in Romania”, made for Ministry of European Funds
(former Authority for the Coordination of Structural Instruments)

Romanian Government (2009) National Strategic Report 2009 on the implementation of the Structural and Cohesion
Funds


                                                      291
Romanian Government (2013) National Strategic Report 2013 on the implementation of the Structural and Cohesion
Funds

Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources Development 2007 – 2013, Annual Implementation Report
(A.I.R) 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011

Sectoral Operational Programme Increase of Economic Competitiveness 2007 – 2013, Annual Implementation
Report (A.I.R) 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010

Sectoral Operational Programme Environment 2007-2013, Annual Implementation Report (A.I.R) 2007, 2008,
2009, 2010, 2011

Soros Foundation Romania (2012), “Roma Inclusion in Romania: Policies, Institutions and Examples”, 2012

Soros Foundation Romania (2010), “Local authorities face to face with European funds”, 2010




                                                     292
