                                       MAKING REFORMS WORK                      89691
                                       IN THE CARIBBEAN:
                                       A collective action approach to growth
MAKING REFORMS WORK IN THE CARIBBEAN
  Edited by
  MAKING
 REFORMS
    WORK
    IN THE
CARIBBEAN
A collective action approach to growth




                                         Edited by
                 Andrea Gallina and Sara Giannozzi

                                                     1
    © 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
    1818 H Street NW
    Washington DC 20433
    Telephone: 202-473-1000
    Internet: www.worldbank.org




    This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpreta-
    tions, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its
    Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

                    The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
    boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
    judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
    or acceptance of such boundaries.


    Rights and Permissions

    The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of
    its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as
    full attribution to this work is given.
                        Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
    World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax:
    202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




    Vice-President:	       Jorge Familiar
    Country Director:	     Sophie Sirtaine
    Sector Director:	      Ede Ijjasz-Vasquez
    Sector Manager:	       Markus Kostner
    Task Team Leader:	     Andrea Gallina
    Team Members:	         Sara Giannozzi, Diana de León, Caroline Vagneron,




    Book Design by Room Grupo Creativo | 809-567-0543 | www.room.com.do




2
TABLE OF
CONTENTS
PREFACE .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6

INTRODUCTION .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8

1.	 AIR TRANSPORT IN THE OECS: FLYING SOLO?  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21

2.	 THE CHALLENGES TO SMALL CARIBBEAN PORTS .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 29

3.	 TRADE FACILITATION IN THE CARIBBEAN .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36

4.	 CUSTOMIZED ICT SOLUTIONS FOR CARIBBEAN GROWTH .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 58

5.	 RESILIENT COASTAL CITIES: THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL DIMENSIONS OF RISK .  .  .  .  . 68

6.	 MARKET-BASED AGRICULTURAL RISK MANAGEMENT IN THE CARIBBEAN .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 87

7.	 MITIGATING VULNERABILITY TO HIGH AND VOLATILE OIL PRICES IN THE CARIBBEAN .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 95

8.	 PROMOTING GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN: GEOTHERMAL ENEWABLE ENERGY .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 107

9.	 PROMOTING GROWTH IN THE CARIBBEAN: TAX INCENTIVES IN THEORY AND IN PRACTICE  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 122

10.	PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP IN THE CARIBBEAN: BRIDGING THE FINANCING GAP  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 137

11.	THE CARIBBEAN DIASPORA: A SOURCE FOR VENTURE INVESTMENT? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 149

12.	YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE CARIBBEAN  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 159

13.	QUALITY COUNTS FOR SKILLS AND GROWTH .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 180

14.	NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES IN THE CARIBBEAN .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 190




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
PRE
FACE
4
Following years of low growth, high unemployment, high debt ratios, growing vulnerability to external
shocks and poverty and increasing inequalities, many countries in the Caribbean region and its develop-
ment partners have embarked on a critical effort to rethink their approach to growth. In my conversa-
tions with people from all walks of life, both inside and outside the Caribbean, from government officials
to thought leaders and shopkeepers, I have been impressed by the clarity of vision regarding the need
to take a pragmatic and inclusive stance towards reforming Caribbean economies, at a time when many
islands are still struggling with the aftermath of the global financial crisis.

Since its launch in June 2012, the Caribbean Growth Forum (CGF) has provided a unique platform for
hundreds of participants from the public and private sector, the civil society and the media, to join in an
effort to better understand the challenges at hand, to define a new way forward and take action together
to shape the future of the region. This powerful collective effort around economic reform and growth fo-
cused, during its first phase, on short- and medium-term catalytic actions in three core areas: Logistics
and Connectivity, Investment Climate, and Skills and Productivity.

In addition, the CGF was meant to be a practical public-private platform for dialogue, to enable knowl-
edge sharing, exchange of experiences and lessons among peers from the region with international
institutions supporting the process. This cross-fertilization allowed for a large number of practical and
actionable solutions to emerge; but also for the dissemination of critical technical knowledge to inform
policymaking. ”Making Reform Work in the Caribbean: a Collective Action Approach to Growth” builds
on these conversations and the technical inputs developed since the launch of the Forum, to propose a
roadmap for change in the Caribbean region.

The knowledge and analysis gathered in this volume, focused on locally identified challenges and solu-
tions, will be used in support of the second phase of the Caribbean Growth Forum, which will focus on
the roll-out of the reforms identified so far. While it is now critical for each country participating in the
initiative to move towards implementation as agreed, what will also be critical for the success of this ef-
fort is to maintain vibrant public-private dialogues at the national and regional levels, while continuing
to foster learning within each country and regionally. A lot more can be learned by working together to
support the implementation of these development solutions and to foster a virtuous cycle of economic
growth and shared prosperity in the Caribbean.

Only a genuine dialogue across all layers of the society will allow locally identified solutions to incorpo-
rate lessons learned in different contexts and bring the change necessary for growth and prosperity. Our
hope is that this collection can be a testimony of these efforts, and a reminder for us all of the importance
of collective actions in promoting this large regional reform agenda.


Sophie Sirtaine,
Caribbean Management Unit, Director
The World Bank
June, 2014




                                                                                                                5
    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
    This volume is a collection of the work of many people over time: Daniel Alvarez-Estrada, Diego
    Arias, Martin Alessandro, Mandkhai Bayarsaikhan, Laura Berman, Martin Bes, Cecilia Briceño-
    Garmendia, Heinrich C. Bofinger, André Carletto, Shiyan Chao, Qahir Dhanani, Doyle Galle-
    gos, Andrea Gallina, Sara Giannozzi, Jose Luis Guasch , Jose Eduardo Gutierrez Ossio, Gerry
    Huttrer, Migara Jayawardena, Nadeem Karmali, Mina J. Lee, Clark Matthews, Florencia Millan
    Placci, Harriet Nannyonjo, Juan Jose Neyra, Gylfi Palsson, Pau Puig Gabarro, Javier Sanchez-
    Reaza, Chandra Shekhar Sinha, Rigoberto Ariel Yépez-García and Castalia Strategic Advisors.

    Important contributions were made throughout the process by World Bank colleagues Juan Bu-
    chenau, Françoise Clottes, Diana de Leon, Safaa El Kogali, Francisco Galrao, Peter Holland,
    Alessandro Legrottaglie, Christine Richaud, Galina Sotirova, Maria Angelica Sotomayor, Caro-
    line Vagneron, and Tom Vis. Additional insights and comments were received from the CGF
    Secretariat Team Sylvia Dohnert, Carl Howell, Karen Mahy, Desiree Mitchell and Inder Ruprah. A
    particular thanks also to Calvin Edwards, Richard Lumsden, Christine Richaud and Wayne Mitch-
    ell, for their precious comments on the introduction. CGF Government Focal points across the
    region have also contributed to the ideas in this book, in particular Kim Aikman, Laura Anthony-
    Browne, Timothy Antoine, Gale Archibald, Collin Bullock, Sieglien Burleson, John Calixte, Kavita
    Chankar, Petra Charles-Joseph, Decima Corea, Rasona Davis, Calvin Edwards, Rosamund Ed-
    wards, Kenneth Foe Man, Hilary Hazel, Fiona Hinkson, Richard Lumsden, Amparo M. Masson,
    Juan Monegro, Juan Reyes, Collin Robinson, Khaalis Rolle, and Samantha L. Rolle are gratefully
    acknowledged. Last but not least we are thankful to Johanna Koolemans Beynen for her invalu-
    able editing support, and Room Creativo in the Dominican Republic for publishing and design of
    the layout. While we are very grateful for the guidance received, advisors and reviewers are not
    responsible for any remaining errors, omissions or interpretations.

    The work was conducted under the general guidance of Sophie Sirtaine, Country Director for
    the Caribbean, Latin America and Caribbean Region and Hasan Tuluy, former Vice-President for
    Latin America and Caribbean of the World Bank.

    We are especially grateful to the Governments and individuals that made the Caribbean Growth
    Forum a reality through their commitment and participation, as well as to the Caribbean Growth
    Forum partners and sponsors: the Inter-American Development Bank, the World Bank Group,
    and the Caribbean Development Bank in collaboration with the United Kingdom Agency for Inter-
    national Development and the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development of Canada
    (DFATD). Without them, this book would not have been possible.

    The team would like to acknowledge financial support for this publication from Department of
    Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development of Canada (DFATD).




6
7
INTRO
DUC-
TION
                     1                      2
    ANDREA GALLINA       , SARA GIANNOZZI
8
THE CARIBBEAN GROWTH FORUM
PROCESS AND ITS OBJECTIVES
After good growth performance and improvements in human development indica-
tors from around 1950 through the 1980s, the erosion of trade preferences since
the 1980s has contributed to a shift in production patterns, leaving most Caribbe-
an countries without sufficient new activities to absorb the workforce and provide
a higher standard of living. Many Caribbean economies have been virtually stag-
nant for the past thirty years, while other small island states have experienced rapid
        3             4
growth . The region is now resting on a tipping point and faces low growth; high
                                                    5                 6
unemployment, especially for youth and women ; high debt ratios ; high incidence
          7                                                                   8
of crime ; and growing vulnerability to external shocks and climate change . In the
aftermath of the global financial crisis, the challenges posed by high debt and low
growth have become more acute, creating a renewed sense of urgency concerning
the need to address the structural and policy obstacles to development and growth.

To concretely address the current challenges, a platform for multi-stakeholder dialogue
on growth in the Caribbean was launched in June 2012 by policy makers, private sector,
and civil society organizations of all Caribbean countries. Caribbean leaders wanted
assurance that this platform would not be another series of “talk shops” on growth, and
that it would instead be used to help quickly prioritize and implement shared solutions.



                 1
                   Senior Social Development Specialist, Latin America and the Caribbean Region,
                 The World Bank.
                 2
                   Social Protection Specialist, Latin America and the Caribbean Region, The World
                 Bank.
                 3
                   Ruprah et al (2013).
                 4
                   For the purpose of this volume the Caribbean region includes: Antigua and Bar-
                 buda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Jamai-
                 ca, St. Kitts and Nevis, St Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago,
                 Belize, Guyana, Suriname, Haiti.
                 5
                   See Note by Monica Parra in this book.
                 6
                   According to the Caribbean Development Bank eleven Caribbean countries are
                 among the top fifteen most indebted middle income countries, Caribbean Devel-
                 opment Bank, 2013, p. 27.
                 7
                   UNDP (2012).
                 8
                   According to the World Bank (2014) “Since 1980, nine countries in the Caribbean
                 and Central America have experienced a disaster event with an economic impact
                 greater than 50 percent of their annual gross domestic product (GDP)”, p.8.




                                                                                                       9
     The Caribbean Growth Forum (CGF) was thus designed to respond to these concerns:
     to be both a forum of dialogue to identify needed reforms, and a catalyst for the implemen-
     tation of agreed reform priorities, creating the needed accelerators to make reforms happen,
                                                                                               9
     while keeping in mind the political economy factors that have impeded reforms in the past .

     Since inception, the CGF process has been solidly grounded on few core principles: (i) tailor-
                                                                                               10
     ing: the approach is based on locally defined problems and solutions (home grown) ; (ii) ac-
     tion-orientation: prioritization and sequencing of reforms (e.g., combining gradual reforms
     with longer term structural changes) and their translation into clear, achievable and measur-
     able targets, dashboards and roadmaps for implementation; (iii) transparency: making both
     targets and the process public to increase participation and shared commitments, thus creat-
     ing a routine culture of public reporting to track progress openly (introduce behavioral chang-
     es); (iv) flexibility: to ensure that the process allows for adjustments if targets are not reached
     and to create space for innovation; and (v) accountability: infusing a sense of shared re-
     sponsibility across the coalition that is supporting change, thus moving from a blaming cul-
     ture to a culture of finding solutions by doing; and, eventually, anchoring the process around
     a small group of responsible government officials and support them in delivering policies.


     MANY COUNTRIES WITH SIMILAR CHAL-
     LENGES, BUT ALSO SOLUTIONS
     The first Phase of the CGF (from its official launch in June 2012 to the regional event in The
     Bahamas in June 2013) saw strong traction and momentum, built in record time, with the roll-out
     of CGF National Chapters in 12 countries, and broad-based and consistent stakeholder par-
                                                                  11
     ticipation throughout the process that lasted several months . This has led to the formulation
     of 12 Action Plans which contain 385 agreed national and regional priorities divided in the three
     pillars of the CGF: Logistics and Connectivity; Investment Climate and Skills and Productivity.

     Not surprisingly many of the challenges to growth that have emerged by these dialogues taking
     place almost in parallel in 12 countries are similar in many of them, and so are their proposed
     solutions.

     In the area of Logistics and Connectivity, the main challenges stakeholders identified included the
     bureaucratic obstacles to the movement of people and goods within the region, and the absence
     of reliable and cost effective ferry services. In the Eastern Caribbean countries the need to ad-
     dress monopolies in the maritime transports was also tackled by proposing the establishment of
     a Maritime Transport Regulatory Agency that would monitor rates and charges by shipping lines.

     9
        The CGF was also conceived keeping in mind that the shift in Caribbean economies performance is not only due to structural factors but also to
     policy failures and resistance to change. There is evidence in the Caribbean academic literature showing that implementation of key reforms to improve
     macroeconomic sustainability, competitiveness and growth have been lagging behind, partly because of political economy issues (Persaud, 2011). The
     literature also suggests that the main challenges to the implementation of pro-growth reforms in the region can be linked to a few stylized facts: small,
     highly-personalized societies in which political sympathies and loyalties of individuals tend to be widely known, with career public servants traditionally
     blocking reforms led by politicians of the opposite political spectrum (Stewart, 2007); strong vested interests in the private sector, with the presence of a
     domestic and foreign private sector that has developed competitive advantages based on concessions and exemptions (Kida, n.d.); small size, which,
     among other things, has provided room for corruption through nepotism and patronage (Sutton, 2008); a weak civil society and media sector, lacking
     the necessary autonomy for advocacy (Payne & Sutton, 2007); a public service culture that mirrors the class, racial, and ethnic divides in some of the
     countries (Bissessar 2001); an attitude toward work centered on both a reluctance to delegate by senior officials, and for those lower down to take re-
     sponsibility (Sutton, 2008) ; public sector job promotions based on seniority rather than merit (Bissessar, 2002); and, finally, the presence of a widespread
     mistrust between public and private sector, which contributes to lower mutual expectations and scope for engagement. In his book “Power Politics and
     Performance” Winston Dookeran (2012) has elaborated on the term ‘anti-growth coalitions’ to emphasize the adverse impact of these Caribbean ‘distor-
     tions’ on growth and on improvements in living conditions for the Caribbean people as a whole.
     10
        By focusing on prioritizing and sequencing the Action Plans resulting from the CGF are aligned with the National Development Strategies, Growth and
     Poverty Reduction Strategies and other Programmatic Documents in each country.
     11
        Participation to the national dialogues involved more than 2,500 people and included a wide range of stakeholders, from small and micro enterprises,
     to large hotel chains, to indigenous people, community based organizations and policy makers and civil servants at all levels.


10
Interestingly, proposals for solving these issues came from small exporters, which are likely to
suffer more the lack of competition among the international shipping lines that operate in the
region. Trade facilities and customs have also emerged across the region as key areas in need
of reforms. In particular, customs inefficiency was highlighted in most countries as an important
bottleneck to trade and competitiveness, not only in terms of quality management system for
customs but also in terms of transparency and simplification of procedures and tariffs. While ports
infrastructures are not considered a problem, their functioning is considered a major impediment
and therefore the need to improve operational efficiency, introduce standards for logistics ser-
vices, and Electronic Single Windows to lodge standardized information on trade and transport
was raised in several countries. In the deliberations on logistics and connectivity the need to
develop a modern legal framework for concessions were also highlighted in several countries.

Country specific challenges in this pillar were also identified: for example in the Dominican Repub-
lic a pressing issue is to improve trade facilities with Haiti, both in terms of infrastructure but also in
terms of security and phytosanitary program to facilitate exports and imports with Haiti. Similarly
in Belize, the main logistics problems are linked to the lack of rural infrastructures and lack of con-
nectivity between the capital city and the rest of the country. In Jamaica the main concern was the
need to transform the existing port infrastructure into a logistic hub that could serve as a trans-ship-
ment hub for the Caribbean. Also in Jamaica, increasing the capacity of customs officers and bro-
kers, or establishing weighing stations, were some of the proposals agreed upon in the dialogues.

The logistics and connectivity pillar working groups also addressed challenges related to ICT, in
terms of connectivity, regulation, affordability, and also skills and capacity. The need to devise
modern ICT legal frameworks emerged in almost all countries as a key priority. Another key
area that was prioritized in this pillar is energy: solutions proposed ranged from i) the creation
of economic and fiscal incentives for the use and development of renewable energy, ii) the de-
velopment of energy efficient standards for all buildings, and iii) the need to promote and build
capacity to undertake energy audits. In the case of the Dominican Republic, it was also pro-
posed to launch a nation-wide electricity forum that would lead to the signature among all social
parties of an Electricity Pact, as part of the three pacts of the National Development Strategy.

Regarding the Investment Climate pillar, the discussion focused mainly on the regulatory
frameworks and the need to improve Doing Business indicators. The need to create nation-
al investment strategy and promotion agencies was also highlighted in many countries, in-
cluding the creation of single stop shops and the streamlining of key legislations for inves-
tors. The need to increase access to finance for small businesses, to promote better access
to SMEs in state procurement and to enact Small business Development Acts is another
common topic. In terms of access to finance, the consensus lies in several countries on the
need to establish secure transactions and collateral registry, or establishing credit bureau.

Country-specific issues in the Investment Climate pillar included in Belize, Suriname and the
Dominican Republic the need to improve transparency, public procurement, competition poli-
cies and more accountability in designing concessions frameworks. In the Dominican Republic
the debate around taxes was seen as a small step towards launching a National Fiscal Pact; in
the OECS countries it was more an issue of streamlining incentives and eliminate old incentives
to make room for new ones more attuned to the need to develop new industries or use renew-
able energies for example, while in Jamaica the discussion focused a lot on tax simplification.

Probably the Skills and Productivity pillar is where most commonality exists in the region in terms
of challenges and solutions to address the “great mismatch” between skills available and the
demand of the market. In particular the lack of soft skills dominated the discussion everywhere,
but also the need to strengthen the tripartite frameworks and national productivity councils with

                                                                                                              11
     the aim to have national platforms for discussing and implementing programs for soft skills
     and vocational training. The main concern is how to quickly create the conditions, especially
     for the youth, to enter and remain into the labor market. The promotion of education program
     for entrepreneurial skills, especially for small enterprises, and continuous education programs
     attuned to evolving business needs has been identified as well as critical areas of interven-
     tion for both education and active labor market policies. It is also important to note that one of
     the main issues raised by the working groups in this pillar is the absence of solid data upon
     which to build effective and strategic planning. While true across the region, this is especially
     evident in the areas of labor market (e.g., enterprise surveys, skills profiling) and poverty. As
     recognized in several countries, policy development in the areas of labor market, skill devel-
     opment, and institutional training would benefit from a more solid evidence-base. In this pillar
     the discussion also focused on the need to redefine a better integration between tourism and
     farming, with the aim to boost productivity and reduce import dependency. This concern was
     particularly raised by the small hotels owners associations and by the farmers’ cooperatives.

     In itself, the CGF process has now already allowed for the confirmation of “what” is at stake
     and has shed some light as to “how” to tackle the challenge of needed reforms in the Car-
     ibbean. After listening to and participating in the CGF national dialogues, the authors of the
     notes included in this volume have intended to provide the evidence and analysis to bet-
     ter assist policy makers, private sector, civil society representatives and development prac-
     titioners on “how” to address the old and new challenges facing the Caribbean today.


     THE FORMAT AND CONTENT OF THE BOOK
     The content and format of this book was chosen in order to make relevant knowledge ac-
     cessible to a wider audience, while beginning to fill Caribbean-specific knowledge gaps
                                                  12
     on areas of particular interest for the CGF and engage stakeholders discussing techni-
     cal solutions. The policy and technical notes contained in this volume are written in a non-
     prescriptive format with the idea of inspiring action and animating national dialogues on
     growth, both within and beyond the CGF initiative. In most cases, the notes build on a
     wealth of ongoing analytical work that contains greater details than can be found here.

     In particular, in its contribution to the conversation on air connectivity, Chapter 1
     makes the case for a coordinated regional air policy in which OECS islands see them-
     selves less in competition with one another, and more in need of closer regional coop-
     eration to overcome both the small size of their economies and their isolation. While
     the focus is on the OECS, many considerations apply to the Caribbean as a whole.

     Chapter 2, in turn, looks at recent African experiences with port reform to highlight the impor-
     tance of a comprehensive approach that addresses the legal/regulatory and institutional un-
     derpinnings of the sector and is not limited to infrastructure alone. This is very much in line
     with many of the proposals coming from the CGF working groups, which have been calling for
     institutional strengthening to address logistics and connectivity challenges. A case in point is
     the issue of customs efficiency. Despite the openness of Caribbean economies, customs per-
     formance in the region is comparatively low, as shown in Chapter 3, and this inefficiency af-
     fects the region’s competitiveness. To overcome this challenge, many countries currently seek
     to modernize port infrastructure and ICT systems. However, if they do not pay sufficient atten-
     tion to the institutional reforms that are needed to complement these modernization efforts, they

     12
       For ease of reference, the notes are presented following the three broad themes of the Caribbean Growth Forum (e.g. Logistics and Connectivity,
     Investment Climate and Skills and Productivity), though this is a mostly artificial division of topics given how inter-related the issues are.


12
risk missing all the benefits. Proposals to bring down costs and increase use of ICT, to improve
the regulatory environment for telecoms investments, as well as to provide avenues to finance
ICT start-ups through venture capital were common across countries. Chapter 4 describes the
state of ICT development in the region and the significant opportunities arising from increased
use of ICTs to accelerate and solidify economic and job growth objectives across all sectors
and services. According to this Note an improved connectivity and linkages to markets, trade
facilitation and ICT are essential if the Caribbean is to fully reap the benefits of participating in
globalized markets. At the same time, a lot of discussion has revolved around what can be done
to create a better environment for private sector development overall. Reducing the cost of do-
ing business, increasing access to capital, strengthening institutions and legislation that encour-
age investments, and facilitating access to government services and information through e-gov-
ernment applications were considered key areas where immediate action could go a long way.

Another element for the region to consider is the impact of climate change on infrastructure and pro-
duction, since it will directly affect connectivity and growth. Chapters 5 and 6 look more closely at tools
and options to increase resiliency of infrastructure and service provision, as well as ways to improve
risk management in key productive sectors such as agriculture, through market-based mechanisms
that shift some of the risk away from the public sector alone. A more systematic approach to risk would
greatly benefit Caribbean countries, with their high exposure levels and limited public resources.

One of the elements driving up the cost of doing business in many Caribbean countries, and
holding back potential investments, is the high cost and low reliability of energy. Chapters 7 and
8 look at the economic impact of high and volatile oil prices in a context of high oil dependency;
and at options to diversify power generation in the Caribbean, such as through the development
of geothermal energy. Tax incentives, for example, are commonly used in the Caribbean to sup-
port growth and employment, but experience has shown that they do not always achieve the
investment objectives they are initially designed for. Moreover, they typically involve a host of
efficiency, equity, fiscal, and political economy issues, potentially slowing growth and reducing
competitiveness. Chapter 9 contributes to this dialogue by analyzing the issues associated with
the use of tax incentives and reviewing the challenges faced by the region, in terms of controlling
tax expenditures. Chapters 10 and 11, in turn, look at options for leveraging capital. Faced with
tight budget environments and large public debt, many governments in the region are reach-
ing out to the private sector to leverage scarce public resources. Public-private partnerships
have the potential to mobilize important private sector resources to meet existing infrastructure
needs. In addition, the Caribbean diaspora is sizeable, well-educated, affluent, and interested in
engaging even more “back home”. It can also play a role in jumpstarting venture capital engage-
ment from the rest of the world, showing that the Caribbean has viable high growth enterprises.

Finally, it is important to keep in mind that the labor market, together with the economic land-
scape of the Caribbean, is changing fast. The manufacturing and agriculture sectors, which
have historically been the main drivers of economic growth and employment, are quickly giving
way to services. The discussions in the CGF working groups have reflected growing concerns
that much of the training, particularly at the tertiary level, is too academic or theoretical and
not geared towards supporting this change. Training is often viewed as not being sufficiently
demand-driven, a problem that is often related to the absence of strong public/private sector
partnerships in this area. Participants called for curriculum upgrades, improvements in exist-
ing certifications and also a rekindling and “re-branding” of Technical and Vocational Education
and Training (TVET), which often suffers from a bad reputation in the region, as well as the es-
tablishment of tri-partite –private sector, public sector and trade unions- Productivity Councils.




                                                                                                              13
     The weakness of labor markets and the mismatch between private sector needs and the edu-
     cational system require a renewed focus to help improve competitiveness and foster job crea-
     tions. Chapter 12 highlights the social and economic cost of ignoring the challenges faced by
     youth in finding employment, and points to the need for social protection systems that support
     labor market policies. In particular, combining programs that aim at developing skills and bring-
     ing together employers and job seekers offer the greatest potential rewards. Chapter 13 de-
     scribes international research showing that the subject matter learned and skillset developed
     in the classroom are better predictors of economic growth compared to the simple number of
     years in school, and that a multi-pronged approach between the public and private sector is
     required to achieve effective and high quality skill development. Chapter 14, on the other hand,
     sheds light on the threat posed by non-communicable diseases (NCDs) to productivity, an is-
     sue that is often not sufficiently exposed. The prevalence of NCDs in the Caribbean has im-
     pacts on labor market outcomes, including significant productivity losses due to absenteeism,
     disability, reduced functionality, and reductions in the average number of years of worker output.




14
15
     CONCLUSIONS
               AND


         WAY FORWA
16
 The CGF approach, which brings together public and
 private actors, is seen by many as an innovative way
 to overcome current constraints in the Caribbean
 with a view to exchange experiences, and discuss
 challenges and solutions among peers. In contrast
 to past approaches, the CGF approach aimed to
 generate adaptation and acceptance of the changes
 proposed and build consensus around them. The
 process required opening up new communication
 channels between various stakeholders, for which a
 high degree of commitment by policy makers was
 needed. By creating the space to broaden the poli-
 cymaking process to wider participation, the CGF
 fostered the finding of common grounds on concrete
 steps forward. With support from international part-
 ners, the CGF also helped to tap global resources
 and share knowledge on specific technical issues.       more analytical work. New research and analysis
                                                         will help fill in major knowledge and information
 The CGF hinges on the creation of national and re-      gaps and promote the innovation needed to find
 gional social coalition of reform-minded stakehold-     alternative solutions to the identified challenges.
 ers. The CGF recognized early on that coalition-
 building exercises are not blueprint solutions. They    As the growth reform agenda in the Caribbean un-
 require a proper understanding of the factors that      folds, more difficulties will unavoidably arise, and
 underpin the low-level equilibrium that characterizes   new opportunities for quicker, participative, trans-
 reform weary systems. Coalition building is also a      parent, and evidence-based implementation of pol-
 costly and lengthy exercise . Too often in the past,    icies will emerge. The CGF process is providing an
 consultations on policies have been used as a sub-      alternative delivery methods that can help address
 stitute for real participation and long-term partner-   these challenges and shape a new social contract
 ships. The CGF by contrast has engaged voices           for the Caribbean. The delivery challenge is indeed
 thatwere not always heard in the past to increase       more than just passing laws or drafting policies, it
 the legitimacy of the reforms and build the consen-     means making changes tangible for people and
 sus necessary to carry out public policies and in-      translating them into clear measurable results. It
 crease accountability in-between election cycles.       is difficult, but not impossible, and the Caribbean
                                                         is taking exciting steps towards this objective.
 Going forward, the CGF is focusing on the imple-
 mentation of critical reforms identified through the    With the CGF, Caribbean governments have initiat-
 national and regional dialogues, while continuing to    ed a structured, transparent and accountable pro-
 feed the conversations at the national and regional     cess engaging all stakeholders with the objective
 level on how to address pending challenges with         of accelerating reform and change, to promote pri-
                                                         vate-sector led growth. The stakes are high, as the
                                                         process could be crucial to breaking the traditional
                                                         sub-optimal equilibrium that has been established.




ARD
                                                         And it is the genuine commitment to change and
                                                         to learn from both successes and failures among
                                                         partners that has given the CGF such credibility.


                                                         13
                                                             Leftwich A. & Hogg, S. (2007). Leaders, Elites and Coa-
                                                         litions The case for leadership and the primacy of politics
                                                         in building effective states, institutions and governance for
                                                         sustainable growth and social development, Background
                                                         Paper 01 DLP Developmental Leadership Program, Policy
                                                         and Practice for Developmental.
                                                                                                                         17
     REFERENCES

     Acevedo Sebastian, Aliona Cebotari, and Therese Turner-Jones (2013). Caribbean Small States:
     Challenges of High Debt and Low Growth, February 20, 2013, International Monetary Fund,
     Washington DC.

     Bissessar, A.M. (2001). The Forgotten Factor: Public Servants and New Public Management in
     a Developing Country, Trinidad: University of the West Indies.

     Bissessar, A.M. (2002). The Introduction of New Public Management in Small States, in S. Ryan
     & A. M. Bissessar (Eds.), Governance in the Caribbean, St Augustine, Trinidad: Sir Arthur Lewis
     Institute of Social and Economic Studies.

     Caribbean Development Bank (2013). Public Sector Debt in the Caribbean: An Agenda for Re-
     duction and Sustainability, Caribbean Development Bank, Bridgetown.

     Dookeran, W. (2012). Power, Politics and Performance: A Partnership Approach for the Develop-
     ment. Ian Randle Publishers, Jamaica.

     Leftwich A. & Hogg, S. (2007). Leaders, Elites and Coalitions The case for leadership and the
     primacy of politics in building effective states, institutions and governance for sustainable growth
     and social development, Background Paper 01 DLP Developmental Leadership Program, Policy
     and Practice for Developmental.

     Kida, M. (N.D.). Caribbean Small States—Growth Diagnostics, World Bank, mimeo.




18
Payne, A. & Sutton, P. (2007). Repositioning the Caribbean within Globalisation, Caribbean Paper
No.1 June 2007, The Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI), Waterloo, Ontario.

Persaud, A. (2011). Fostering Growth and Development in Small States through Disruptive
Change: A Case Study of the Caribbean, Caribbean Paper No. 11 October 2011, The Centre for
International Governance Innovation (CIGI), Waterloo, Ontario.

Inder Ruprah, Karl Melgarejo, Ricardo Sierra (2014). Is There a Caribbean Sclerosis? Stagnating
Economic Growth in the Caribbean, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington DC.

Stewart, S. (2007). Facts, Myths and Monsters: Understanding the Implementation of Public Sec-
tor Reform in SVG, pp. 79-95 in A. M. Bissessar (Ed.), Rethinking the Reform Question, Cam-
bridge Scholars Publishing: Newcastle.

Sutton, P. (2008). Public Sector Reform in the Commonwealth Caribbean: A Review of Recent
Experiences, Caribbean Paper No.6, October 2008. The Centre for International Governance In-
novation (CIGI), Waterloo, Ontario.

United Nations Development Programme (2012). Caribbean Human Development Report 2012:
Human Development and the Shift to Better Citizen Security, UNDP.

World Bank (2014). Caribbean and Central American Partnership for Catastrophe Risk Insurance.
Pooling Risk to Safeguard against Catastrophes Generated by Natural Events, International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank, Washington DC.




                                                                                                   19
20
AIR TRANSPORT
                                                                  1
   IN THE OECS:
  FLYING SOLO?




   Heinrich C. Bofinger, Florencia Millan Placci, and Cecilia Briceño-Garmendia*
                                                                                   21
     ABSTRACT
                  Most OECS countries exchange goods and services with the rest of the world via air and maritime
                  transport, increasing transportation and infrastructure costs, and increasing vulnerability from disrup-
                  tion due to natural disasters. However, the cost of developing necessary infrastructure such as ports
                  and airports is very high compared with the small size of most of these countries. Regional coopera-
                  tion could take advantage of the economies of scale of such investments. This is particularly important
                  for air transport, since countries in the region rely heavily on tourism, and studies show that stay-over
                  tourism presents a greater growth and development opportunity compared to cruise visitors. Regional
                  cooperation is particularly important for inter-island communication, where a spoke and hub system
                  could greatly improve distribution of tourists.

                  *Members of the Economics Team of the World Bank Sustainable Development Department of the Latin America and the Caribbean Region of

                  the WorldBank




     INTRODUCTION
     OECS countries face two critical barriers for developing their infrastructure and connec-
     tivity: their conditions of island states and their geographic location in the Caribbean.
     Exchanges of goods and services with the rest of the world are limited to air and maritime
     transport modes, logistics costs are generally more expensive, and they face a disproportionate
     risk of natural disasters. This all translates into a cost premium for developing infrastructure, and
     higher transport services. Moreover, the OECS islands are small states characterized by small
     market size and this imposes an important limitation for developing large infrastructure assets,
     such as ports and airports. The long life cycles that characterize these types of assets and the
     important upfront capital investments required–even greater given the climate resilience required
     in this region-- make them suited for larger markets in which it is possible to reap the benefits of
     the economies of scale proper of such investments. In the case of OECS countries, such econo-
     mies of scale can only be developed through regional cooperation due to the size of their markets
     and economies.

     Moreover, with the collapse of the region’s agricultural exports in recent dec-
     ades, the tourism sector has emerged as a key economic pillar, contributing up to 12
     percent of all jobs and about 14 percent of the region’s GDP in 2011. In the case of the
     OECS countries, in their condition of island states, tourism and air transport are invariably
     intertwined. Therefore, this note will take a look at the air. transport sector and the impli-
     cations for inter-island connectivity and regional coordination as the OECS countries aim
     to fully develop their potential in tourism, a crucial component of their economic growth
     strategies. The note will briefly outline how under-development of stay-over resort tourism rela-
     tive to cruise ship tourism represents a growth and development opportunity, and that the chal-
     lenge looking forward lies not only in more investments in assets, but rather in developing better
     and more coordinated hub-and-spoke systems. The note concludes that regional coordination for
     infrastructure investments and systems is one of the key elements needed for OECS countries
     to succeed in speeding up growth.




22
    AIR TRANSPORT: A VITAL CHANNEL FOR
                 THE TOURISM INDUSTRY
At the moment, cruise visitors, who are between 2.5 and 3 times more numerous than stay-
over visitors, dominate in the category of international tourist arrivals in the OECS. As a
matter of fact, the growth and development of tourism throughout 2000-2011 is largely attributable
to the increase in cruise-ship passengers (Figure 1a, dashed line). During the same period, the
numbers of stay-over visitors remained stable at about 1 million per year (Figure 1a, solid line).
This is in contrast to what is observed in the main Caribbean destinations such as Jamaica, Ba-
hamas, and Aruba,1 where stay-over visitors dominate international tourism.

This difference has important economic implications, as cruise ship visitors do not offer
the same revenue opportunities as stay-over resort visitors do. Passengers of a cruise ship
consume by going on local excursions, and going shopping at the country being visited. Stay-over
visitors spend much more on hotels, restaurants, excursions, transportation, and shopping per
stay. It should not come as a surprise that between 2000 and 2011, while the number of interna-
tional cruise-ship passengers increased about 66 percent (40 percent if we include all interna-
tional visitors) the income generated by all passengers measured in terms of traceable spending
increased only about 25 percent from approximately US$950 million in 2000 to US$1,180 million
in 2011 (Figure 1b). Anecdotal evidence indicates that average per head spending of visitors
arriving by cruise ship was around US$ 50-120 during the global economic downturn, whereas
stay-over visitors typically spend more than US$ 1,000.



Figure 1: Eastern Caribbean Countries International Tourism

(a) Stay-over and cruise ship passengers	                                       (b) Total visitor expenditure




	




Source: Authors’ calculations based on ECCB data.


1
 The leaders are Dominican Republic, with 4.306 million arrivals during 2011, Cuba, with 2.688 million, Jamaica with
1.952 million, Bahamas with 1.344 million, Aruba with 871 thousand and Barbados with 568 thousand. Together, these
countries host 56% of the tourists that arrive internationally to the Caribbean. The first 3 countries, Dominican Republic,
Cuba, and Jamaica account for 43% of the tourist arrivals in 2011 (WTO. 2012).
                                                                                                                              23
     The fact that OECS international tourism is currently skewed towards cruise-ship pas-
     sengers creates an opportunity waiting to be grabbed, and has important implications
     for air connectivity. Even with a relatively small share of international passengers in stay over
     (one third of total in 2011), the overall contribution of tourism to the economy is quite significant,
     ranging from 24 percent in Grenada to 74 percent in Antigua and Barbuda (WTTC, 2012). This
     is much higher than the 14-16 percent that tourism contributes to the overall economies of the
     leading Caribbean destinations. If and when stay-over trends improve, the local economies can
     benefit from higher demand from items typically consumed by stay-over tourists such as tradi-
     tional crops (including mango, pineapple, and papaya); fresh produce; fish and seafood; ser-
     vices, including those provided at yachts and marinas; and hotel receipts linked to services and
     goods; among other things. The main way for higher-revenue tourists to arrive is through airlift,
     making air transport the vital pipeline for hotel arrivals. Focusing on increasing stay-over tourism
     therefore implies tackling the intraregional and interregional air connectivity of the OECS islands.

     Given the physical infrastructure layout, many of the islands rely on other countries and
     intraregional traffic to connect with the rest of the world. The OECS islands are connected
     by two types of air transport systems, one linking islands among themselves, and another con-
     necting them to longer-distance destinations. The inter-island system is served predominantly by
     one carrier, LIAT. A separate system links the OECS region with the origin of its arriving tourists
     and it is served by international (no-OECS) carriers. Currently, the two systems are poorly inter-
     linked.

     The inter-island system is wrought with inefficiencies and mixed connectivity. The Inter-
     island air service operates in a challenging environment in which for some pairs of islands there
     is barely a flight connection in one or two days. Table 1 shows how difficult it might be to visit St.
     Kitts from another neighboring OECS country. It can take 4-9 hours or even overnight, and up to
     two connections. St. Vincent faces a similar situation. This situation represents an enormous cost
     for inter-island connectivity but it also creates enormous hurdles for international tourism. The
     main inter-island carrier LIAT currently does not interline with any of the other larger carriers, so
     it cannot really contribute to the efficient distribution of tourists amongst the islands. Moreover,
     LIAT’s reliability in recent years is being challenged by its inability to recover costs2. This is hav-
     ing an important impact on maintenance. Schedule integrity is often compromised due to the
     breakdown of equipment. Since LIAT is a de facto monopoly, such unreliability means that many
     OECS islands are not only poorly connected but the existing connections work erratically and
     unpredictably.

     The lack of reliability of the inter-island air service creates incentives for islands to in-
     vest in their own air infrastructure in individual bases to connect them with the rest of
     the world, rather than cooperate to develop a functional hub-and-spoke system of inter-
     island connectivity. Thus, the system connecting OECS with the rest of the world depends on
     the ability of each individual island infrastructure to accommodate large aircrafts. In general, the
     OECS region has two important hubs: Antigua in the north, and Barbados in the south. Trinidad
     also serves as a connection point. However, four of the six OECS islands under review –Antigua,
     Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, and St. Lucia— also have runways that are capable of handling
     wide-body aircraft. In the current structure of routes, this means that each of them receives their
     own direct or semi-direct long-distance flights brining passengers to their island instead of relying
     on the inter-island connectivity system anchored in two hubs. Other OECS countries are starting
     to follow this model.


     2
         As reported in interviews by some LIAT officials, as many as 39 out of 112 daily flights are not profitable.



24
OECS islands are increasingly locking themselves in over-dimensioned infrastructure in-
vestments to bypass a dysfunctional inter-island system. St. Vincent is building a brand new
greenfield airport with a 9,000 foot runway and a 1.4 million passenger annual capacity terminal
hoping to support its tourism development in the longer term. The expected opening will be in
2014, with the majority of the earthworks already completed. Dominica is also considering options
for a new airport or extending its main runway into the ocean, and recently completed additional
infrastructure investments to increase terminal capacity. Both Grenada and St. Lucia have consid-
erable excess capacity in their terminals (with utilization rates below 50 percent), significantly rais-
ing their overheads. St. Vincent had less than 200,000 passengers in 2012, yet the new terminal
being built will have a capacity of 1.4 million passengers.

This ‘decentralized’ investment decision-making process is creating a public sector co-
nundrum: to unlock the tourism sector, OECS countries need reliable air connectivity with the
rest of the world that, in the absence of a reliable inter-island system --for now dominated by a mo-
nopoly that has reached capacity— leads countries to think individually and invest by themselves
in expensive infrastructure that could be designed more efficiently if they considered the region
as a whole. Moreover, once a country has locked-in expensive long-life assets such as airports,
ensuring that tourism takes off becomes even more critical in order to guarantee the economic
returns of such investments. This situation creates additional incentives for OECS countries to
engage in interventions that aim to secure each individual country a minimum flow of tourists.
Bilateral agreements and subsidies to airliners, in particular, have become a common practice.

Aiming to support a sector that is essential for their economies and develop a secure flow
of tourists, some of the OECS countries provide subsidies to air transportation. Through-
out the Caribbean, even in highly successful resort destinations such as Jamaica, major airlines
negotiate agreements with island governments that protect them in the case of a downturn. The
agreements are generally of two types: Marketing Support Agreements (MSA) and Minimum Rev-
enue Guarantees (MRGs). In MSAs a country makes funds available to an airline for marketing
purposes. In the case of MRGs, a government guarantees that if a specified load factor or volume
over a given period is not achieved it will pay for (i.e. “take delivery”) of the unwanted capacity.
In 2012 the net fiscal effect of these agreements amounted to between 0.12 and 0.2 percent of
GDP, or between 0.6 and 1 percent of tax revenues, and between 0.1 and 0.3 percent of public
debt (Bofinger and Millan, 2013). Individual ministries see these agreements as expensive items
on their budgets. Also, the overall question can be raised as to who is really paying for these ben-
efits, which are ultimately an indirect subsidy to the hotel industry that captures stay-over visitors.
Since funding for most of these agreements comes from overall tax revenues, the agreements
are financed with funds outside the tourism sector that could arguably be allocated to other uses
including education, health or any other social cause.




                                                                                                           25
     CON
     CLU
     SIONS
     The OECS has a high concentration of international airports within short distances. Most
     of the islands are receiving international tourists directly from their countries of origin instead of
     building a hub-and-spoke system that would optimize the regional investment in expensive air
     transport infrastructure. The individual -as opposed to coordinated- decision-making not only
     makes infrastructure investment more expensive and inefficient for the region but also creates
     enormous pressures for each government to secure a share of the tourist market individually. To
     neutralize the unpredictability of those tourism streams, and therefore of the load factors on the
     aircraft delivering the service, OECS countries have entered into individualized agreements with
     airlines in order to ensure connectivity. The cost of these agreements can be up to 1 percent of
     the GDP, but the political tag is significantly higher as subsidies are perceived as unnecessary
     and expensive items in the budget.

     Moreover, the negotiation of these agreements raises the question of how much the OECS could
     gain by acting as one block in negotiating with airlines. It also underscores the importance of
     establishing a more efficient hub-and-spoke system for treating tourist arrivals. A system of two
     hubs, one in the north (Jamaica perhaps) and one in the south (Barbados or Trinidad), was sug-
     gested as a possible solution in recent meetings with the Caribbean Hotel and Tourism Associa-
     tion. This would pool most arriving passengers into more sustainable load factors from long-haul
     flights, and could also create the density needed to make the inter-island transport system more
     sustainable, with benefits spilling over beyond tourism per se. A hub system would most likely
     provide more flexibility in matching supply with demand during high as well as low sea-
     son, when inter-island business and Government travel drive the demand.

     Coordination is not an easy feat, but if the OECS wants to go forward with a regional
     policy it will be necessary for the islands to see themselves less in competition with one
     another: they will need to cooperate with each other to overcome the small size of their
     economies and their isolation.

     It is time for OECS countries to stop flying solo.




26
REFERENCES
World Tourism Organization. (2012). Tourism Highlights, Madrid, Spain.

World Travel & Tourism Council. (2012). The Caribbean: The Impact of Travel & Tourism on Jobs
and the Economy, World Travel & Tourism Council, London, United Kingdom.

Bofinger, H. C., & F. Millan Placci (2013.) Air Transport in the OECS: Subsidies and Connectivity¸
Internal Report prepared as an input into the OECS Secretariat’s sectoral strategy as part of its
Growth and Development Strategy, World Bank, LCSCE Economics Unit.




                                                                                                     27
28
    THE CHALLENGES
    TO SMALL
    CARIBBEAN

2
    PORTS:
    ARE THERE LESSONS TO BE
    LEARNED
    FROM RECENT PORT REFORMS
    IN AFRICA?              Gylfi Palsson*
                                             29
     ABSTRACT
                  Although ports are crucial for the economic growth and prosperity of the small-
                  er caribbean islands, they are often criticized for their inefficiency, mismanage-
                  ment, delays, high costs, and political patronage. Furthermore, doubts have been
                  raised, due to their small size, as to whether they can attract the kind of investment
                  from professional private terminal operators, under a landlord port management
                  model, seen as necessary to improve their performance. This policy note presents
                  some experiences of successful port reforms in africa. It concludes that, gener-
                  ally speaking, reform most often requires comprehensive actions addressing le-
                  gal, institutional, labor and Public Private Partnership (PPP) aspects. Furthermore,
                  the highest possible level of political commitment is necessary, authorities must
                  develop a thorough understanding of the root causes of port inefficiencies and
                  design appropriate reforms, and stakeholders should be consulted. If ports are
                  overstaffed, labor issues will also need to be addressed. In addition, the design of
                  the concession should take into account not only the requirements of the port but
                  also the realities of the market. Finally, well-designed, transparent and competitive
                  transaction processes lead to better outcomes.

     *Lead transport specialist in the sustainable development department of latin america and carib-
     bean region at the world bank.


     INTRODUCTION
     Smaller islands in the Caribbean are faced with a very particular challenge with respect
     to their ports: They are the gateways in and out of the country and a basic pillar for the
     economic wellbeing and future of the country, and yet the ports are often the focus of
     sometimes-justifiable criticism for inefficiencies, mismanagement, delays, high cost and
     in some cases maybe even political patronage. Furthermore, the traffic through the port is in
     the global scheme of things very small, which raises doubts as to whether the ports can attract
     what is often viewed as the magic solution for improving performance - concession of port opera-
     tions under a landlord port management model to professional private terminal operators.

     This paper examines some issues that these countries might want to examine to obtain ideas
     for addressing the specific challenges facing these kinds of ports, as well as some useful experi-
     ences of other ports to implement, or avoid.




30
PORT REFORMS IN AFRICA
                                                The most recent port reforms in Africa have
    Box 1: Where’s my silver bullet?            been comprehensive, using diagnostics and
                                                analysis to arrive at a holistic understanding
      Liberia came out of a 14-year civ-        of the challenges of the sector. This has led
   il war in 2004. As part of the peace         to port sector reform approach that tries to
   agreement, control of the main port of       address the legal/regulatory, institutional and
   Monrovia was handed to one of the            social/labor underpinnings of the sector; and
   warring factions. Mismanagement,             is often accompanied with measures aimed at in-
   inefficiencies, plunder and rule of the      creasing the role and responsibility of the private
   port as a personal fiefdom resulted. A       sector in port operations. In some cases, conces-
   government elected in 2006 tried for         sions were authorized for relatively small termi-
   two years different one-off solutions        nals.
   (e.g. new board, port management
   (several times), piecemeal financ-           Drawing on those experiences in Africa – both
   ing, and labor redundancies) all in the      successes and in a handful of cases where ef-
   hope of improving the port operations,       forts were not sustained long enough to ob-
   but to no avail. Meanwhile the World         tain results- this brief paper highlights some
   Bank advocated a comprehensive so-           of the pertinent aspects of port sector reform:
   lution to the problem. In 2008, a deep       from the time it is realized that serious change is
   legal and institutional reform process       needed in the sector until the time when the nec-
   finally started, including preparation       essary changes are implemented. Some of these
   for concession. This small, one mil-         may be relevant to the experience in the Carib-
   lion ton, 50 thousand TEU port is            bean port sectors.
   now operated by one of the largest
   terminal operators in the world. With-      A series of epiphanies: Many African ports
   in 6 months of taking over the port,        experienced extended periods where perfor-
   productivity had more than tripled.         mance of the sector was gradually declining.
                                               Often, these declines were accompanied by ris-
    The lesson is that there are no silver     ing concerns and demands for improvements,
    bullets – just clarity of agreed vision    and gradually developed into a political issue. The
    and hard work.                             high costs of certain ports were occasionally an
                                               issue, but more generally it was the declining per-
                                               formance of the overall sector, causing shipping
                                               lines to raise liner tariffs in response to longer wait
                                               and berth times in some instances, and even to
leave containers to catch up on schedules in some cases. Other problems included custom-
ers who had to wait long periods until their containers could be processed, and the absence of
efficiency improvements, due to a lack of investment in basic infrastructure. In sum, the lack of
proper management was creating chaos in port operations. The result was always the same:
less and more-costly port and maritime service for the country, which created a self-imposed
and completely avoidable barrier to the country’s trade.

Change in any organization is difficult – often in ports it is made even more difficult because of
the public service function of ports, public perception of ports as jewels of the economy, and
pervasive political influence on management as well as strong union role. It is therefore under-
standable that as criticism of port performance increases and goes beyond complaints by the
port community, political efforts are made to find the one or two actions that will turn the situation
around. Sadly, the roots of the decline of the ports are almost always deep and systemic
and require a long term, comprehensive, solution.

                                                                                                         31
     It is only when the realization starts taking hold among the various stakeholders that
     something fundamental needs to be done about the situation in the port – a broad under-
     standing that things need to change – that the country condition for starting to address
     the problem is in place.

     The final and concluding epiphany takes place when political authorities at the highest level give
     their support for a fundamental change in the port sector. The experience of port reform in Af-
     rican has one constant: where a high level of political commitment to reform of the sector
     was in place, reform succeeded; where strong political will was lacking, the port sector
     reforms did not succeed.

     Diagnostics and Reform Design: Frequently, at the
     same time that the need for comprehensive port                Box 2: Nigerian Presidential
     reform is being digested among stakeholders,                  Decision
     diagnostics of the port issues take place, which               Under World Bank funding (PPIAF)
     help to develop and design proper reform. In oth-           comprehensive policy and planning
     er cases these diagnostics work only takes place            recommendations for reform of the
     after political decision to change has been made -          Nigeria port sector were prepared
     depending on the political space and circum-                in 2002, and extensively discussed
     stances at the time.                                        at political as well as technical lev-
     These diagnostics, often conducted by specialized           el. However, the reform was put
     consultants, normally examine various possible port         on hold for the following two years
     models to emulate, review and recommend changes             while the country went through a
     to the legal and regulatory framework, organizational       presidential election. President Oba-
     structure and role of port authorities; establish bench-    sanjo, newly reelected, decided in
     marks for human resource requirements and evaluate          2004 that Nigeria needed to revamp
     existing levels of labor and skills, what skills would be   its port sector – at the time gener-
     required under optimal situation and how to address         ally recognized around the world as
     any discrepancies.                                          one of the worst performing ones.
                                                                 In the following 30 months or so,
     During both the diagnostic and reform design                the government drafted a new port
     phases, a good practice is to undertake a number            bill; restructured and reformulated
     of consultations with stakeholders. These not only          the Port Authority; carried out re-
     improve the quality of the diagnostics, and thus of the     dundancies with compensation af-
     reform, but also inform stakeholders and jump-start         fecting 25,000 staff and casual la-
     the process of eventual implementation of the reform.       bor;, and awarded concessions for
     However, authorities are often reluctant to undertake       the operation of 26 port terminals .
     such consultation. In order to resolve this impasse,        The lesson is that with good analytical
     the Sierra Leone Port Authority essentially asked the       underpinning and unwavering political
     World Bank to be the honest broker in the initial dis-      commitment, challenging port reform
     cussions with the port labor unions.                        can be implemented quickly even when
                                                                 confronted with competing interests.
     In the experience of African countries, nearly with-
     out exception, part of the reform solutions have
     included the introduction or restructuring of pri-
     vate sector involvement in port operations, in one
     capacity or another. As a general rule, concessions should be decided in the last stage of
     implementation: in Nigeria handover of concessions were delayed about 6 months because the
     government had not concluded negotiations, including agreements on compensation for redun-
     dancies, with the labor sector.



32
By the end of this diagnostic and reform design phase, authorities need to have a clear set of
objectives for the reform.

Legal, Regulatory, Institutional and Labor Reform: In many of the African countries that have
undertaken reform, the original legislation, a Port Act, dated to the period immediately following
independence in the sixties. Frequently the original legislation envisioned a port authority
service model, where the public port authority was responsible for delivery of all port op-
erations, and where the legal authority to outsource or concession part of the operation
did not exist or was difficult to interpret.

As countries began to fully understand the dif-
ferent choices of port models, they each ended             Box 3: Layoffs
up pursuing the landlord model – as is the case
worldwide. In the main, under the landlord model          The Liberian Government faces enor-
a port authority constructs and owns the basic port       mous challenges in rebuilding its ba-
infrastructure, and controls marine services, while       sic infrastructure after decades of
                                                          damage and neglect due to civil war.
the private sector, under leasing, concession or
                                                          The 600 meters of berths at the main ter-
usufruct agreements, operates that infrastructure         minal in the Freeport of Monrovia were not
and is responsible for providing equipment and            only approaching the end of their useful
constructing the superstructure.                          life (built in 1946); they were literally col-
                                                          lapsing, with parts rendered non-opera-
On the basis of that model, new legislation was           tional due to failing strength integrity. The
drafted or existing legislation updated and amend-        port throughput was only one million tons.
ed. The role and responsibilities of the public sec-      In designing the “width and breadth”
tor, to be executed through a public port authority,      of the concession the Government
was decided on and incorporated into the legisla-         eventually decided to go as far as pos-
                                                          sible in moving operational and invest-
tion. Authorities attempted to integrate a require-
                                                          ment responsibility to a concessionaire.
ment for a commercially oriented institution into the     Following a well-planned process
legislation, for instance in the selection, terms and     aimed at maximizing the benefit to the
responsibility of a port authority board; in the estab-   country, a concession was awarded to
lishment of regulations governing the selection of        APM Terminals, for (i) terminal opera-
Managing Directors; and in requirements for open-         tions including container and general
ness of financial information, issuance of annual re-     cargo and (ii) tug and pilot service. The
ports and their availability to the public.               investment obligation included all ter-
                                                          minal equipment, new tugs and pilot
In some cases, pre-reform ports were exces-               boats and construction of a new 600
                                                          meter quay. Reportedly, the investment
sively overstaffed - in some cases by factors of
                                                          alone was valued at US$120 million.
up to 6 to 7 times what benchmark staffing would          The lesson learned is that a well elabo-
be. Obviously, such overstaffing had to be ad-            rated and smart concession design can
dressed as part of a reform. An added dimension           bring great benefits even to a small port.
sometimes was overly generous conditions of
service (including pension obligations) that made
cost of redundancies exorbitant and indeed beyond
capacity of port authorities and governments to fi-
nance. As a consequence, extensive negotiations with labor unions and eventual settlements
were necessary. In the end, labor unions came to understand that reform was needed and how
it would affect them. One labor leader stated to the writer of this paper after a 5 hour long discus-
sion with a group of about a dozen Nigerian union representatives: “We know the reform will go
through. We just want to hold out for the best deal possible”.




                                                                                                           33
     Well-designed redundancy packages include not only payments to workers who are made redun-
     dant, but may also include counseling and training, education grants, microcredits to establish
     new small enterprises and other measures designed to reduce the risk that the redundant labor
     falls into poverty.

     The Holy Grail: The legal, institutional and labor re-         Box 4: The Monrovia Concession
     form can be thought of as putting in place the need-           The Liberian Government faces enor-
     ed framework for well-operated ports; sometimes                mous challenges in rebuilding its
     accompanied by restructuring existing private sec-             basic infrastructure after decades of
     tor involvement in port operations or in most cases            damage and neglect due to civil war.
     introducing the private sector into port operations            The 600 meters of berths at the main
     hitherto conducted directly by the port authority.             terminal in the Freeport of Monro-
                                                                    via were not only approaching the
     When formulating the approach to concession of op-             end of their useful life (built in 1946);
     erations, it is important to take into account the exist-      they were literally collapsing, with
     ing and expected future rate of growth of a port, as well      parts rendered non-operational due
     as its transshipment potential. For instance, a port with      to failing strength integrity. The port
     400,000 TEU through-put could be expected to sustain           throughput was only one million tons.
     two competing concessions (depending of course on              In designing the “width and breadth” of
     port space and configurations). A relevant question for        the concession the Government even-
     smaller Caribbean ports would be whether there is a            tually decided to go as far as possible
     lower limit on throughput where it becomes impossible to       in moving operational and investment
     attract a traditional concession.                              responsibility to a concessionaire.
                                                                    Following a well-planned process
     The unfortunately ambiguous answer is that it depends.         aimed at maximizing the benefit
     In the end, a concessionaire looks at the expected             to the country, a concession was
     profitability of operating a terminal. In that evalua-         awarded to APM Terminals, for (i)
     tion the combination of volume of traffic, applicable          terminal operations including con-
     tariffs and perhaps other factors such as a vested             tainer and general cargo and (ii) tug
     interest in quicker service for the concessionaire’s           and pilot service. The investment ob-
     own vessels come into play.                                    ligation included all terminal equip-
                                                                    ment, new tugs and pilot boats and
     The throughput of some of the terminals with the small-        construction of a new 600 meter
     est volumes operated as concessions in Africa over the         quay. Reportedly, the investment
     past 10 years has only been about 50,000 TEU. But the          alone was valued at US$120 million.
     very recent example of such a concession, in Liberia,          The lesson learned is that a
     may indicate that the volume of traffic can be even lower      well elaborated and smart con-
     and still attract interest and competition for terminals by    cession design can bring great
     competent operators - even in a country still considered       benefits even to a small port.
     high risk because of recent conflict. Significant invest-
     ment and operational obligations were placed on the
     concession – indeed far beyond what normally is seen in port concessions. Yet, through careful
     formulation of the concession, market sounding, tariff adjustments, and an exceptionally well-
     prepared concession process, this concession was successfully implemented and has now been
     in operation for just over 2 years (see text box “The Monrovia Concession”).

     While concessions in larger ports follow familiar path, there is no infallible formula or ap-
     proach to concessions of smaller ports. While the design of the concession would be oriented
     towards the particular needs of a port, each concession also needs to take into account the po-
     tentially limited interest of the market. It can be helpful to use the technique of market sounding,
     where the preliminary design of the concession parameters are presented to a number of poten-
     tially interested terminal operators, and the final design of the concession is adapted, on basis of
     their response.
34
Authorities need to conduct an open discussion about the concession design and about
what functions of the port will be operated as a concession, as well about the objectives of
the concession: whether the intent of the concession should be to get the greatest value
for the concession, to drive down overall costs, to obtain the highest-possible level of ef-
ficiency, to attract investment, to attract know how, or to obtain some combination of these
goals. Furthermore, what type of concessionaire is desirable and what type of profile
should the concessionaire have?

The concession process normally follows a path where due diligence for the concession is un-
dertaken, resulting in a series of reports and opinions on aspects that may affect the concession,
such as legal and regulatory, operational, technical and engineering, equipment, institutional,
human resources/labor, environmental and financial aspects, and on the creation of a financial
model which will help in refining the concession design and tariff issues.
On basis of the concession design and informed by issues discovered and exposed in the prepa-
ration of the due diligence, a formal request for expression of interest is issued, sometimes ac-
companied by a brief Information Memorandum. On basis of the responses and within the estab-
lished parameters of the request for Expression of Interest, a shortlist of terminal operators will be
invited to submit a proposal for the concession on basis of a Request for Proposals. To the extent
possible, selection criteria need to be quantitative so as to ensure transparency in the process.

In one case in Africa, the period of proposals built in two rounds of comments on a draft
contract that would eventually govern the concession. This resulted in an important drop
in the number of issues that eventually needed to be addressed during the negotiation
process and – importantly – addressed through open consultations with competing termi-
nal operators the technical, operational and procedural details of the concessions. This
turned out to be an exceptionally successful addition to the process.

An inevitable issue raised in the process in the concessions in Africa is the question of how to ac-
commodate economic regulations. For the most part independent economic regulatory agencies
to which the concession contracts can refer issues related to tariffs do not exist in Africa. For the
most part, the contract itself plays the role of economic regulation, since it contains clauses that
describe how to resolve these issues. In one case the government initiated steps to establish an
independent transport commission to regulate all transport tariffs.

There are a handful of lessons to be drawn from the African port reforms of the past years
that reform minded stakeholders in the Caribbean may want to keep in mind.

             • Generally speaking, there are no silver bullet solutions. Proper reform most often
             requires comprehensive actions addressing legal, institutional, labor and PPP aspects.
             • Without the highest possible level of political commitment, chances for successful reform are
             compromised.
             • Authorities must develop a thorough understanding of the root causes of port inefficiencies and
             design appropriate reforms.
             • Stakeholders should be consulted in the design and implementation of reforms to improve and
             facilitate the process of change and final results.
             • If ports are overstaffed, labor issues need to be addressed; eventual solutions should include
             measures to try to ensure that the workers who are made redundant have the opportunity to find
             new jobs.
             • When it comes to concessions of small ports, the design of the concession should take into ac-
             count not only the requirements of the port but also the realities of the market.
             • Well-designed, transparent and competitive transaction processes lead to better outcomes.




                                                                                                                 35
3
     TRADE FACILITATION
     IN THE   CARIBBEAN:
     THE CASE OF
     CUSTOMS
     PERFORMANCE




36
Jose Eduardo Gutierrez Ossio, Martin Alessandro and
                                  Juan Jose Neyra*
                                                37
     ABSTRACT
                    Although the Caribbean countries have very open economies, in terms of their de-
                    pendence on trade and investment flows, this policy note argues that their cus-
                    toms performance is low, both compared to best practices, and to practices in Latin
                    American countries. Using data from the Customs Assessment Trade Toolkit, it
                    shows that customs processes in the region do not meet adequate standards in
                    terms of speed, predictability, and transparency, in part because they fail to take
                    sufficient advantage of ICT. This note concludes with some policy recommenda-
                    tions, including: Reducing dependence on tariffs for the government’s total revenue,
                    clarifying the role of the customs offices, promoting regional agreements to consoli-
                    date customs processes, establishing alliances with the private sector to improve
                    procedures. It also proposes a number of institutional reforms to enhance the per-
                    formance of customs systems, including prioritizing the completion, implementation
                    and dissemination of SOPs, promoting continual improvements by strengthening
                    strategic thinking, ensuring that ICT information is available to the decision-makers,
                    establishing the procedures and the incentives to fully appropriate the potential of
                    ICT systems, and introducing productivity incentives to promote better performance.

     *Senior Public Sector Specialist, and consultants, of the Public Sector Unit in the Latin America
     and the Caribbean Region of the World Bank, respectively.



     INTRODUCTION
     The Caribbean countries3 have highly open economies (World Bank & OAS, 2009). The trade
     of goods and services and the inflows from Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) represent large
     proportions of their Gross Domestic Products (GDP), especially in English Speaking Caribbean
     (ESC) countries4. Therefore, the proper functioning of the channels that connect them to the rest
     of the world, including customs offices, is essential to the performance of their economies.

     However, this note will show that, despite their integration into the world economy, cus-
     toms performance in the Caribbean countries is comparatively low. This note presents data
     from the Customs Assessment Trade Toolkit (CATT), which provides empirical evidence that
     customs processes do not meet adequate standards in terms of speed, predictability and trans-
     parency. This inconsistency is partially explained by the fact that actual operational practices fail
     to make effective use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) systems.




     3
       In this report the Caribbean refers to the World Bank definition for this region, which includes these 15 countries:
     Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
     St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.
      4
        In this report the English Speaking Caribbean (ESC) includes 12 countries: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bar-
     bados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines
     and Trinidad and Tobago.
38
This policy note is organized as follows. The following section presents evidence on the
economic profile of the Caribbean countries to show their high integration to the world
economy. Trade and Foreign Direct Investments are the key aspects being consid-
ered in this regard. The next section discusses the role of customs systems for economic
development. It analyzes the performance of the
Caribbean customs offices in a number of aspects
                                                          Box 1: CATT’s methodology in
(clearance times, predictability, and transparency)
                                                          detail
that the literature has identified as critical to promote
competitiveness and development. This analysis               Operationally, good practices are
relies on data produced by the CATT, an integrated        incorporated into the CATT through
monitoring tool that considers the evidence pro-          the definition of 120 indicators that
vided by local teams and compares it against good         measure the gap between the cur-
practices in the field (See Box 1, used by the World      rent situation and good practices,
Bank since 2011 . The data is defined in accord-
                    5                                     scoring it from zero to 100%. Once
ance to international best practices recommended          indicators are measured, they af-
and promoted by international organizations such          fect seven intuitive dimensions (pro-
as the World Customs Organization (WCO) and the           cesses orientation, strategic think-
World Trade Organization (WTO). Thus, the CATT            ing, control, efficiency, effectiveness,
is a source of objective evidence about the perfor-       facilitation, and transparency), which
mance of the customs systems.                             are likewise measured from zero to
                                                          100%. Finally, these seven dimen-
This analysis is expanded in the following section        sions are aggregated into two high
by focusing on how the use of ICT can improve             level dimensions: performance and
customs performance in those aspects, followed by         practice. This aggregation process
a summary of the lessons learned by the analysis          enables the CATT team to present
of these data. Finally, the conclusions section pre-      assessments outcomes through a
sents some policy recommendations to deal with            bi-dimensional figure which, in ranks
the inconsistency between high economic open-             of 25 percent points, classifies cus-
ness and low customs performance in the Carib-            toms in four categories: world class
bean countries.                                           at the top, contender in the second
                                                          quarter, progress in the third quarter,
                                                          and underperforming at the bottom.


PROFILE OF THE CARIBBEAN
ECONOMIES
Trade represents 44% of the GDP of the entire Latin American & Caribbean (LAC) region, but
for the Caribbean countries this value is substantially higher. This is especially true in most ESC
economies: for Guyana, Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Barbados, St. Lucia and Trinidad and To-
bago, trade represents over 100% of GDP, and for The Bahamas, St. Vincent and the Grenadines
and Dominica, the figure is almost that high. (See Figure 1).




                                                                                                      39
     In most Caribbean countries, this strong trade activity involves mainly exports of services
     (such as tourism)6 and imports of goods. The receipts from tourism only represent 6% of the
     LAC exports, but for many ESC countries (The Bahamas, Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, Ja-
     maica, St. Lucia, Barbados) this figure exceeds 50%. And while imported goods only constitute
     19% of LAC’s GDP, this proportion is substantially higher for every Caribbean nation.

     For several ESC countries, like Guyana, Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, St. Vincent and the Gren-
     adines, St. Lucia and Barbados, the imports of goods even exceed 50% of their GDP. This fact
     underscores the importance of customs performance for their economies.




     Source: calculated using merchandise trade and trade in services data from the World Development Indicators. For
     certain countries, 2010 data was used.

     Intra-regional trade is low and concentrated on oil. All countries buy at least 60% of their imports
     from outside the region, and some of them (like Trinidad and Tobago and Belize) obtain almost
     all of their imports from outside the Caribbean. This lack of intra-regional trade is explained by
     the absence of complementarity and by the low competitiveness of their economies (CARICOM,
     2010)7. The United States is by far the main trade partner of the Caribbean, denoting the influ-
     ence of the US economic cycle on these countries’ performance.




     6
       Unlike the exports of goods (which only represent, on average, 19% of the total exports in the Caribbean countries),
     the exports of services are not registered and controlled by customs systems. However, to provide these services
     companies (like hotels) usually need to import goods, which again highlight the relevance of the customs offices for
     their economies.
     7
       The low degree of regional integration can also be influenced by the cumbersome customs procedures in these coun-
     tries, which can act as an entry barrier for smaller, regional companies.

40
The      Caribbean       economies
also rely heavily on For-
eign Direct Investments. Net
inflows of FDI represent less than
3% of the LAC’s GDP, but this figure
is higher for most Caribbean nations
(Trinidad and Tobago, Haiti, Jamaica
and Suriname are the exceptions).
For small economies, like the ones
of St. Kitts and Nevis and St. Vin-
cent and the Grenadines, FDIs ex-
ceed 15% of GDP (Chart 5 in the Ap-
pendix). Thus, we can observe how
open the Caribbean countries are
by combining the two dimensions
of trade and FDIs as proportions of
GDP (Figure 2). When compared to Source: calculated using data from the World Development Indicators.
                                                For certain countries, 2010 data was used.
the LAC region as a whole, the Car-
ibbean countries, and especially the ESC nations, depend substantially more on trade and on
foreign investment.

Their fiscal situation is also dependent on trade, due to their reliance on tariffs for the col-
lection of revenue. Although several countries have reduced their dependence on international
trade taxes in the last few years, such taxes still constitute a higher share of total revenue in the
Caribbean than in the LAC region as a whole. In The Bahamas, taxes on trade exceed 50% of
all government revenue, and this figure is approximately 25% in Belize and Grenada (Chart 6 in
the Appendix). This is partly explained by the fact that all Caribbean countries have higher mean
tariff rates than the LAC region taken as a whole, with particularly high rates in The Bahamas,
Barbados, Antigua and Barbuda, Suriname, St. Kitts and Nevis and Trinidad and Tobago (Chart
7 in the Appendix). This high reliance on trade taxes may reinforce a perception of customs of-
fices simply as revenue-collection agencies, instead of seeing them as key actors for the smooth
functioning of trade.


THE ROLE OF CUSTOMS IN ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT: SIX CARIBBEAN CASES
There are two obvious channels by which customs interventions impact the economy
directly. First, the pass-through effect of duties, taxes, and transaction costs over do-
mestic prices, which is of particular importance in terms of the cost of living in countries
where most goods are imported. And second, through revenue collection, a key feature
in countries with a narrow fiscal base. Nevertheless, the impact of customs systems on
the economy is broader since they affect the capacity of a country to attract investors,
increase competitiveness, and boost exports.

Over time, three factors have been identified as critical for customs administrations to
promote economic competitiveness and development: clearance times, predictability and
transparency (International Chamber of Commerce, 1999; OECD, 2009; Shujie and Shili, 2010).
Delays at the border and to the lack of transparency and predictability cause economic losses
that can even exceed the costs


                                                                                                        41
     of tariffs (Engman, 2009). In small and open economies that rely heavily on trade and foreign invest-
     ment, like those of the Caribbean countries, these dimensions are especially relevant for their eco-
     nomic development8.
     The first factor, clearance times, requires minimizing the burden associated with customs proce-
     dures, by simplifying the operations involved in the movement of goods across borders. The notion
     of “trade facilitation”, with its emphasis on the reduction of time-consuming and unnecessary opera-
     tions (Grainger 2011), is similar. It has been shown that delays at the borders significantly reduce
     international trade (de Jong and Bogmans, 2011). Nowadays, when not only the trade of goods but
     also their production is global (Maskin, 2010), ensuring ‘just in time” delivery of inputs, capital goods,
     and goods is especially critical to ensure efficiency and competiveness. Delays are costly to inves-
     tors, so they prefer to locate in countries with quick customs procedures. Furthermore, a country’s
     exports can also be significantly increased by a reduction in clearance times (Djankov, Freund and
     Pham 2010).

     The CATT assessments in the Caribbean10 show that the indicators related to clearance times
     are underperforming in comparison with good practices, as well as with the average for Latin
     America. In addition, their negative effect on the economy is aggravated by the fact that nearly 100
     percent of entries are subject to physical examination11.The following table presents a summary of
     the measurements of clearance times in six diverse Caribbean countries12.

     Table 1. Caribbean customs performance in clearance times13
         CATT            Country 1      Country 2       Country 3      Country 4       Country 5       Country 6             LA       Good
         indicators                                                                                                                  Practice
             % of
           imports
         released in        36%           29.43%          14.51%         75.92%            NA            0.47%          82.67%          70%
          less than
            24hs
           Average
           number                                                                                                                     Closest
                            5.55             NA            12.11           1.76            NA             3.19               2.55
          of days to                                                                                                                    to 0
            import
              % of
            imports
          processed
               in            0%            3.43%            NA            1.24%            0%              NA           13.05%          50%
           advance
           to goods
             arrival
           Average
           time for
           imports’
                          37.68%             66             NA             128             NA             40.13          27.21        8 hours
           physical
         inspections
            (hours)




     8
      In this policy note we are not considering the impact that trade can have on a country’s inequality levels (see Kremer and Maskin 2006). However, for
     countries with already open economies, poor customs performance (which increases transaction costs for imported merchandise) can disproportion-
     ately affect lower income individuals, who destine a larger share of their income to the consumption of goods.
     9
      Logistics performance is critical in a context where central banks have limited power to increase countries’ competiveness by depreciating the local
     currency.
     10
        The CATT, used by the World Bank since 2011, is an integrated monitoring tool that considers the evidence provided by local teams and compares
     it against good practices in the field (See Box 1). These are defined in accordance to international best practices recommended and promoted by
     international organizations such as the World Customs Organization (WCO) and the World Trade Organization (WTO). Thus, the CATT is a source of
     objective evidence about the performance of the customs systems.
     11
       During the CATT assessments it was shown that Customs officers often reroute entries selected for green lane (i.e. immediate release) to red lane
     without registering decisions and outcomes in the system.
     12
       The table presents a selection of the main CATT indicators related to clearance times. The same procedure was applied in Tables 2 and 3. Countries
     are not indicated due to the reserved nature of CATT data.
     13
          Names of countries are not disclosed because assessed countries did not provide their permission to disclose it.

42
     % of
   imports
  subject to
                                                                                                    Closest
  physical or     75          84          100         100         35.21       41.15    27.2114.87
                                                                                                      to 0
    docu-
   mentary
 inspections

Source: CATT. NA indicates that the data was not available.

The second factor, predictability, is also critical to improving a country’s competitiveness.
In general, institutional uncertainty has been found to significantly reduce trade by in-
creasing transaction costs (Büge 2010). In the case of customs offices, erratic or unreli-
able procedures increase costs by requiring the maintenance of large “safety stocks”
on the part of businesses. These costs are eventually transferred to the consumer, and
therefore can be regarded as a hidden tax (and without the government collecting any
revenue from it). Moreover, when businesses are uncertain about how the customs will
decide, they may even be discouraged from operating in a certain country. On the other
hand, when formal processes are followed and delivery is consistent and predictable,
costs are reduced and competitiveness is enhanced.

Caribbean customs offices are performing poorly in terms of predictability, as
shown in Table 2. In fact, almost none of the indicators associated with predictability (in
the sense that they show that traders perceive them as consistent and regular) present
positive values in any of the countries.

Table 2. Caribbean customs performance in terms of predictability

 CATT             Country 1   Country 2   Country 3   Country 4   Country 5   Country 6      LA        Good
 indicators                                                                                           Practice
 Existence of a
 single window
  mechanism            No          No        No          No          No          No          No         Yes
  for clearing
 import goods
 Implementation
 of the Author-
 ized Econom-
                       No          No        No          No          No          No          No         Yes
  ic Operators
    Program
     (WCO)
  Legal pro-
  cesses are
  handled by           No          No        No          No          No          Yes         No         Yes
  specialized
    courts

  Existence of
  a maximum
 allowable time
                       No          No        No          No          No          No          No         Yes
 for clearance
  procedures


Source: CATT.




                                                                                                                 43
     The third critical factor, transparency, is associated with the two previous ones. Traditionally, longer
     trade times are associated with higher levels of trade-related corruption because traders have
     an incentive to make side-payments to speed up procedures (Shepherd, 2010). Lack of pre-
     dictability is also tied to a higher risk of corrupt behavior, because it creates an uncertain
     context under which those practices can occur. Arbitrary decisions in the valuation or inspection
     of goods can disrupt logistical flows and increase transaction costs, leading again to the imposition
     of a hidden tax on the final value of the products. The presence of corruption also reduces the flow of
     foreign direct investments (Wei, 1997). Providing traders with clear and accessible information on the
     required documentation, for example, contributes to ensure transparency in the process.

     Caribbean customs are also underperforming in terms of transparency, as shown in Table 3. Most
     countries do not publish adequate and accessible information, and do not conduct regular surveys
     about corruption perceptions.

     Table 3. Caribbean customs performance in terms of transparency

                       Country 1   Country 2   Country 3   Country 4   Country 5   Country 6   LA     Good
                                                                                                     Practice
        Publishes
       changes in
        law, new          No          No         Yes          No          No         Yes       Yes     Yes
       regulations
      and programs
      Measures the
        corruption
      perception by
      using surveys
                          No          No          No          No          No          No       Yes     Yes
      or equivalent
         systems

      Allows users
       to view the
      status of im-
                         Yes         Yes          No          No          No         Yes       Yes     Yes
      ports/exports
      declarations
          online
        Publishes
          tariff
      classification
                          No          No          No         Yes          No         Yes       Yes     Yes
      and valuation
          rules



     Source: CATT.

     The economic literature argues that the three factors covered in this section (clearance times,
     predictability and transparency) can be improved by the adoption of technologies that make
     customs procedures shorter, more consistent and less arbitrary. The next section will analyze in
     greater detail how these six countries have been implementing ICTs in their customs systems.


     CUSTOMS PERFORMANCE
     IN THE REGION
     Beyond clearance times (i.e., facilitation), predictability (i.e., process orientation) and transpar-
     ency, the CATT measures the dimensions of strategic thinking, control, efficiency, and effective-
     ness. Since the CATT is evidence based, a proper implementation of ICT systems



44
is a core aspect to measure indicators and dimensions properly, as information coming out from ICT sys-
tems will show how customs operations perform. Nevertheless, proper implementation is not only about
the existence of information systems but rather about the effective complementarity between the use of ICT
systems and operational practices.
ICT systems are supposed to help customs offices enhance their management and development, as well
as enhance their countries’ competitiveness, by improving three critical factors: clearance times, predict-
ability, and transparency. The idea that ICT systems should help customs offices to perform more effectively
and efficiently is widely shared14. For instance, ICT systems are crucial for systematizing customs operating
procedures, and also for providing to stakeholders with more transparency concerning the enforcement of
these procedures, by making customs decisions more predictable, avoiding in-person interactions. Infor-
mation systems also support data analyses that allow customs to implement risk management systems to
strengthen control and facilitate trade. Figure 3 shows how an ICT system can support customs operations.

Figure 3: ICT system basic structure and its expected outcome on
competitiveness




Source: Author´s elaboration based on internet images.

Implementing ICT systems has become one of the few modernization aspects that seem to have a gen-
eral consensus among practitioners. Nevertheless, as this note shows, modernization of customs offices
goes beyond implementation of ICT systems. ICT systems become a powerful tool only when they are
complemented effectively with good practices and a set of economic incentives (not necessarily monetary
incentives)15.

14
   Many international organizations including the World Bank, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment (OECD), the World Customs Organization (WCO), and the World Trade Organization (WTO), as well as regional
development banks such as the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the
European Union (EU) have recommended the use of ICT systems to improve customs processes, facilitate trade and
therefore enhance countries’ competitiveness. See Lewis (2009).
15
   There are some basic necessary conditions that have to be in place before, during and after implementation of any
ICT system. First, a strong political will to implement ICT changes is crucial; second, it is necessary to identify a cham-
pion to lead the process, explain its benefits and deal with people opposed to the changes; third, customs staff needs
to be made aware of the cultural change associated with going from a culture of physical records on paper to a culture
of virtual records and electronic entries; fourth, the availability of financial resources to complete implementation of the
ICT systems and to provide staff the necessary training to facilitate its use and maintenance, must be ensured; fifth, a
legal reform has to accompany the implementation of ICT systems to provide support and sustainability to the changes;
and sixth, the implementation of the ICT systems has to be part of a broader technology plan in which a clear vision is
outlined for the different phases of its implementation and its role within the strategy plan of the institution is explained.
The analysis of these conditions is beyond the scope of this technical note.


                                                                                                                                 45
     When we examined the level of integration and sophistication of ICT systems in Caribbean countries
     through the analysis of the results of selected CATT indicators, we found that, in the six countries as-
     sessed, only one of them does not have an integrated information system working. Most of these countries
     are using one of the three versions of the ASYCUDA (Automated System for Customs Data) developed by
     UNCTAD. Table 4 presents the main features of the core Customs information systems’ implementation in
     the selected Caribbean countries.

     As table 4 shows, critical aspects for customs control and performance have not been implement-
     ed properly. The most illustrative case is the low percentage of cargo manifests that are submitted
     to the customs office electronically before the cargo arrives at the customs office even though
     most of the systems are capable of accepting cargo-manifests electronically. The lack of this good
     practice implies that it is hard to implement facilitation measures based on risk assessment. In addition,
     critical modules such as transit and warehouse (including the control of abandoned goods) have not been
     activated. This situation further weakens the ability of customs administrations to provide facilitation meas-
     ures based on effective control mechanisms.

     Why have the customs offices not activated such modules? A possible answer is the lack of a
     Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) Manual formally approved and disseminated, as well as
     other important measures and practices to ensure quality of services. SOPs constitute the back-
     bone of any Customs office. Without SOPs there is the risk of improper use of ICT due to the fact that no
     “straitjacket” exists to make the activation of the overall modules mandatory. SOPs also make customs
     decisions more transparent and predictable. The CATT evaluations found that Caribbean customs offices
     follow international standard regulations on issues such as tariff classification, valuations, rapid release
     guidelines, etc.; however, none of them were applied properly. Therefore, in some cases, the issue is not
     the procedure, which may already exist, but its implementation and enforcement. In order to tackle this is-
     sue, economic and legal incentives have to be in place to make customs officers fully accountable. Some
     examples of incentives include strengthening links between work-oriented training and career develop-
     ment; introducing monetary and non-monetary incentives; systematic and transparent rotation policies;
     HR systems with complete performance records, and regulations that allow customs management to take
     disciplinary actions.

     Table 4: CATT Results on ICT indicators

      CATT              Country 1   Country 2    Country 3      Country 4   Country 5   Country 6       LA         Good
      indicators                                                                                                  Practice
        % Border
       Offices with
      Communication        0          92.3          100            92         42.86        100         90.11        100
      services 24x7

          Level of
       integration of                 Mostly                                              Mostly       Mostly
      core customs IT     Total                     Total        Partial      None                                 Total
                                    integrated                                          integrated   integrated
          systems

      Transmit and
      receive data                               Manifest +
      electronically      None        None                         All        None         All         75%          All
                                                 declarations
        using EDI

        Access to
       institutional
      email, intranet
                          47.18        100          100            17          0          11.73        93.76        100
       and internet
         (% staff)

      % Administra-
      tive processes
       controlled by
                           25          NA           37.5          54.54        11         37.5         52.86        100
       any software



46
CATT                 Country 1   Country 2   Country 3   Country 4   Country 5   Country 6     LA       Good
indicators                                                                                             Practice
  % of cargo
   manifests
 presented to
 the Customs           100          NA         100         100          0          3.14       86.39      100
    office in
   electronic
     format
    % of cargo
    manifests
 submitted to the
  customs office
                        NA          NA          NA         18.03        0          0.44       67.22      100
 electronically in
     advance

   Operates a
 computerized
   systems for          No          No          No         Yes          No          No       25% Yes     Yes
 transit control

   Customs
   office can
   generate
   reports of
                        No          No          No         Yes          No          No       25% Yes     Yes
  all transport
  documents
  considered
  abandoned
 Average days
   goods con-
 sidered aban-
 doned remain           NA          NA          NA         1.27         NA          NA        229.3       1
  in that state
  before being
  disposed of
      Uses
    selectivity
   based on
  automated
  compliance
 measurement            No          No          No          No          No          No       50% Yes     Yes
     and
     risk-
 assessment
 and profiling
   systems
      % of
   economic
 operators with
                        NA          3.4         NA          2.1         NA          NA        52.71      100
  risk profiles
     defined

% of econom-
 ic operators
with HIGH risk                                                                                         Closest
                        NA          3.4         NA         0.074        NA          NA        10.04
    profiles                                                                                             to 0




Source: CATT

With respect to control mechanisms, the effect of ICT systems has been also limited. The
CATT evaluations show that only three of the six countries have a database containing informa-
tion of all customs declarations for the purpose of risk assessment. However, none of them sys-
tematically conduct risk assessment analysis, and none use modern customs control practices
for selectivity control and risk assessment based on risk profiling.
                                                                                                                  47
     Despite a tendency to inspect a high percentage of all declarations, the rate of detection of improp-
     erly declared goods in the inspections is very low (less than 1% for two countries and 12% for the
     outperformer country, which is still a low rate). This is clearly a signal that the inspections are not
     well targeted, and are, in fact, the most visible outcome the high discretionary power of customs
     officers. Such a high rate of inspections leads to high transition costs for the trading community.
     This is likely the response to a widely accepted overtime practice that sets out a distorting incen-
     tive structure.

     Customs overtime payments are applied all across the Caribbean. These compensations are paid by Cus-
     toms brokers on behalf of importers/exporters to a customs officer who performs physical examinations at
     the importer/exporter’s premises. Brokers will request the service by 3:00 pm and once the working hours
     are finished at 4:30 pm, the assigned inspector will carry out the inspection in the importer’s premises.
     Transport costs are covered and overtime compensation is based on an hourly rate. As the paper work
     is completed, the overall compensation amount is deposited in a specific customs account. By end of the
     month the overtime compensation is paid (by a private party) in conjunction with the due salary (paid by
     the Government) after corresponding taxes are subtracted. These additional compensations are very at-
     tractive, and are pursued by Customs officers to top up their salaries and considered part of the aggregate
     income of customs officers for all financial transactions including mortgage applications.

     Tensions between customs officials and the trading community can arise because of the lack of an effective
     feedback mechanism.17. Table 5 summarizes the situation of good practices that should complement ICT
     systems in these countries:

     Table 5: CATT results on Indicators of Good Practices

      CATT                  Country 1       Country 2      Country 3      Country 4      Country 5   Country 6   LA      Good
      indicators                                                                                                        Practice
          Procedures
                                0%              0%             0%             0%            0%          0%       100%    100%
            Manual
           Applies the
              WCO
           Harmonized          100%           100%            100%          100%           100%        100%      100%    100%
             System
           Convention

          Applies the
             WTO
           Valuation           100%           100%            100%            0%           100%        100%      100%    100%
          Agreement

       Implements
         a Single
      Administrative
                               100%             0%            100%          100%           100%        100%      75%     100%
        Document
          (SAD)

          Applies the
            WCO
          Immediate
                                0%              0%             0%           100%            0%          0%       50%     100%
           Release
          Guidelines

          Defines
          special
      procedures for
                                NA              0%            100%            0%           100%         0%       100%    100%
      express cargo
         (Courier)




     16
          Also in some cases overtime payments are used by the Port Authority as well.
     17
          This is also extensive to the internal feedback mechanism.


48
  Effective
  Feedback
 Mechanisms
  Mechanisms
   to capture
    process            0%          0%          0%          0%          0%          0%       75%     100%
feedback from
 internal users
Mechanisms to
capture process
 feedback from
                       0%          0%          0%          0%          0%          0%       75%     100%
 external users

  Conducts
  customer
 satisfaction
                       0%         100%         0%          0%          0%          0%       75%     100%
 surveys for
external trade
  operators
  Conducts
  employee
 satisfaction          0%          0%          0%          0%          0%          0%       100%    100%
   surveys
  regularly
  Procedures
 available on
 the Customs
   web page
CATT                Country 1   Country 2   Country 3   Country 4   Country 5   Country 6   LA      Good
indicators                                                                                         Practice
   % of core
   customs
  procedures
                       0           15         33.34        16          0           0         99      100
and legislation
 available on
the Web page
 Makes tariffs
and duties avail-
able on the web
                       0%         100%         0%         100%         0%          0%       100%    100%
     page
Customs has
  an on-line
   support
                       0%          0%          0%          0%          0%          0%       50%     100%
 system for
external trade
  operators
Customs has
  an on-line
statistics and
                       0%          0%         100%        100%         0%          0%       50%     100%
   reporting
  system for
external users
 Complaints
   Office
 Existence of
 a complaints
 office within         0%          0%          0%          0%          0%          0%       50%     100%
 the customs
     office




                                                                                                              49
       Complaints
       lodged per
        month by
                                                                                                          Closest
         external            NA          NA          NA          0.8         NA         2.33      14.72
                                                                                                            to 0
        operators
      per thousand
       employees
        Appeal
      Mechanisms
       % of judicial
      processes that
      were resolved
        in favor of
                             NA         84.36        NA          60          0          42.31     40.56     70
      Customs (one
           year)

      Average time
        to resolve
                             NA          5           NA         24.6         1          1.08      51.80      6
      legal process
         (months)
       % of admin-
       istrative pro-
        cesses that
                             NA         11.03        NA          0          70.58       98.61     66.17     70
      were resolved
      in favor of the
         Customs
      Average time
      to resolve an
                             NA          NA          NA          NA         68.94        39       184.6     15
      administrative
      appeal (days)


     Source: CATT.

     Finally, a critical aspect is that customs in the region cannot envision better scenarios in
     the future to ensure continual improvements. The CATT data evidenced that ICT systems
     have been implemented only for revenue purposes, as tax and duties collection is the only stra-
     tegic goal that government authorities pursue with respect to customs. Most countries lack a
     strategic plan, a long term technology plan or a modernization plan, and only half of them identify
     quantifiable performance measures. Optimizing performance, therefore, has not been a central
     priority. Table 6 shows the main results regarding strategic thinking:

     Table 6: CATT results on Strategic Thinking indicators

      CATT                Country 1   Country 2   Country 3   Country 4   Country 5   Country 6    LA      Good
      indicators                                                                                          Practice
        Customs
      office applies
        Balanced
                             NA         100%         0%          0%          0%          0%       75%      100%
      Scorecard or
       equivalent
      methodology
      Customs office
        has a docu-
      mented and ap-
      proved strategic
                            100%        100%         0%          0%          0%          0%       25%      100%
      plan for at least
          5 years

      Strategic plan
        identifies
       quantifiable
                            100%        100%        100%         0%          0%          0%       75%      100%
      performance
       measure for
         targets



50
 Customs has
 a documented
    long term               0%              0%              0%              0%             0%              0%              25%            100%
   technology
       plan
 Customs has
 a reform and/
                          100%              0%              0%              0%             0%              0%              75%            100%
 or moderniza-
 tion program
  % of workforce
  trained in their
 areas of respon-
                            NA             38.5            82.1           31.96              0             56.8            53.7            100
       sibility


Source: CATT

The CATT allows us to graph the overall performance of these six Caribbean countries compared
to a group of selected Latin American countries18. As Figure 4 shows, the Caribbean countries
are underperforming in both of the dimensions (performance and practice) into which all of the
indicators are grouped. None of the Caribbean customs reaches the “contender” category (50%
of good practices). Figure 4 summarizes our previous analysis of Customs performance in these
countries.

Figure 4: CATT results comparisons between Caribbean and Latin-American coun-
tries




Source: CATT




18
     Countries were selected to be a representative sample for Latin America regarding the size of the country (i.e. big, middle, and small).



                                                                                                                                                 51
     LESSONS LEARNED
     This report has presented evidence on a number of aspects related to the Caribbean countries’
     customs systems. This section systematizes the note’s key messages:

     The Caribbean economies are highly open, but their customs systems are not up to the
     challenge. Almost all Caribbean countries, and especially the ESC countries, rely heavily on
     trade and foreign direct investments for the functioning of their economies. However, one of the
     key channels through which both of these occur, the customs offices, performs poorly in terms of
     clearance times, predictability and transparency. The CATT data shows that elapsed times are
     long, processes are not consistently followed and required information is not easily accessible
     to the traders.

     This inconsistency affects the competitiveness and development of these countries. There
     is a large body of evidence that shows how these factors impact a country’s competitiveness.
     Long clearance times impose costs on trade and discourage foreign investment. Inconsistent
     procedures require the maintenance of large “safety stocks”, something that may not be possible
     for new entrepreneurs or for smaller companies19 . Lack of transparency, in addition to acting as
     a hidden tax, unfairly discriminates against those who play by the rules. The combination of all
     these factors increases transaction costs and greatly affects the performance of the economy,
     especially in countries (like those of the Caribbean) where trade plays such a critical role. Due
     to the large share of imported goods in local consumption, consumers’ purchasing power is also
     affected by these extra costs. Higher prices disproportionally affect lower income households
     that destine a larger share of their income to the purchase of goods.

     Customs offices may be performing additional functions, which, in a context of scarce
     resources, can distract them from performing their core functions. In some of these coun-
     tries, customs are working to facilitate the inflow of foreign investments by, for example, imple-
     menting tax and duty exemptions for investors. In a globalized context in which not only trade
     but also production is global (Kremer and Maskin, 2006), this is an important role, especially in
     the Caribbean countries, since they rely on foreign investments to develop the tourism industry.
     However, resources used for this task are diverted from the customs core function of controlling
     the flow of goods in a timely and appropriate manner. This can partly explain their low perfor-
     mance in the areas previously discussed.

     The main strategic function that customs offices appear to be doing well was that of col-
     lecting tax and duties, while important functions such as policy advisor, trade facilitator
     and security provider appear to be neglected. Although the role of Customs as revenue col-
     lectors contributes to fiscal stability, focusing solely on revenue collection has distorted other core
     Customs functions (Shujie and Shili, 2010). Customs offices in the region cannot effectively fulfill
     their role as policy advisors, since they cannot support policy decisions by providing accurate
     and on-time trade statistics; as policy implementers, they lack standard operating procedures to
     make their decisions predictable; as trade facilitators, they lack effective facilitation measures;
     and as security providers, they lack risk management systems based on electronic submission
     of cargo information in advance and risk profiling of authorized operators.



     19
       In this sense, poor customs performance can act as an entry barrier to new competitors, reinforcing the region’s lack of economic diversification and
     dependence on a few industries.


52
          The main strategic function of trade facilitator is affected by the practice of overtime. Since
          this practice creates an incentive structure that links physical inspections with salaries top-ups,
          customs managers might find it difficult to break the indicated link and implement effective trade
          facilitation measures. An effective solution may be beyond the customs sphere due to the salary
          implications of such a solution, especially in a tight fiscal situation, which these days is common
          in the Caribbean. Nevertheless, countries need to think about ways to address the issues created
          by this practice. Promoting a broad policy dialogue about it might be a good starting point.

          Modernization efforts are should not be limited exclusively to ICT implementation. Most of
          the Caribbean countries have been implementing ICT systems, or are in the process of upgrad-
          ing previous versions or seeking new integrated solutions. However, the CATT data show that, to
          develop a world-class customs office, government authorities need to pay attention to the adop-
          tion of good practices in several key dimensions that complement the use of ICT systems. ICT
          adoption is a requisite for a modern customs, but these systems need to be supplemented by
          improvements in other aspects too. In particular, the absence of strategic thinking (in the form of
          plans, modernization programs or even quantifiable indicators of performance) hurts their ability
          to make most of the technological tools being adopted.




            CONCLUSIONS
Caribbean countries can apply a num-
ber of the lessons provided in this
study to improve the performance of
their customs systems in all their core
roles (policy advisor, policy imple-
menter, trade facilitator and security
provider). Implementing these chang-
es, which are all feasible and realistic,
would boost the competitiveness of the
Caribbean economies and solve many
of the problems detected in this report.
These recommendations can be divid-
ed into two groups: (a) policy changes
and (b) institutional reforms.

                                                                                                                53
     The main policy changes that these countries could adopt include:

     • Reduce the dependence on tariffs for the government’s total revenue. The high reliance of
     Caribbean countries on trade taxes reinforces the idea that customs offices are just revenue-col-
     lection agencies. Thus, their officials have incentives to concentrate on raising revenue, instead
     of focusing on their key role in trade facilitation. A reduction in tariffs (compensated for example
     by greater emphasis on internal consumption taxes) would also reduce the incentives to smug-
     gle goods or to bribe customs officials. This increase in transparency would lower the transaction
     costs involved in trade, benefiting the Caribbean producers and consumers.

     • Clarify the role of the customs offices. Customs offices in the Caribbean usually deal with
     issues that should be the responsibility of the tax collecting agency. For example, they have
     to implement the numerous tax exemptions designed to attract foreign investment. But these
     added responsibilities divert resources from their core functions and hurting their performance.
     Relocating these tax enforcement responsibilities to the appropriate government agencies would
     allow the customs offices to focus on their essential mission.

     • Promote regional agreements to consolidate customs processes. The Caribbean is com-
     posed of multiple islands, most of them with small populations. Establishing a common entry port
     (a hub) and controlling the transits to the different islands would contribute to trade efficiency, re-
     duce costs and decrease clearance times. Although this cannot be an immediate goal, advanc-
     ing with regional agreements to consolidate and streamline trade processes would be a positive
     first step in this direction.

     • Establish alliances with the private sector. Private companies should be key partners in the
     smooth and predictable operation of customs procedures. Their collaboration is needed to warn
     of problems that need to be solved, and they have a strong interest in seeing a reduction in the
     high transaction costs associated with customs systems. It is important to build mutual trust and
     cooperation in this relationship. Working together, clearance times, predictability, transparency
     and therefore competitiveness can likely be improved.

     In addition to these policy changes, we can identify a number of institutional reforms that would
     contribute to enhance the performance of these customs systems in all their core roles:

     • Above all customs offices in the Caribbean region could prioritize the completion, im-
     plementation and dissemination of SOPs. Without SOPs it is hard to conceive these public
     offices either as modern or traditional. Within the public sector no entity needs to operate through
     the definition and implementation of basic rules of the game as much as customs offices must.
     Trade transitions are complex and in some cases they imply risks for national security, sanitary
     status, revenue, health and other related aspects. This is why they need to be regulated. At the
     same time, the regulatory system should be simple and transparent to improve the flow of trade.

     • Promote continual improvements by strengthening strategic thinking. Performance can-
     not be improved in a sustainable way if customs authorities focus only on day-to-day operations.
     CATT indicators show that the Caribbean customs are lagging behind in terms of defining strate-
     gic goals for their agencies beyond revenue collection. Setting strategic objectives and defining
     the best ways to achieve them are critical for consolidating a culture of permanent improvement
     and reform.




54
Moreover, establishing measurable indicators for these goals would create incentives to meet ad-
equate standards of timely and predictable processes. One critical aspect limiting strategic think-
ing is the lack of training on core technical themes such as classification, valuation, procedures,
and rules of origin. The CATT shows that most of the Customs officers were not trained on those
themes in the last 10-15 years.

• Ensure that ICT information is available to the decision-makers. To serve as a proper policy
advisor, customs need to be able to provide timely and accurate data to policymakers. The cur-
rent situation, in which only the IT staff is able to access these data, limits the use of customs
data in the decision-making process, and in achieving accountability and transparency. Moreover,
ensuring broader access to this information would foster a more evidence-based approach to
policymaking and would allow the implementation of better and more accurate customs controls.

• Establish the procedures and the incentives to fully appropriate the potential of ICT sys-
tems. ICT systems can support the customs offices in their role as policy implementers only if
complemented by other measures. Among them we have mentioned: (i) ensure that ICT systems
are part of a bigger strategy by conceptualizing ICT systems as a useful tool to support customs
modernization rather than as the final goal; (ii) completion and dissemination of SOPs; (ii) on-
going training to address the cultural change and to avoid natural reluctance to use the new
systems; (iii) legal reforms to accompany, simplify, and validate new processes and procedures
introduced by ICT systems; (iv) procure resources to complete the implementation of systems,
provide maintenance and monitor future developments; and (v) promote an organizational culture
based on permanent feedback.

• Introduce productivity incentives to promote better performance. The CATT can serve as
a useful tool to collect objective evidence about how different sections within a customs office are
performing. With these data, and with the establishment of clear goals, it should be possible to
set up incentives that foster the achievement of measurable results. For example, making training
courses more relevant to work activities, measuring the knowledge internalized by staff on those
courses and linking training with promotions could provide the right incentives to promote the use
of ICT systems. Sections that meet established standards in terms of predictability or clearance
times should be rewarded accordingly. To provide the flexibility needed to achieve these goals,
granting greater autonomy to the customs offices should also be considered. Along with greater
autonomy, customs offices could be better positioned to overcome sensitive issues such as the
practice of overtime.




                                                                                                       55
     REFERENCES
     Büge, M. (2010). Institutions, uncertainty & the intensive margin of trade. Presented at the
     Workshop on the Politics of Preferential Trade Agreements: Theory, Measurement, and
     Empirical Applications, Princeton University.

     CARICOM, Caribbean Community. (2010). Caribbean Trade & Investment Report. Strate-
     gies for Renewal, Recovery and Reform. Kingston: Ian Rand Publishers.

     Djankov, S., Freund, C., & Pham, C.S. (2010). Trading on time, The Review of Economics
     and Statistics, 92, 166-173.

     De Jong, E. & Bogmans, C. (2011). Does corruption discourage international trade? Euro-
     pean Journal of Political Economy, 27, 385-398.

     Engman, M. (2009). The Economic Impact of Trade Facilitation”, in OECD, Overcoming
     Border Bottlenecks: The Costs and Benefits of Trade Facilitation, OECD Publishing. 81-112.

     Grainger, A. (2011). Trade facilitation: a conceptual review, Journal of World Trade, 45, 39-
     62.

     International Chamber of Commerce. (1999). Trade liberalization, foreign direct investment
     and customs modernization: a virtuous circle, Document N° 103-32/77. Paris.

     Kremer, M. & Maskin, E. (2006). Globalization and inequality, Working Paper 2008-0087,
     Weatherhead Center for International Affairs, Harvard University.

     Lewis, G. (2009). The impact of ICT on customs. World Customs Journal, 3, 3-11.

     Maskin, E. S. (2010). Why global markets have failed to reduce inequality. Paper presented
     at the University of the Thai Chamber of Commerce XVIII Lecture Series, Bangkok.

     Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2009). Overcoming border bot-
     tlenecks. The costs and benefits of trade facilitation. OECD Trade Policy Studies, Paris.

     Shepherd, B. (2010). Speed money: Time, corruption and trade. Available at: http://www.
     developing-trade.com/publications. Consulted on 04/21/2013.

     Shujie, Z. & Shilu Z. (2010). The implication of customs modernization on export competi-
     tiveness in China, in United Nations Trade and Investment Division Impact of Trade Facilita-
     tion on Export Competitiveness: a Regional Perspective. Studies in Trade and Investment
     66, Bangkok.

     Wei, S.J. (1997). How taxing is corruption on international investors? NBER Working Paper
     6030, Cambridge.

     World Bank & the Organization of American States (2009). Caribbean: Accelerating trade
     integration. Policy options for sustained growth, job creation and poverty reduction. Wash-
     ington, DC.


56
57
4    CUSTOMIZED
     ICT SOLUTIONS
     FOR CARIBBEAN

     GROWTH




58
                                    59
Doyle Gallegos, Pau Puig Gabarro*
     ABSTRACT
                        Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs) are important to a number of sectors, as well
                        as for economic growth and employment. In the last 10 years, high-speed communication networks
                        and the innovative applications they carry have enabled a fundamental restructuring and innovation
                        of the Caribbean economy. This note looks at the level of ICT development of countries in the region,
                        and argues that the diversity of the Caribbean region is reflected in the great diversity in degree of ICT
                        development across countries, and that customized approaches to reduce intra-regional disparities in
                        ICT sector development are needed. Renewed partnerships between the private and public sectors
                        can catalyze the necessary investment and innovation. Governments will play a role in creating the
                        right enabling environment, policies, strategies and objectives, and, in the most challenging cases,
                        they may need to lead.

     *Lead ICT Policy Specialist and ICT Regional Coordinator for the Latin America and Caribbean Region at the World
     Bank, and World Bank TWICT Unit, respectively.




     INTRODUCTION
     Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) can be key enablers across many
     sectors and services (e.g. water, energy, education, health) as well as drivers of economic
     growth and employment. They enhance the effectiveness, efficiency, and transparency of other
     sectors; and offer new tools to reduce poverty. A growing body of evidence emphasizes the eco-
     nomic impact of investments in telecommunications and, more specifically, broadband services.20
     Even more important for the overall economy have been the strong long-run effects of ICT appli-
     cations on productive activities in other sectors. In the last 10 years, high-speed communication
     networks and the innovative applications they carry have enabled a fundamental restructuring
     and innovation of the Caribbean economy. For example, governments are becoming more ef-
     ficient and transparent by offering information and services online (Qiang & Wellenius, 2010).

     This note looks at the level of ICT development of countries in the region, as determined by key
     ICT indicators such as Access, Use and Skills Indices, as well as cellular and broadband pen-
     etration rates. The note then argues that the diversity of the Caribbean region is reflected in the
     great diversity in degree of ICT development across countries, and that customized approaches
     to reduce intra-regional disparities in ICT sector development are needed. A customized ap-
     proach, encompassing an appropriate national broadband strategy, policy and regulatory
     actions, and implementation plan, should be developed according to each country’s level
     of ICT development, specific challenges, and sector development goals and objectives.




     20
       A recent study encompassing several developing countries showed that a 10 percent increase in the number of telephones per 100 inhabitants was
     associated with an increase of 0.6 percentage points in annual GDP growth, and that a 10 percentage-point increase in broadband penetration was
     associated with 1.4 percentage points of additional annual GDP growth (Qiang & Rossotto, 2009).



60
A VERY DIVERSE REGION
The CARIFORUM region is one of the most diverse in the world in terms of economic per-
formance and demography. While economic growth for the region averaged about 2.7% a year
over the last decade (2002-11), outliers include countries such as Bahamas, Barbados and Haiti
with less than one percent annual growth rate, and the Dominican Republic, Trinidad and Tobago,
and Suriname with about 5.5 % annual growth. The size of the economy also varies widely. In
2011, GDP totaled US$55 billion in Dominican Republic, compared to US$0.48 billion in Domi-
nica, with four countries accounting for about 80% of the regional GDP, and the remaining eleven
countries accounting for only 20%. Annual per capita income ranges from a high of US$21,970
in the Bahamas to US$700 in Haiti. Disparity among the CARIFORUM countries is also reflected
in the population distribution, with two countries (Dominican Republic and Haiti) accounting for
approximately 75% of the population (20 million people).



ICT DEVELOPMENT IN THE CARIBBEAN
This diversity is also very much apparent in the different degree of ICT development across CAR-
IFORUM countries, as can be seen by a comparison of key ICT indicators as described below.
This diversity implies the need for customized approaches to reduce intra-regional disparities in
ICT sector development.

The ICT Development Index (IDI) provides a useful snapshot of the level of ICT development
across the region. The IDI is a composite index developed by the International Telecommunica-
tions Union (ITU) combining 11 indicators into a benchmark index, and three sub-indices (See
Box 1).


     Box 1: ICT Development Index
     The 11 indicators that compose the IDI can be grouped into an Access Index, a Use
     Index, and a Skills Index. The Access Index captures ICT readiness, and includes
     five infrastructure and access indicators (fixed telephony, mobile telephony, interna-
     tional Internet bandwidth, households with computers, and households with Internet).
     Together, these indicators measure the basic level of access and infrastructure de-
     velopment within the country. The Skills Index captures the set of ICT capacity and
     skills that are considered indispensable inputs for ICT uptake, and includes three proxy
     indicators (adult literacy, gross secondary enrollment, and gross tertiary enrollment).
     Together, these indicators reflect the country’s human capacity and ability to absorb
     and take advantage of ICT. The Use Index captures ICT intensity, and includes three
     ICT and usage indicators (Internet users, fixed broadband, and mobile broadband).
     Together, these indicators reflect ICT uptake and use, as well as intensity of use.


21
  CARIFORUM comprises the 15 Caribbean countries of CARICOM (i.e., Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada,
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago) and the Dominican
Republic. However, figures throughout this paper do not include Montserrat since it is a British overseas territory.
22
  Regional GDP grew only by 2.64 percent in 2008 as a result of the global financial crisis, contracting by 2.6 percent and by 0.26 percent in 2009 and
2010, respectively.
23
   Dominican Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica and the Bahamas account for 45 percent, 18 percent, 12.5 percent and 6.5 percent, respectively,
of regional GDP.


                                                                                                                                                          61
     Table 1 presents all four indices of the IDI for selected Caribbean countries. Across all indices,
     the same countries are top performers: Antigua and Barbuda, Saint Vincent and the Gren-
     adines, Trinidad and Tobago, and St Lucia. The one exception is the ranking of the Skills
     Index where Jamaica is more highly ranked than in its other indices. This clustering of the
     same countries across all indices is all the more interesting considering that the top positions are
     dominated by the smaller island countries (less than 200k in population) and in particular those
     with higher population densities (more than 200 people per square kilometer).

     Table 1: ICT Development Index 2011

                                      2010(*), 2011 Indexes by country
         Country                IDI Index        Access Index     Use Index                     Skills Index
       Antigua and                5. 75              6.99            3.76                           7.17
         Barbuda
       Saint Vincent               4.74                  6.09                  2.15                  7.23
          and the
        Grenadines
       Trinidad and                4.57                  5.59                  2.52                  6.67
          Tobago
         St. Lucia                 4.49                  5.72                  2.07                  6.87
        Suriname*                  3.52                  4.54                  1.22                  6.08
         Jamaica                   3.49                  3.96                  1.31                  6.93
        Dominican                  3.34                  3.37                  1.66                  6.62
         Republic

     Data not available for the Bahamas, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Guyana, and St. Kitts and Nevis. Data for Suri-
     name is 2010
     Source: Measuring the Information Society 2012, ITU

     It is therefore not surprising to see that the same cluster of high ranked countries also
     performs particularly well in the level of mobile subscription penetration, with a penetration
     level (measured as a percentage of inhabitants) of greater than 120% as demonstrated in Figure
     1. Suriname, Dominica, and St. Kitts and Nevis show a similarly high level of mobile penetration.
     The advantage conferred by such high levels of penetration should be weighed against the fact
     that prices of mobile services remain relatively high and that people often own multiple phones
     from different service providers in order to take advantage of specific rates and offers, thus “inflat-
     ing” the number of actual mobile users.

     Figure 1 - Mobile-cellular Subscriptions per 100 Inhabitants in 2010(*), 2011




     Source: DataBank, World Bank, 2013

62
Figure 2: Fixed Broadband Subscriptions per 100 Inhabitants in 2010(*), 2011




Source: DataBank, World Bank, 2013

Notwithstanding the high prices and the “inflated” penetration rates mentioned above, the region
has developed its mobile services platform and coverage footprint very well. This development
has been driven primarily by pro-competition policies and regulatory practices (e.g. licensing and
spectrum management). This bodes particularly well for the region as mobile platforms that
place a phone or smart device in almost every citizen’s hand are fast becoming the single largest
delivery system of services (e.g. banking, health, education, m-government, 24 etc.) as well as a
preferred mode for citizen engagement, with particular benefits for the poor and disabled.

However, if the region is going to be effective in accelerating growth and competitiveness,
it must take a further step forward, and focus on enabling the use of broadband services
across every income level and part of the country. Herein lays the major challenge for the
region, since broadband markets in the region are very much underdeveloped. Figure 2 presents
the penetration level of fixed broadband services in selected Caribbean countries. Two clusters
and one outlier are visible. Specifically, half the countries are below the 7% mark while the other
half are above (12-14%), with St. Kitts Nevis surpassing all others by far (28%). According to the
ITU, the average penetration levels for the World, Developed, and Developing countries in 2011
were 8.5%, 25%, and 4.9%, respectively.

Figure 3: Mobile-broadband
Market Penetration in 2012

                                                         The hope and expectation of many policy makers is that much
                                                         of this lag and digital divide can be quickly overcome with
                                                         new broadband wireless technologies (both, fixed – WIFI,
                                                         and mobile – 3G and 4G). As demonstrated in Figure 3, the
                                                         region still has a long way to go as far as mobile broadband
                                                         coverage is concerned, with only Belize and Jamaica show-
                                                         ing levels of penetration greater than 17%, the Dominican
                                                         Republic and Bahamas at 6%, and all others at less than 1%.
                                                         According to the ITU, the average penetration levels for the
                                                         World, Developed, and Developing countries in 2011 were
                                                         15.7%, 51.3%, and 8%, respectively.




24
     E-government services that are made available using mobile devices such as mobile phones, PADs, etc.,


                                                                                                                        63
     Globally, low broadband penetration rates are caused by a number of factors, including lack of
     infrastructure, weak or minimal competition, and high level of prices for services and devices. In
     the Caribbean region, low penetration is also due to these factors but more specifically because
     the liberalization agenda remains to be fully implemented. Monopolies or partially competitive
     ICT sub-sectors continue to exist in countries such as Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, and Trini-
     dad and Tobago (World Bank ‘ICT-at a glance’ database, 2010).

     While the region is served by several fiber optic submarine cables and in many places
     overcapacity exists, there is no effective competition in the provision of international ser-
     vices. In most countries, the former monopoly providers still retain effective control of interna-
     tional facilities and many of the cables are not subject to open access regulatory regimes. Similar
     challenges exist at the national transmission level where there are few competitors. As a result,
     prices are relatively high, and access is limited, resulting in slow growth of broadband services
     and uptake.

     Such important gaps in ICT infrastructure, as well as high prices in the region, hamper
     the region’s ability compete in the global economy. The lack of affordable and reliable ICT
     infrastructure and services limits the ability of the countries of the Caribbean to improve
     their competitiveness, productivity and diversify their economies through knowledge-
     and information-based services.



     CUSTOMIZED APPROACH TO
     ICT DEVELOPMENT
     Given the large disparity in ICT development across Caribbean countries, there is no single
     solution, or “cookie cutter approach” to address the region’s weaknesses and threats. Rather, a
     customized approach, encompassing an appropriate national broadband strategy, policy
     and regulatory actions, and implementation plan should be developed for each country
     according to its level of ICT development, specific challenges, and sector development
     goals and objectives.

     In some countries, an emphasis on updating the legal, policy and regulatory environment (e.g.
     implementation of pro-competition policies and regulations) may be all that is needed. In others
     the emphasis may need to be on greater access (i.e. supply) at lower costs and higher quality, on
     stimulating demand (e.g. e-government services, ICT skills training and applications and content
     development), or a combination of all the above.

     However, a customized approach does not preclude the need to consider the regional context or
     to integrate individual country approaches into a regional strategy. On the contrary, the potential
     spillover effects of ICT make it a critical sector for stimulating growth, competitiveness, and di-
     versification throughout the region. Another argument in favor of a regional strategy is that fact
     that the region’s prosperity depends on how well it is integrated into the global economy. ICTs,
     particularly high-speed Internet, are playing an increasingly central role in this integration, by
     enhancing trade, facilitating cross-border payments, and increasing investment – all key compo-
     nents of economic growth/diversification and poverty reduction. ICT investments in one country
     can generate positive externalities for other countries and for the region as a whole. Further co-
     ordination of national strategies, policies and initiatives can only strengthen outcomes.


64
Over the past ten years, policy makers have focused on introducing competition, transforming
incumbent operators, revamping policy and regulatory frameworks, building regulatory capacity,
and – when required – making catalytic investments in infrastructure in the form of Public Private
Partnerships (PPPs). Development of the sector has required not only that countries accelerate
their efforts to address the fundamentals (i.e. supply) but also that they begin initiatives to ad-
dress uptake and use of ICTs for jobs growth, business development and innovation (see Box 2).




  Box 2 The Caribbean Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (CAR-
  CIP)
  CARCIP, a program developed by the World Bank provides targeted tools to help Carib-
  bean countries benefit from the developmental and transformational potential of ICT. First,
  CARCIP provides financing and technical assistance for the CARIFORUM region to bridge
  the remaining gaps in regional and domestic broadband communications infrastructure, in-
  cluding submarine cable infrastructure and landing stations, domestic backbone networks
  and cross-border links and national and regional internet exchange points (IXPs). Second,
  CARCIP aims at creating an enabling environment that leverages this regional and domestic
  infrastructure to foster employment and economic growth. This includes support for the de-
  velopment of policies and regulatory frameworks to further increase market competition, as
  well as for developing innovative regional IT and IT Enabled Services (ITES) industries, and
  applications by the private sector and, e-government and m-government services. Specific
  skill development programs target women and youth to improve employability and bridge
  the gender gap in access to, and use of ICT. Finally, CARCIP encourages institutional devel-
  opment and capacity building to enhance the effectiveness of the regional institutional ICT
  framework.
  The program ultimately seeks to use communication infrastructure policies to contribute to
  the higher strategic objectives of regional and global integration, green growth and the com-
  petitiveness of the Caribbean region. CARCIP is expected to contribute to the CARIFORUM
  regional integration by fostering economic growth, generating employment, supporting pov-
  erty reduction plans, enabling rural integration, and enhancing the regional and domestic
  competitiveness of each of the member countries.
  CARCIP Phase 1 was approved by the WB Board on May 22, 2012 with Grenada ($10m
  IDA), St. Lucia ($6m IDA) and St. Vincent and the Grenadines ($6m IDA) as participating
  countries. The CARCIP program is also supported by three regional institutions (via a US$ 3
  million regional grant), including the Caribbean Telecommunications Union (CTU), the Carib-
  bean Knowledge and Learning Network (CKLN) and the Eastern Caribbean Telecommunica-
  tions Authority (ECTEL).




                                                                                                      65
     CON
     CLUSIONS
        The Caribbean has significant opportunities to benefit
        from regional efforts to use information and communi-
        cations technologies (ICTs) to facilitate and jumpstart
        policies and initiatives across all sectors and services.
        Yet, while the region has seen an overall expansion of mo-
        bile cellular use, variations in the prevalence and use of
        ICTs across countries remain. These variations are due to
        differences in income levels, location, and human capi-
        tal. Addressing the disparities in ICT sector development
        across countries in the Caribbean will more effectively sup-
        port the expansion of ICTs in the region.

        Policy makers can make more effective use of ICTs to
        accelerate and solidify their economic and job growth
        objectives across all sectors and services. But in order
        to benefit from all that ICTs can offer, they must first as-
        sess their own ICT policies, strategies and objectives.
        While the mobile services segment has advanced signifi-
        cantly, bottlenecks and challenges exist in the supply and
        demand of high-quality low-cost broadband services.

        There is no single best practice or solution, but poli-
        cymakers can use available examples to guide them in
        designing policies and strategies that address specific
        market dynamics and thus reach the goals and objec-
        tives of all stakeholders. Taking into consideration the
        specific development level of the sector and government’s
        goals and objectives, customized solutions must be de-
        signed and implemented. Renewed partnerships between
        the private and public sectors can catalyze the necessary
        investment and innovation. Governments will play a role
        in creating the right enabling environment, policies, strate-
        gies and objectives, and, in the most challenging cases,
66      they may need to lead.
REFERENCES
ITU (2013). World Telecommunication / ICT Indicators database. Retrieved from:
http://www.itu.int/pub/D-IND-WTID.OL/en

ITU. (2012). Measuring the Information Society 2012. Retrieved from:
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/publications/mis2012/MIS2012_without_An-
nex_4.pdf

Qiang, C. Z., & Wellenius, B. (n/a). Five Decades of IDA in the Information and Communication.
Sector Background Paper. Unpublished.

Qiang, C. Z., & Rossotto, C. (2009). Economic Impacts of Broadband, Retrieved from: http://sit-
eresources.worldbank.org/EXTIC4D/Resources/IC4D_Broadband_35_50.pdf

GSMA. (2013). GSMA Intelligence. Retrieved from www.gsmaintelligence.com

World Bank. (2013). World DataBank. Retrieved from: http://databank.worldbank.org

World Bank. (2010). ICT at a glance. World Bank: Washington DC. Retrieved from: http://
go.worldbank.org/VWG3857NY0

World Bank. (2012). CARCIP Project Appraisal Document, First Phase (APL 1A). Unpublished.

World Bank TWICT Unit. (2013). ICT Sector Policy Notes for Dominican Republic, Surinam and
Jamaica. Washington DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                  67
     RESILIENT COASTAL



5
     CITIES: THE ECONOMIC,
     SOCIAL AND
     ENVIRONMENTAL
     DIMENSIONS OF RISK




68
Javier Sanchez-Reaza, André Carletto*
                                        69
     ABSTRACT
                   The Caribbean countries, and particularly its cities, are extremely vulnerable to severe weather
                   events, and this situation will worsen with climate change. Weather-related disasters have increas-
                   ingly important economic and social effects. This policy note calls for cities in the region to become
                   more resilient, and presents some of the salient features of a resilient city. It discusses some of the
                   actions that countries have taken to mitigate their contributions to such disasters, and to adapt. It
                   argues that a resilient city is run by an inclusive, competent and accountable local government that
                   is concerned about sustainable urbanization and that commits the necessary resources to develop
                   capacities to manage and organize itself before, during and after a natural hazard event. It concludes
                   that, although recent improvements in disaster risk management in the Eastern Caribbean are en-
                   couraging, these countries still lack the required capacity to assess the full financial implications of the
                   disasters to which they are likely to be exposed.


     *Senior Urban Specialist (LCSDU), Sustainable Development Department, The World Bank, and Consultant (LCS-
     DU), Disaster Risk Management, Sustainable Development Department, The World Bank, respectively.




     INTRODUCTION
     Any long-run and sustainable growth strategy for the Caribbean cannot afford to neglect
     the region’s vulnerability and the economic, social and environmental dimensions of risk.
     The frequency and severity of extreme weather events will continue to be exacerbated by cli-
     mate change. Coastal cities, where most of the world’s population lives, are particularly at risk.
     Since the Caribbean is among the world’s most exposed regions, its coastal cities are constantly
     confronted by risk and disasters. Such risks have not only an environmental dimension, but
     through the way environmental disasters disrupt economic activity and through the propensity
     of lower-income people to locate in risk-prone areas, the social and economic dimensions of
     risk are particularly important; so much so, that GDP losses are as large as 9% annually in
     some countries (e.g. Grenada) and social consequences can be devastating (e.g. Haiti). This
     policy note calls for cities in the region to become more resilient, and presents some of
     the salient features of a resilient city. It also gives some concrete examples of how some
     countries have implemented risk mitigation actions, as well as how some others have
     also taken steps to adapt to climate change. The note argues that an integrated approach
     to resiliency is required and that it is only possible in as much as community-level actors
     are involved and engaged.


     COASTAL CITIES ARE AT RISK
     Natural geographic advantages have historically attracted human settlements to rivers and
     coasts. Almost one-quarter of the world’s population lives within 100 km of the coast and less
     than 100 m above sea level (Small and Nicholls, 2003). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
     Change (IPCC) argues that 60% of the world’s largest metro-regions (with over 5 million peo-
     ple) are located within 100 km of the coast, including 12 of the world’s 16 cities with populations
     greater than 10 million. The attraction to the coast is so strong that people are willing to give up
     living space to be near the coast. As a result, population densities in coastal regions are about
     three times higher than the global average.



70
However, these cities are particularly at risk of natural hazards. It has been argued that
around 360 million urban residents live in coastal areas that are particularly exposed, as they are
10 meters or less above the sea level (Moser and Satterthwaite 2008). This number is growing
rapidly. Lall and Deichmann (2009) have estimated that given demographic dynamics, population
exposed to cyclones will more than double by 2050 to nearly 700 million people. 25

Such an increase in exposure to risk can partly be explained by the rapid urbanization of coastal
cities that accelerated dramatically during the 20th century and can arguably be associated with:

I) Saltwater intrusion into surface and ground waters, which has been exacerbated due to
both the enlargement of natural coastal inlets and the dredging of waterways for navigation, port
facilities, and pipelines;
II) Increasing shoreline retreat and risk of flooding of coastal cities due to the degradation of
coastal ecosystems by human activity, as has been documented in the cases of Thailand (Du-
rongdej, 2001; Saito, 2001), India (Mohanti, 2000), Vietnam (Thanh et al., 2004) and the United
States (Scavia et al., 2002).




FACTORING IN CLIMATE CHANGE
Coastal cities need to quickly prepare for climate change consequences, which further in-
crease their vulnerability to extreme weather events. Over the next 100 years, sea levels will
rise by up to 59 centimeters (IPCC, 2007). Peak sea levels, which are most relevant for coastal
planning –as they characterize storm surges— may be rising even faster. These estimates are
relevant because sea level rise will result in significant land erosion. For example, a low-IPCC
scenario such as a 1 ft (30 cm) sea-level rise in the US would erode up to 30 meters of shoreline
in New Jersey and up to 120 meters in California (OECD, 2008; Ruth and Rong, 2006). With
such sea-level increases and land erosion, flood protection systems could come under strain.
Furthermore, the number of natural disasters that have been reported worldwide has increased
dramatically from only a few dozen at the beginning of the 20th century to hundreds of them, par-
ticularly after the 1980s (Figure 1). Coastal cities are now increasingly vulnerable to sea level rise
and have already experienced more severe and frequent windstorms. The case of New Orleans
is an important early warning of what would be needed to protect population and assets at risk
in coastal areas. In Europe, 70% of the largest cities have areas that are particularly vulnerable
to rising sea levels. Moreover, most of these cities can be found in areas that are less than 10
meters above the sea level. Based on the estimates of McGranahan, Balk and Anderson (2007),
using average annual population growth in vulnerable areas, China alone already has more than
93 million people living in low-elevation areas. If such estimates prove correct, as many as 280
million people will be living in vulnerable areas by 2050. That is larger than the entire US popula-
tion in 2000 or around seven times the entire Caribbean region.




25
     Lall and Deichmann (2009) also warn of an increase in population at risk of an earthquake: from 370 million people in 2000 to 870 million in 2050.




                                                                                                                                                          71
     Figure 1: Natural Disasters Reported 1900-2011




     	  
     There are definite costs for the environment when extreme weather events take place, but the
     economic and social consequences of such events are particularly important in cities. Many
     coastal cities in the developing world are at risk due to climate change, extreme weather events
     and the lack of proper planning. In particular, planning can help increase resiliency to such events
     by enabling cities to adapt their responses on the basis of experience in disaster risk reduction.



     ECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     Natural geographic advantages have historically attracted human settlements to rivers and
     coasts. Almost one-quarter of the world’s population lives within 100 km of the coast and less
     than 100 m above sea level (Small and Nicholls, 2003). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
     Change (IPCC) argues that 60% of the world’s largest metro-regions (with over 5 million peo-
     ple) are located within 100 km of the coast, including 12 of the world’s 16 cities with populations
     greater than 10 million. The attraction to the coast is so strong that people are willing to give up
     living space to be near the coast. As a result, population densities in coastal regions are about
     three times higher than the global average.




72
Throughout the last century, mankind has been effective at developing the tools to limit
the number of casualties resulting from natural disasters, but has been less successful at
curbing their economic impact. In addition to human losses and asset damages that result in
loss of output, natural hazards also have an indirect economic impact by disturbing the produc-
tive system: damages to the assets, infrastructure and linkages that firms need to operate. In
2011, the world experienced damages in the order of US$350 billion compared to the few dozen
billion US dollars annual damages incurred in the 1970s. In fact, every few years since the Kobe
earthquake in 1995, a single catastrophic event will take place that will multiply the amount of
economic damages. Yet, all these estimations fall short of the actual economic impact, since they
do not include the indirect consequences of these events.

From an economic standpoint, floods are one of the most costly and damaging disasters,
and will pose a critical problem to policy makers as they increase in frequency and sever-
ity. The frequency and severity of flooding has generally increased in the last decade compared
to the pre-1980 period. In addition to being more frequent, they have also become more severe.
Floods with discharges exceeding 100-year levels are much more frequent (OECD, 2008; Kron
& Berz, 2007). Severe precipitation events are predicted to cause a greater incidence of flash
flooding than in the past, particularly in urban settings (IPCC, 2007). In addition to the obvious
structural damages and loss of life that they can cause, floods can short-circuit transformers and
disrupt energy transmission and distribution, paralyze transportation, compromise clean water
supplies and treatment facilities, and accelerate spread of water-borne pathogens (OECD, 2008;
Ruth & Rong, 2006; IPCC, 2001). With severe levels of precipitation, existing water treatment in-
frastructure needs to be evaluated, along with water transport systems. Systems that are able to
cope with excess precipitation or an influx of seawater need to be designed. The City of London
Corporation, for example, has identified “hot spots” vulnerable to flooding, where it plans to install
new sustainable drainage system and invest in maintenance to accommodate the expected rise
in the volume of precipitation (OECD, 2008). In Sub-Saharan Africa, adapting new and existing
infrastructure for urban wastewater treatment systems has been estimated to cost between 2 and
5 billion dollars per year. In Toronto, similar improvements were valued at around USD 9 billion
annually (OECD, 2008).

In the absence of adaptive infrastructure changes, socio-economic models of future flood dam-
age in cities (e.g. Boston or London) predict the need for vast increases in spending in response
to climate-change related damages (OECD, 2008; Kirshen, Ruth & Anderson, 2005; Hall, Motz-
kin, Foster, Syfert, & Burk 2002; and Choi & Fisher, 2003). Adaptation and mitigation measures
are already being applied around the world. Some of these measures, such as dykes, can be ar-
gued to be cost-effective; but they could also bring about unintended consequences. Coastal in-
frastructure protecting against storm surges, such as sea walls, could damage local landscapes,
ecosystems and beaches, which may impinge on the tourism industry. Fisheries may also suffer.
Infrastructure to reduce coastal flooding can damage coastal ecosystems on which, according
to Hallegatte, Henriet and Corfee-Morlot (2008), 90% of fish species depend during at least one
stage of their life cycle.




                                                                                                         73
     The urbanization of poverty phenomenon has resulted in the concentration of large num-
     bers of the poor in urban areas. These groups are especially vulnerable to climate change and
     extreme weather events. Poor city residents tend to locate in the most vulnerable locations and
     housing construction materials are not robust. The consequences of surging seas, windstorms,
     and flooding are much more dramatic in these areas (OECD, 2010). Recent OECD work shows
     that a 50-cm sea level rise, factoring in socioeconomic development, could result in a tripling of
     the population at risk of coastal flooding by 2070 and a tenfold increase in the amount of assets
     exposed. Such an increased exposure translates into an almost two-fold increase in the value
     of assets at risk in terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP): from 5% of GDP in 2008 to 9% of
     GDP in 2070. However, for Lall and Deichmann (2009), urban agglomerations by their own na-
     ture –being the places where wealth and skills tend to concentrate—can mitigate some of the
     risks: after all, higher income countries tend to have lower life losses. Wealthier societies could
     also mean, according to Lall and Deichmann (2009), better housing quality, institutions that are
     able to enforce risk mitigation measures, and economies of scale can be achieved in risk control
     measures because these can benefit a larger population. More often than not, social capital is a
     key ingredient in disaster-risk management (DRM). As climate change will demand greater local-
     government capabilities, social capital becomes increasingly important to build more resilient
     cities.


     VULNERABILITY IN THE CARIBBEAN
     The Caribbean population and assets are among the most exposed to natural disasters
     in the world. For instance, over 96% of Jamaica’s population and GDP are located in risk-prone
     areas to at least two hazards. According to the World Bank (2005), Jamaica is the third most
     exposed country to at least two hazards in the world. Similarly, Grenada has over the last two
     decades lost 9% of GDP annually to natural hazards (World Bank, 2012). The problem is particu-
     larly acute in Haiti and the Dominican Republic where losses as a proportion of population and
     GDP size, have been the greatest in the region.

     Every year, Caribbean countries experience losses as a result of natural disasters as they
     are particularly prone to earthquakes and meteorological-related hazards (i.e. flooding,
     high winds and landslides). Although less common than the latter, earthquakes represent the
     biggest threat in terms of population and asset losses from a single event. That is particularly the
     case in Antigua and Barbuda, Haiti, the Dominican Republic and Jamaica. Meteorological-relat-
     ed events such as flooding, high winds and landslides intensify during the rainy season (June to
     November) through hurricanes and tropical storms. Each year, at least one major hurricane and
     several tropical storms sweep across the Caribbean. Coastal cities in the region are therefore
     particularly exposed to meteorological hazards, climate change and in some cases earthquakes.

     Such events have the potential of destroying lives, livelihoods, infrastructure and economic activ-
     ity. Climate change is expected to worsen the threats for the Caribbean by making these events
     more acute in addition to accelerating above-mentioned challenges such as sea-level rise and
     coastal erosion. It is estimated that if current trends continue, between USD 350 and 870 million
     will be lost each year in the Eastern Caribbean sub-region alone. The World Bank (2012) has
     estimated that the entire Caribbean lost USD 9 billion between 2007 and 2011 due to natural
     disasters, which is more than twice the size of the economy of Barbados or seven times that of
     Antigua & Barbuda.




74
Estimates by Cardona (2007) show that a 50 or 100-year event can lead to severe economic
consequences for countries with higher exposure to natural hazards in Latin American and the
Caribbean. 26 Cardona (2007) estimated considerable losses given the size of the economies of
the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, and Trinidad & Tobago (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Probable MAximum Loss in 50 and 100 years




IMPROVING RESILIENCY
Because economic and human densities amplify risk and change the economics of disas-
ter risk reduction strategies, urban disaster risk management is different than any other
type. Lall and Deichmann (2009) argue that an increasing number of people and assets are
exposed to natural hazards in dense urban areas, and that economic and human density can
amplify risk and change the economics of disaster risk reduction strategies. A disaster-resilient
city therefore, attempts to minimize risks by favoring neighborhoods with organized services and
infrastructure that adhere to sensible building codes; and by avoiding informal settlements built
on flood plains or steep slopes because no other land is available. To be more resilient, cities
need to take steps to anticipate and mitigate the impact of disasters, incorporating monitoring and
early-warning technologies to protect infrastructure, community assets and individuals, including
their homes and possessions, cultural heritage, and environmental and economic capital. Cities
also need to take steps to develop systems to quickly respond to crises and restore services after
a disaster.

Resilient cities require social capital and adequate institutional arrangements. People need
to be empowered and to participate, decide and plan their city together with local authorities. A re-
silient city is run by an inclusive, competent and accountable local government that is concerned
about sustainable urbanization and that commits the necessary resources to develop capacities
to manage and organize itself before, during and after a natural hazard event (e.g. Box 1 on ac-
countability in the Philippines). Local authorities and population in a resilient city understand their
risks and develop a shared, local information base on disaster losses, hazards and risks, includ-
ing who is exposed and who is vulnerable. Such a form of governance must also act to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions to address climate change at its roots (ISDR, 2012).


26
   The Probable Maximum Loss (PML) calculates potential losses using a model that takes into account different hazards (which are calculated in
probabilistic form according to historical data on the intensity of past phenomena) and the actual physical vulnerability of the elements exposed to such
phenomena. This analytical and predictive model is not based on historical measures of losses (deaths and number of people affected), but rather on
the intensity of the phenomena.


                                                                                                                                                            75
       Box 1. Accountability: The case of the Philippines

       The Mindanao Summit on Disaster Risk Reduction and Geo-Hazard Awareness in Cagayan
       do Oro City was convened by two Philippines Government senators after a devastating
       tropical storm hit Mindanao and nearby areas. It brought together a range of government
       and civil society stakeholders to discuss how to reduce disaster risks. They identified spe-
       cific legislative, communication, planning, and response priorities for disaster risk reduction,
       among them creation of a disaster response and an accountability rating system for local
       government units.

       Source: Jha, Miner and Stanton-Geddes (2013).


     Building resilience in a city requires an integrated approach based on the four dimen-
     sions of resiliency: environmental, economic, social and institutional (Figure 3). To be
     resilient, a city must not only face environmental hazards, but protect and integrate key eco-
     system services, as well as develop economic, social and institutional resiliency. As part of the
     adaptation and mitigation efforts to address environmental challenges, the city should work on
     increasing the adaptive capacity of buildings and critical infrastruc- Figure 3: Dimensions of
     ture, including water and power supply systems, and to develop Resilience
     an emergency preparedness. The system should have in place a
     plan for economic recovery after a disaster, while also diversifying
     the economy when possible, to lower the risk of economic crisis.
     Social inclusion programs could be coupled with land-use planning
     to address vulnerable groups’ exposure to risks. To allow for this,
     the system would need an institutional set up that allows for partici-
     pation, as well as an urban risk assessment and a robust decision
     making process that is based on cost-benefit assessments valuing social	   and environmental as-
     pects and that takes into account long-run risk. Cities would develop plans on the basis of social
     participation and empowerment so that social capital can become a source of resiliency. To be
     effective, urban resiliency strategies should incorporate partnerships with other levels of govern-
     ment as well as with other cities (e.g. see the case of Mozambique in Box 2).




       Box 2. Participatory planning in Mozambique

       In Quelimane City, Mozambique, local informal communities partnered with the City Coun-
       cil and several international organizations (Cities Alliance, World Bank, DANIDA, UNICEF,
       WaterAid) to work on upgrading communities that are particularly affected by cyclical floods
       because of a high water table and heavy rains. City and communities worked together to
       formulate a participatory urban development strategy for informal neighborhoods, where
       about 80 percent of the population live, taking into account water and sanitary conditions.




76
  The participatory planning process led to joint action to improve conditions in densely popu-
  lated peri-urban slum belts. The City Council made an in-kind contribution of US$100,000
  by providing office space, equipment, a meeting room, technical/administrative staff, and
  vehicles. The community provided an in-kind contribution of US$150,000 by providing subsi-
  dized labor, conducting awareness campaigns, forming operational management teams, and
  reducing plot sizes or, in extreme cases, moving to another area. UN-HABITAT, the World
  Bank, DANIDA, UNICEF, and WaterAid together contributed US$440,000 in cash and in
  kind. Other in-kind contributions totaling US$30,000 were secured from a state water-supply
  institution and a private firm that made its trucks available on weekends in exchange only for
  payment for the fuel and the driver.

  The results achieved through these combined efforts included a City Council that was better
  equipped to work with informal settlements; construction of two community centers; clean-
  ing of 10 km of drainage channels with 1 km paved; widening and improvement of 20 km
  of unpaved roads; installation of 10 new water points in the most densely populated areas;
  and construction of 20 rainwater collection systems and four public lavatories—all mainly
  through planned labor-intensive activities. The endeavor also produced greater government
  and community awareness of water, sanitation, and drainage maintenance issues and im-
  proved planning for sanitation and expansion of the water supply network to densely popu-
  lated peri-urban slum belts.

  Source: Jha, Miner and Stanton-Geddes (2013).




MITIGATION, ADAPTATION AND
ENVIRONMENTAL MEASURES
Complementary mitigation and adaptation policies need to be employed to address risk
and climate change. There is a significant distinction between climate change mitigation and
adaptation. Mitigation efforts aim at reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to reduce the se-
verity of climate change. Adaptation involves readjusting life to the reality that a certain amount of
climate change will inevitably occur. However, an effective climate change policy for cities needs
to include both, and they need to be approached in an integrated manner. Adaptation is neces-
sary to address impacts resulting from global warming that will occur even in the most optimistic
IPCC-assessed carbon stabilization scenarios. In the long run, in the absence of mitigation ac-
tions, natural and human systems’ capacities to adapt could be exceeded. Early mitigation ac-
tions are indispensable to reduce the magnitude of climate change and can, at the same time, be
combined with adaptation needs.




                                                                                                         77
     Public investment in flood protection is one of the most important adaptation tools for
     coastal cities, but they should be carefully planned so that their impact on the environ-
     ment is minimized. Some of the most well-known examples include Venice (Box 3), New
     Orleans, Helsinki or Rotterdam. However, these investments have triggered a debate as they
     can lead to the destruction of ecological resources in order to protect the built environment.
     Parks and natural spaces can be used to provide flood protection without destroying natural
     resources. However, more often than not, the need for horizontal co-ordination – in addition to
     the vertical co-ordination required with regional and national governments in charge of environ-
     mental management – hinders the use of ecological preservation as a tool for adaptation since
     these parks and natural spaces frequently fall outside city boundaries. Natural resource policies,
     and in particular wetland protection and urban forestry programs can also play an important role
     in adaptation by providing natural buffers for storms, in addition to providing mitigation benefits
     by removing CO2 from the atmosphere.

     Local government disaster risk management (DRM) plans are increasingly taking into account
     potential impacts and vulnerability assessments. The Finnish cities of Espoo and Helsinki have
     mandated that new planned areas be 2.6 meters above sea level, and that the lowest floor level
     of new buildings be 3 meters above sea level (Voutilainen, 2007).



       Box 3. Adaptation: The Case of Venice

       The approved plan to protect Venice, MOSE (Modulo Sperimentale Elettromeccanico, or
       Experimental Electromechanical Module), involves the construction of 79 gates at three
       lagoon inlets. When waters rise 1.1 meters (43 inches) above “normal”, air will be injected
       into the hollow gates, causing them to rise, blocking seawater from entering the lagoon and
       thereby preventing the flooding of Venice. At the Malamocco inlet, the walls of the MOSE
       project are being built just like the original walls in Venice. But workers are driving 125-foot-
       long steel and concrete pilings into the lagoon bed, instead of wooden pilings. When the
       giant doors are at rest, they will be lying invisible to Venetians and tourists on the bottom
       of the inlet channel. Each gate will be up to 92 feet long, 65 feet wide, and will weigh 300
       tons. Depending on the type of tides, there are different ways to manage the gates. They are
       flexible: they can close one inlet and not the other, depending on sea tides, wind and rain.
       There is no need to close the whole lagoon allowing a continuous exchange of water from
       the open sea to the lagoon.

       Source: Prasad et al. (2009).



     Another important set of mitigation and adaptation actions that are becoming increas-
     ingly relevant are those aimed at addressing increasing levels of precipitation as a re-
     sult of climate change. London and Venice are redesigning their urban storm-water drainage
     system giving consideration to the increase in the frequency and intensity of rainfall. Tokyo is
     designing urban holding ponds under roads and parks to temporarily hold runoff water to avoid
     flash floods. Jakarta has recently initiated a program to construct a major storm-water drainage
     canal system known as the East Canal to provide adequate drainage to the eastern half of the
     city. In Vietnam, physical protection from typhoons and rising sea water levels is provided by an
     extensive system of dikes (Box 4).




78
  Box 4. Nam Dinh Province, Vietnam

  A range of disaster risk management measures have been identified for Nam Dinh accord-
  ing to the draft of Vietnam’s Second National Strategy and Action Plan including:
  • Protecting existing upstream forest watersheds to reduce downstream floods;
  • Building large- and medium-scale reservoirs upstream on big rivers to retain flood water;
  • Strengthening dike systems to be able to resist flood levels;
  • Building flood diversion structures;
  • Clearing floodways to rapidly release flood water;
  • Strengthening dike management and protection works to ensure the safety of the dike
  systems;
  • Constructing emergency spillways along the dikes for selective filling of flood retention
  basins; and
  • Designating and using flood basins to decrease the quantity of flood water flow.

  Source: Prasad et al. (2009).




RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE AND
SERVICE PROVISION
As cities develop, they must evaluate infrastructure and service improvements through
a climate change lens so as to promote long-term mitigation, adaptation, and poverty al-
leviation. Cities that focus on provision of basic urban services to the poor tend to do so in an
integrated manner. Reducing infrastructure vulnerability to climate change poses a key challenge
for local and regional transportation authorities. Preventing disruptions due to flooding is chief
among these concerns. It is vital for cities to clearly assess and plan for sea-level rises, storm-
surges and other storm impacts that exceed existing 100-200-year plans (OECD, 2010). Coastal
cities’ public transportation systems are at risk, particularly regarding flooding due to storms
and rising sea levels. Below-ground transportation systems are particularly susceptible to water
damage. Extreme heat can also damage roadways, bridges, and rail lines that were designed
for lower temperatures. But resilient infrastructure alone is not sufficient to provide uninterrupted
service delivery. Coastal cities need to also work on improving resiliency in services. Building re-
siliency requires: (i) advanced drainage systems that can alleviate flooding during intense storms;
(ii) healthcare services prepared for emergencies; (iii) warning systems; and (iv) transport infra-
structure that allow citizens to evacuate in response to risk.

As cities compete globally to attract investment, skills and talent, slum growth, insecurity,
and vulnerability to natural hazards can become location decision factors. Urban policies
aimed at reducing inequality, reducing poverty and managing risks can be growth-enhancing
policies as well. In particular, an important adaptation strategy for local governments is to provide
new shelter options for the poor to avoid settlements on marginal land that not only fosters slum
growth but also often exposes already vulnerable population groups to live in risk-prone areas.
Providing better settlement options for vulnerable population serves the dual purpose of immedi-
ately providing them with a safer living environment and contributing to more resilient neighbor-
hoods and cities in the longer term.



                                                                                                        79
     Land-use planning tools can contribute to disaster risk management in coastal
     cities. On the one hand, land-use planning can be used to favor more compact urban develop-
     ments that reduce intra-urban trips and commuting times. In turn, such compact arrangements
     result in lower GHG emissions, less traffic and more productive urban centers. High-density de-
     velopment can also be the result of land-use planning efforts, which have been associated to a
     decrease in GHG emissions (OECD, 2010). On the other hand, land-use planning can be a pow-
     erful DRM tool. Coastal cities threatened by sea-level rise or sea water intrusion as a result of a
     tsunami or storm surge are turning to land-use planning through regulation or market incentives.
     Singapore, for example, has decided to increase the ground level in all reclamation programs to
     factor in the likely increase in sea level due to climate change (Box 5). Similarly, Chile has set a
     line along the coast, prohibiting development under a certain threshold and requiring minimum
     heights in lower floors for all other risk-prone areas in coastal cities. The City of London has
     also factored in sea-level rise in the redesign of Thames Barrier flood control system. Shanghai
     has plans to implement a two-phase project that is designed to regulate water flow in the region
     to reduce flooding and provide a platform for water quality monitoring. In the US, rolling ease-
     ments have been introduced to discourage development of coastal areas by granting a public
     right-of-way to a narrow portion of coastal property, which migrates inland as the shore erodes.
     This prevents coastal land owners from erecting structures to block sea level rise, as well as
     allocating the risk of sea level rise to the private land owner (Titus and Narayanan, 1996). The
     most immediate impact of the policy would be to discourage new coastal development in areas
     vulnerable to coastal flooding.



       Box 5. Singapore’s Taps Strategy

       Singapore’s Four National Taps Strategy aims at ensuring that the country has enough
       water to meet its future needs. The first tap is the supply of water from local catchments.
       This consists of an integrated system of 14 reservoirs and an extensive drainage system to
       channel storm water into the reservoirs. The Marina Barrage, completed in late 2007, has
       converted the Marina Basin into Singapore’s 15th reservoir with a catchment area of about
       10,000 hectares (or one-sixth of Singapore’s land area). Dams have also been constructed
       across Sungei Punggol and Sungei Serangoon, creating a new catchment area of over
       5,000 hectares. Collectively, these projects were projected to increase water catchment
       areas from 50 percent to 67 percent of Singapore’s land area, fulfilling one of SGP 2012
       targets on clean water.

       The second tap, imported water from Johor, while the third tap, NEWater or high-grade
       reclaimed water further supplement Singapore’s needs. Thanks to advanced membrane
       technologies, treated effluent from the water reclamation plants is processed to produce
       high-grade reclaimed water of drinkable quality. NEWater is supplied from four plants with a
       combined capacity of 42 million gallons per day.

       Recent technological advances have made Singapore’s fourth tap, desalinated water, an
       affordable source. The first desalination plant at Tuas started operations in September 2005
       and can supply a maximum of 30 million gallons per day of drinking water.

       Source: Prasad et al. (2009), Ng and Tan (2013) and Yim (2012).




80
PROGRESS AND CHALLENGES FOR A
MORE RESILIENT CARIBBEAN
In recent years, countries in the Eastern Caribbean sub-region have made substantial
progress in strengthening their disaster risk management capacity, but more can be done
particularly in the area of risk reduction. In 2011, according to a study for the Caribbean
region carried out by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP, 2011), the region has
made good progress in disaster risk management. Achievements have been made in the follow-
ing areas: hazard mapping and its application to development planning; monitoring and warning
systems and preparedness; development of institutional and legal frameworks; community-based
disaster management programs; public information and dissemination; and recognition of the im-
portance of forecasting climate change effects to disaster risk management. Caribbean countries
have also joined the world’s first pooled insurance facility, Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance
Facility (CCRIF), successfully sharing their catastrophic risk and thereby limiting their financial
impact.

But while these recent improvements in disaster risk management are encouraging, East-
ern Caribbean nations still lack the required capacity to assess the full financial implica-
tions of the disasters to which they are likely to be exposed. A better understanding of the
economic and financial impacts of disasters would provide critical information, without which
sound ex-ante risk reduction cost-benefit analysis or risk reduction strategies cannot be devel-
oped (World Bank, 2012). One of the primary challenges to ensuring an effective recovery and
identifying future risk mitigation activities is obtaining reliable data for sector-specific damages
and losses following a disaster event. In the Eastern Caribbean context, the National Disaster
Organizations (NDO) or similar institutions are mandated with coordinating all post-disaster dam-
age and loss assessments. NDOs are also mandated with the legal, institutional and operational
aspects of disaster prevention and mitigation, as well as the coordination of emergency response,
recovery and rehabilitation efforts following a disaster. However, they remain quite dependent on
external partners to define and implement comprehensive post disaster assessments such as the
Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) 27 or Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA). Further,
in most cases, relevant NDOs do not understand what is expected from them in order to effec-
tively conduct the DaLA and/or PDNA and how information generated from these assessments
relates to sector-specific assessments and recovery strategies (World Bank, 2012).

Strong regional leadership and consistency of approach, national leadership, policy-level sup-
port, cross-disciplinary linkages, analysis and quantification of impacts, committed personnel and
availability of technical skills will be needed to further develop disaster resilience in the region.




27
   The Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) Methodology was initially developed by the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Carib-
bean (UN-ECLAC) in 1972. It has since been improved through close cooperation with the World Health Organization (WHO), the Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO), World Bank, UNDP, Inter-American Development Bank, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and the International Labor Organization (ILO). This methodology is adaptable to multi-hazard events and provides national governments
with the instrumentation to conduct a post-disaster needs assessment and to prioritize the recovery and reconstruction planning process. Although the
tool assesses all sectors, its main application is on the on socio-economic and environmental impacts of disasters. The DaLA is a globally recognized
tool, and is used to determine the financial resources required to achieve full recovery and reconstruction.



                                                                                                                                                        81
     CON
     CLU-
     SIONS
82
Many coastal cities around the globe are stepping up to the challenge of
adapting their infrastructure to the threat posed by growing natural hazards,
as well as putting in place mitigation policies to reduce GHG emissions. How-
ever, the number of governments that have adopted an integral approach
to disaster risk management is much lower. Such an integral approach in-
corporates not only environmental aspects, but also economic and social
aspects of resiliency. Successful policies that rest on an integral approach
require solid institutional arrangements that promote citizen participation,
empower neighborhoods to propose changes to policy making and foster
the accumulation of social capital. In the end, the risks that these policies
aim to reduce are caused by individual and community-level actions and
behaviors and probably can only be resolved there: at the community level.




                                                                                83
     REFERENCES
     Cardona, O. D. (2007). Indicators of disaster risk and risk management report. IADB: Program for
     Latin America and the Caribbean. Accessed on line at http://www.iadb.org/exr/disaster/IDEA_Indica-
     torsReport.pdf?language=EN&parid=6]

      Choi, O. & Fisher, A. (2003) The impacts of socioeconomic development and climate change on se-
     vere weather catastrophe losses: mid-Atlantic region MAR and the US, Climatic Change, 58, 149-70.

     Durongdej, S. (2001). Land use changes in coastal areas of Thailand. Proceedings of the APN/SUR-
     VAS/LOICZ Joint Conference on Coastal Impacts of Climate Change and Adaptation in the Asia – Pa-
     cific Region, 14-16 November 2000, Kobe, Japan, Asia Pacific Network for Global Change Research,
     113-117.

     Hall, B., Motzkin, G., Foster, D.R., Syfert, M. & Burk J. (2002). Three hundred years of forest and
     land-use change in Massachussetts, USA. Journal of Biogeography, 29, 1319-1335.

     Hallegatte, S. (2012). Modeling the roles of heterogeneity, substitution, and inventories in the assess-
     ment of natural disaster economic costs. Policy Research Working Paper 6047, The World Bank:
     Washington D.C.

     Hallegatte, S., Henriet, F. & Corfee-Morlot, J. (2008). The economics of climate change impacts and
     policy benefits at city scale: A conceptual framework. OECD Environment Working Paper Series, No.
     4, OECD Publishing: Paris.

     IPCC. (2001). IPCC Third Assessment Report: Climate Change, Inter-Governmental Panel on Cli-
     mate Change. Accessed at http://www.grida.no/publications/other/ipcc_tar/
     IPCC. (2007). IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change, Inter-Governmental Panel on Cli-
     mate Change. Accessed at http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg2/en/contents.html

     ISDR. (2012). How to Make Cities More Resilient: A Handbook for Local Government Leaders: A
     contribution to the Global Campaign 2010-2015, ISDR, Geneva, accessed at http://www.unisdr.org/
     files/26462_handbookfinalonlineversion.pdf

     Jha, A. K., Miner, T. W., & Stanton-Geddes, Z. (2013). Building Urban Resilience: Principles, Tools,
     and Practice, World Bank:Washington, D.C.

     Kirshen P., Ruth, M., & Anderson, W. (2005). Climate change in Metropolitan Boston. New England
     Journal of Public Policy 20, 89-103.

     Kron, W. & Berz, G. (2007). Flood disasters and climate change: trends and options - a (re-) insurer’s
     view. In Lozán, J.L., Graßl, H., Hupfer, P., Menzel, L. & Schonwiese C. (eds.) Global Change: Enough
     Water for All? Wissenschaftliche Auswertungen/GEO: Hamburg. (pp. 268-73).

     Lall, S. & Deichmann, U. (2009). Density and disasters: Economics of urban hazard risk. Policy Re-
     search Working Paper 5161, The World Bank.

     McGranahan, G., Balk, D. & Anderson, B (2007). The rising tide: assessing the risks of climate
     change and human settlements in low elevation coastal zones. Environment and Urbanization 19,
     17-37.




84
Mohanti, M. (2000). Unprecedented supercyclone in the Orissa Coast of the Bay of Bengal, India. Co-
geoenvironment Newsletter. Commission on Geological Sciences for Environmental Planning of the Inter-
national Union on Geological Sciences, 16, 11-13.

Moser, C. & Satterthwaite, D. (2008). Towards pro-poor adaptation to climate change in the urban centres
of low-and middle-income countries. IIED/ GURC Working Paper No 1, Human Settlements Discussion
Paper Series, Climate Change and Cities 3, University of Manchester.

Ng, P. X. & Tan, H.H. (2013). Fish diversity before and after construction of the Punggol and Serangoon
Reservoirs, Singapore. Nature in Singapore, 6, 19-24.

OECD. (2008). Environmental Outlook to 2030. OECD Publishing: Paris.

OECD. (2010). Cities and Climate Change. OECD Publishing, Paris.

Ruth, M.R & Rong, F. (2006). Research themes and challenges. In M. Ruth (ed.), Smart growth and climate
change, Edward Elgar: Cheltenham, UK. (pp. 9-43).

Prasad, N., Ranghieri, F., Shah, F., Trohanis, Z., Kessler, E. & Sinha R. (2009). Climate resilient cities: a
primer on reducing vulnerabilities to disasters, The World Bank: Washington, DC.

Saito,Y. (2001). Deltas in Southeast and East Asia: their evolution and current problems. Proceedings of
the APN/SURVAS/LOICZ Joint Conference on Coastal Impacts of Climate Change and Adaptation in the
Asia – Pacific Region, 14-16 November 2000, Kobe, Japan, Asia Pacific Network for Global Change Re-
search, (pp.185-91).

Scavia, D., Field, J. C., Boesch, D. F., Buddemeier, R. W., Burkett, V., Cayan, D. R., … Titus, J.G. (2002).
Climate change impacts on U. S. coastal and marine ecosystems. Estuaries 25, 149-64.

Small C. & Nicholls R.J. (2003). A global analysis of human settlement in coastal zones. Journal of Coastal
Research, 19, 584-599.

Thanh, T.D., Saito, Y., Huy, D.V., Nguyen, V.L., Oanh, T.K.O. & Tateishi, M. (2004). Regimes of human and
climate impacts on coastal changes in Vietnam. Regional Environmental Change 4, 49-62.

Titus, J.G. & Narayanan, V. (1996). The risk of sea level rise: A delphic Monte Carlo analysis in which
twenty researchers specify subjective probability distributions for model coefficients within their respective
areas of expertise. Climatic Change 33, 151-212.

UNDP. (2011). HYOGO framework for action 2005-2015: Building the resilience of nations and communi-
ties to disasters, Mid-Term Review, United Nations Development Program, International Strategy for Dis-
aster Reduction, Geneva.

Voutilainen, O. (2007). How do Finnish cities respond to climate change. Paper presented at the OECD
workshop on Competitive cities and climate change: challenges and opportunities, 30 November 2007.

World Bank. (2005). Natural Disaster Hotspots—A Global Risk Analysis, The World Bank: Washington DC.

World Bank. (2012). The Caribbean Region: Strategic Engagement Framework for Disaster Risk Manage-
ment and Climate Resiliency FY13-15, The World Bank: Washington D.C.

Yim, D. (2012). Singapore’s green-roofed marina barrage controls flooding and stores 10,000 hectares
of rainwater. Accessed at http://inhabitat.com/singapores-green-roofed-marina-barrage-controls-flooding-
and-stores-10000-hectares-of-rainwater/




                                                                                                                 85
86
6
    MARKET-BASED
    AGRICULTURAL
    RISK MANAGEMENT
    IN THE CARIBBEAN

             Diego Arias and Sara Giannozzi*
                                               87
     ABSTRACT
                        Natural disasters and commodity price fluctuations have a strong impact on the economies of Carib-
                        bean countries. However, agricultural insurance for individual farmers is scarce and difficult to imple-
                        ment. This article discusses how agricultural risk management could be improved in the Caribbean,
                        and how such practices could help reduce economic losses associated with these events, reduce
                        uncertainty, and improve the competitiveness of the region. Recommendations include the adoption
                        of country specific risk management strategies, focusing on market-based instruments and on part-
                        nerships between the public and private sectors. These strategies should also consider multi-sectoral
                        collaboration, should be comprehensive and demand-driven, should consider informal as well as for-
                        mal approaches, and should consider starting with small-scale, scalable, projects.

     *Senior agricultural Economist, Latin America and Caribbean Region, and Social Protection Specialist, Latin America
     and the Caribbean Region, The World Bank, respectively
     ** Content based on the 2013 World Bank report “Agricultural Risk Management in the Caribbean: Lessons and Ex-
     periences 2009-2012”.



     INTRODUCTION
     Caribbean countries are highly vulnerable to natural disasters: between 1990 and 2010, such dis-
     asters caused Caribbean countries losses of between 9 and 1 percent of their GDP every year.
     They are also exposed to commodity price fluctuations, due to the openness of their economy. At
     the same time, agriculture remains an important source of income for many of them, as well as a signifi-
     cant employer (around 20 percent of total employment in the region, with higher peaks in countries like
     Grenada and Haiti, where it reaches 50 percent). However, agricultural insurance for individual farmers
     is hard to implement in the Region and farmers and governments absorb most of the consequences from
     weather hazards and commodity shocks. Improving current agricultural risk management practices can
     help reduce losses associated with future weather events, reduce uncertainty and increase competitive-
     ness and economic growth.

     This chapter briefly summarizes the main lessons learned from the recent World Bank engagement to
     strengthen market-based agricultural risk management in the region. These findings point towards the
     importance of developing country-specific risk management strategies for the agricultural sector, with a
     focus on market-based instruments targeted to reducing vulnerability, and on partnerships between public
     and private sectors to assess the countries’ particular challenges and find common approaches to design
     and implement market-based solutions.


     ACCESS AND AVAILABILITY OF
     AGRICULTURE RISK MANAGEMENT TOOLS
     Apart from a few exceptions28, the Caribbean agricultural sector does not have access to market-
     based agricultural risk management instruments (insurance and hedging) in case of major shocks
     such as international price fluctuations and disasters, despite its high level of vulnerability. Farm-
     ers and agribusinesses must rely on a combination of informal (crop diversification, off-farm income) and
     traditional (saving, borrowing) financing, as well as on more formal risk management tools (government
     support, mutual funds and other forms of risk-sharing through commodity boards) to deal with these types
     of shocks.




     28
       The Windward Island Crop Insurance (WINCROP) provides insurance for banana growers in the Eastern Caribbean and a public agricultural insur-
     ance company has been able to provide multi-peril insurance to 7 percent of the area cultivated in the Dominican Republic.



88
As a consequence, most of the costs imposed by weather hazards and commodity price shocks
are absorbed by farmers, local agribusinesses, and/or governments, lowering income levels,
increasing rural poverty and reducing economic growth and competitiveness. It is important to
emphasize the role of the government, given the small size of the average farm in the region and
given the vulnerability of the agricultural sector to frequent and intense weather events.

The difficulties in making affordable insurance available to small farmers have to do with:
(i) a multi-cropping structure of smallholder farming (some small farmers in Jamaica have up to
15 crops on 1 plot of land), which complicates the evaluation of exposure of different crops to
the various production shocks; (ii) the lack of affordable mechanisms for insurance companies to
offer insurance to small individual farmers; (iii) the insufficient quality of the information available
about the agro-climate to undertake probabilistic analysis at a disaggregated level; (iv) the insuf-
ficient capacity to design and administer agricultural insurance contracts; and (v) the provision of
ex-post support programs, which reduce famers’ willingness to pay for insurance.


DEVELOPING MARKET-BASED APPROACHES TO
AGRICULTURE RISK MANAGEMENT
Between 2009 and 2012 the World Bank provided advisory services on market-based ag-
ricultural risk management to a total of six countries in the Caribbean: Jamaica, Haiti,
Guyana, Belize, Grenada, and the Dominican Republic. The World Bank first began provid-
ing advisory services in the early 2000s in the area of agricultural risk management by financing
pilot projects related to agricultural insurance and commodity price risk management. In 2007,
authorities implemented a more regional approach to risk transfer of weather events in the Car-
ibbean with the launch of the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF)29. More
recently, World Bank technical assistance has also incorporated a more country-specific and
comprehensive approach towards agricultural risks based on the countries’ particular demands.
The technical assistance described here has taken into account these two approaches: consid-
ering a regional approach but also local country conditions in the implementation of agricultural
risk-management instruments.

Given the importance of the agricultural sector and the heterogeneity of its production
structure across the Caribbean, a country-specific approach was an essential part of the
technical assistance. The primary objective was to support the development of country-specific
risk management strategies for the agricultural sector. In order to achieve this objective, the Bank
facilitated rapid sector-wide risk assessments. Where appropriate, it facilitated feasibility studies
for the design of innovative risk management mechanisms, with a focus on market-based instru-
ments to reduce the vulnerability of small and medium-sized producers. Coordination with the
private sector was an important element of the program. The approach included the following
basic principles: 	

• Multi-sectoral collaboration: the Bank ensured the participation of a multi-sectoral team that
was able to bring an integrated approach including knowledge of specific sectors, regional per-
spectives and financial sector expertise.



29
  CCRIF is a risk pooling facility designed to limit the financial impact of catastrophic hurricanes and earthquakes on Caribbean governments by quickly
providing short-term liquidity when a policy is triggered. It is the world’s first and, to date, only regional fund using parametric insurance, which allows
Caribbean governments to purchase catastrophe coverage at the lowest-possible price.



                                                                                                                                                               89
     • Public-Private Partnership: the Bank worked jointly with the public and the private sectors to
     provide technical assistance to local insurance companies, banks, governments, agro-industry
     groups, and donors to help them assess the countries’ particular challenges and find common
     approaches to designing and implementing market-based solutions in the agricultural sector.

     • Comprehensive risk management framework: the Bank used a comprehensive risk manage-
     ment framework in order to assess the countries’ agricultural risks. Those risks mainly included
     vulnerabilities related to short-term weather events as well as long-term hazards, including price
     risks and animal and plant health threats. The framework incorporates the different actors and
     phases (mitigation/prevention, transfer, and coping/response) in the risk management spectrum.
     The final objective was to move public sector risk-management strategies from reactive respons-
     es (ad-hoc or ex-post) to more proactive approaches (ex-ante) with respect to weather events.

     • Demand-driven: an important principle for delivering the technical assistance was the imple-
     mentation of a demand-driven approach. The central purpose was to implement market-based
     strategies and tools based on countries’ demands with the final objective of possible mainstream-
     ing and scaling up successful experiences. Although most of the work was country-specific, the
     advisory work also provided capacity building at the regional level, through institutions like the
     InterAmerican Institute for Agriculture Cooperation (IICA) and the Caribbean Farmer’s Network
     (CaFAN).

     • Potential for scaling up: It was important to quickly identify the potential to provide valuable
     lessons at the regional level. For example, similar projects in Central America proved to be a
     good channel for further developments in commodity risk management policies (e.g. agricultural
     technology, micro-finance and climate change).

     The technical assistance was implemented in four stages. Stages one and two were con-
     ducted in all six countries with the participation of different stakeholders and resulted in a country-
     specific sector-wide evaluation and a public sector strategy for coping with systemic agricultural
     risks. During stage three, country-specific feasibility study were conducted, based on specific
     requests from two countries, in order to evaluate the possibility of implementing market-based
     risk management instruments. Finally, stage four built on the work done in previous stages by
     implementing specific pilot projects.


                                                         Initial rapid assessment to appraise public and pri-
                                                         vate capacities to manage risks in all six countries,
                                                         as well an assessment of the availability of market-
        Stage one => Agricultural risk assessments       based instruments (in the case of Belize and Gre-
                                                         nada). Additional rapid assessments conducted for
                                                         specific supply chains (ex. Haiti and Guyana coffee
                                                         supply chain)
                                                         Bank engaged in conversations with the public sector
                                                         to facilitate the development of a strategy to manage
        Stage two => Development of public sector
                                                         systemic risks at the micro, meso and macro level,
      strategies for coping with systemic agricultural
                                                         focusing mainly on weather risks (hurricane, tropical
                            risks
                                                         storms, etc.). These strategies were developed in
                                                         Jamaica and Haiti.




90
                                                    In-depth feasibility studies, including a modeling ex-
                                                    ercise for weather risks to correlate farm losses with
                                                    weather variables and determine trigger variables for
  Stage three => Feasibility studies for market-    index-based insurance, as well as an assessment to
  based risk management and transfer instru-        evaluate the type of coverage and transfer mecha-
                    ments.                          nisms (public/private) best-suited for reaching farm-
                                                    ers. The pre-feasibility studies were done for insur-
                                                    ance products in Guyana, Jamaica and Dominican
                                                    Republic.
                                                    Based on the feasibility studies, additional support
   Stage two => Development of public sector        was provided to facilitate the design of market-based
 strategies for coping with systemic agricultural   instruments or mechanisms on a pilot basis (i.e. Ja-
                       risks                        maica, an index-based insurance pilot program was
                                                    developed for the coffee industry)




SOME REGIONAL LEVEL LESSONS THAT HAVE
EMERGED FROM THIS ENGAGEMENT

Market-based financial agricultural risk management instruments are difficult to imple-
ment in the Caribbean region at the farm level because of the high proportion of small farmers
(ranging from 1.4 ha in Haiti and Jamaica to around 2 ha in Belize) with a very diverse production
structure. Assessing the particular production losses at the individual level is technically chal-
lenging. Furthermore, commercial banks and/or insurance companies usually do not have the
infrastructure to reach small farmers in remote areas.

Farmers in the Caribbean tend to use informal risk-management approaches, which can
be successfully complemented by more formal, market-based instruments, as well as oth-
er public or private risk transfer mechanisms. Informal risk management strategies include
personal savings, household buffer stocks, community savings and non-formalized cooperatives
(i.e. commodity boards). A more formal risk management approach implemented by the govern-
ment involving risk mitigation, risk transfer and risk coping mechanisms would be very beneficial
for small farmers as well as for the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures. This ap-
proach would provide farmers with an additional source of financing to manage both weather and
production risks without relying solely on their own savings and farm income.




                                                                                                             91
     CON
     CLU-
92
     SIONS
Public intervention in past catastrophic events has been necessary to
cover extreme agricultural losses for small farmers. While these public
interventions are crucial, they can be made more effective and effi-
cient. In particular, disaster payments to farmers can be structured through
clear ex-ante rules for triggering and distributing public sector assistance;
and a clear process for registering and becoming eligible for ex-post
support should also be considered. In addition, the financial structure behind
such a program must be improved by allowing the government to transfer
part of its fiscal exposure to the international market.

A risk layering approach could be used to finance public interventions
in the agricultural sector in response to systemic shocks. For exam-
ple, low cost (high frequency) events could be financed with reserves and
personal savings, while more catastrophic (lower frequency) events could
be financed with contingent credit lines and/or insurance instruments. A
macro-level risk transfer mechanism was introduced in the region through
the implementation of the CCRIF in 2007. The optimal mix of risk financ-
ing strategies is country-specific, but the high external debts of the Carib-
bean countries limits their ability to access additional financing through credit
lines, so CCRIF insurance makes up a big part of the countries’ risk financ-
ing structure for natural disasters. Additional analysis is required to develop
instruments to cover agriculture sector risks (e.g. non-cyclonic rainfall and
droughts). The CCRIF’s recent announcement of plans to launch a new ex-
cess-rainfall product to supplement its earthquake and hurricane policies is
a step in the right direction.

The public and private sectors need to become more aware of the
potential benefits of market-based products. The limited availability of
market-based instruments in the Caribbean is partly explained by the fact
that public sector officials, the financial sector (lending to agriculture) and
agribusinesses do not have access to, or know of, the potential benefits of
agriculture insurance or commodity-price risk hedging. Moreover, the region
currently lacks the technical capacity to design and offer these instruments,
which constrains their development.

                                                                                    93
94
7
MITIGATING
VULNERABILITY TO
HIGH AND VOLATILE
OIL PRICES IN
THE CARIBBEAN
       Rigoberto Ariel Yépez-García and Sara Giannozzi*
                                                          95
     ABSTRACT
                    High and volatile oil prices have affected government finances and balance of payments as well
                    as household purchasing power and private sector investment In the Caribbean, which is highly
                    dependent on imported oil, particularly in electricity generation. This policy note proposes a menu of
                    alternatives that can be applied as a multi-horizon strategy, such as financial instruments to manage
                    price risks, complemented by structural measures designed to reduce dependence on oil for electric-
                    ity generation, to reduce energy consumption, and to promote regional cooperation. Finally, the note
                    discusses some of the macro and micro benefits that can accrue from implementing such alternatives
                    ranging from the long-term financial viability of the national economy to a higher living standard for
                    households.

     * Senior Energy Economist, Latin America Region, and Social Protection Specialist, Latin America and the Caribbean
     Region, The World Bank, respectively
     **Content based on the 2012 World Bank report “Mitigating Vulnerability to High and Volatile Oil Prices: Power Sector
     Experiences in Latin America and the Caribbean”


     INTRODUCTION
     The past decade has witnessed an unprecedented rise in world oil prices and oil price volatil-
     ity. Countries heavily dependent on imported oil to power a significant portion of their electric-
     ity generation are especially vulnerable. This is the case in the Caribbean, where high and
     volatile oil prices have affected government finances and balance of payments as well
     as household purchasing power and private sector investment. Moreover, high levels
     of uncertainty and risk tend to reduce planning horizons and cause firms to postpone
     investments, reducing capital formation and long-term growth. For all of these reasons,
     economic growth strategies in the region cannot ignore this dependency and the way it
     affects growth.

     This note is based on the 2012 World Bank report “Mitigating Vulnerability to High and Volatile
     Oil Prices: Power Sector Experiences in Latin America and the Caribbean”, with the objective
     of presenting the findings that are currently most relevant for the Caribbean region. Therefore,
     the note first reveals the economic effects of high and volatile prices on oil importing coun-
     tries, with an emphasis on the power sector. Secondly, it proposes a menu of alternatives that
     can be applied as a multi-horizon strategy, such as financial instruments to manage price risk,
     complemented by structural measures designed to reduce dependence on oil for generation
     of electricity and to reduce energy consumption. Finally, the note presents the results of an at-
     tempt to quantify some of the macro and micro benefits that can accrue from implementing such
     alternatives.


     OIL PRICE EVOLUTION AND RISK EXPOSURE
     The past decade has witnessed an unprecedented rise in world oil prices and oil price volatility.
     Since 2002, the spot price for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) has increased more than fivefold,
     and this upward price trend has featured significant volatility. At peak oil prices in 2008, the
     standard deviation in daily price changes was nearly twice that observed six years earlier.

     The greater economic uncertainty and higher risk introduced by oil price volatility adversely
     affect oil importing and exporting nations alike. Countries with a high proportion of oil in their
     primary energy supply are especially vulnerable to higher and more volatile prices.




96
                                                               Caribbean countries, where oil
                                                               imports constitute a large share
                                                               as percentage of GDP (11 percent
                                                               in 2006), are especially vulnerable
                                                               to high and volatile oil prices. The
                                                               World Bank (2006) estimates that in
                                                               Latin America a 16 percent increase
                                                               annually in oil prices over a five-
                                                               year period would increase growth
                                                               in oil-exporting countries by 0.14
                                                               percentage points, compared to a
                                                               loss of 0.10 percentage points for
                                                               oil-importing countries. The great-
                                                               est growth losses, 0.12 percentage
                                                               points, would be experienced in the
                                                               Caribbean.



WHAT IS THE ECONOMIC IMPACT?
Economies are affected by high and volatile oil prices at both macroeconomic and microeco-
nomic levels. The major direct effects at the macro level are a deteriorating trade balance,
due to a higher import bill, reflecting a worsening in terms of trade; and a weakening fiscal
balance, due to greater government transfers and subsidies to insulate domestic markets
from these price changes. At the micro level, the major direct effect is investment uncertainty,
resulting from the higher risk of engaging in new projects.
The major indirect effects are inflation; loss of consumer confidence and purchasing power, due
to greater economic uncertainty and higher inflation; loss of competitiveness caused by higher
power generation and transport costs; and institutional weakening, as firms and households pres-
sure the government to protect them from these price changes in ways which bypass market
mechanisms, which, in turn, affects the credibility and functioning of the regulatory environment.



WHO BEARS THE RISK BURDEN?
In net oil-importing countries worldwide, high and volatile oil prices ripple through the power sec-
tor to numerous segments of the economy. In Central America and the Caribbean, the two sub-
regions identified as the most vulnerable to oil price risk in Latin America, oil supplies 51 percent
of primary energy needs, compared to 42 percent for the LAC region as a whole, and 35 percent
for the world overall. Countries who use imported oil to power a significant portion of their
electricity generation are especially vulnerable to high and volatile oil prices.

How is the risk burden of price volatility distributed? In a controlled energy-pricing environment
with fixed consumer prices, the utility tends to absorb variations in price inputs. Conversely, in a
free-market pricing environment, with a full pass-through mechanism, price shocks are passed
along to consumer households and businesses.




                                                                                                        97
     Most countries exhibit varying degrees of risk sharing between consumers, the utility,
     and government. For example, the government might cap the electricity price for final consum-
     ers, making the utility company bear the cost of price increases. But this situation may not be
     sustainable, as the company may eventually face bankruptcy. If that should occur, the govern-
     ment might have to choose between bailing out the utility or risking power-supply shortages.

     When general subsidies—especially those accounting for a significant share of government out-
     lay—are used to eliminate the impact of price volatility, the result may be a deterioration of the
     fiscal balance. Even if the government manages to maintain fiscal balance, the larger share of
     subsidies in government expenditure means less capacity for capital investment, as well as so-
     cial programs.

     For most of the countries analyzed in this study, consumers are shielded to varying de-
     grees by tariffs with embedded generalized subsidies. Because tariff increases are often
     insufficient to cover rising generation costs, the financial position of the utilities may
     deteriorate. This has been the case for the Dominican Republic, Haiti, and Honduras. A full
     pass-through power-pricing policy is in effect in The Bahamas and St. Vincent and the Gren-
     adines—where the government is the majority owner of the power utility—and in Barbados,
     Dominica, Grenada, Jamaica, and St. Lucia—where the private sector is the majority owner.
     This policy is more sustainable in the long run as it forces consumers to eliminate waste and
     then seek pathways to improve consumption efficiency. Guyana’s move from a partial to a full
     pass-through regime in 2008 highlights the trade-offs of such decisions on final users and the
     regulatory implications for managing volatility. As a result of that decision, volatility impact is born
     by final users, but financial sustainability of power companies is not threatened.


     REDUCING SHORT-TERM PRICE
     UNCERTAINTY: PRICE RISK MANAGEMENT
     One option for managing oil price volatility in the short term is to use price risk-man-
     agement instruments. Such tools can reduce the uncertainty associated with commodity-price
     volatility, particularly its impact on national budgets in a given year by managing existing price
     volatility, which is generally a function of current structural conditions in the market explained by
     imbalances between supply and demand. Risk management, or hedging, instruments are de-
     signed to cope with volatility—price spikes or shifting prices with no unidirectional trend— which
     has a financial impact because the existing price volatility results from the structural conditions
     of the oil market

     A critical first step for any country considering a commodity hedging strategy is careful
     risk assessment, which needs to take into consideration commercial relationships in the power
     sector and interactions with public sector actors and policy mechanisms.

     Additionally, power-sector actors considering price risk management should focus on
     establishing an institutional framework that adequately supports implementation of the
     strategy. Setting up a commodity hedging strategy includes the following key steps:




98
• Documenting risk management objectives;
• Establishing roles and responsibilities of the actors and agencies;
• Verifying adequate legal and regulatory infrastructure;
• Setting up procedures for selecting counterparties and brokers; and
• Providing careful oversight, supervision, and reporting.

Particular challenges for the Caribbean include:

• Building capacity. This step covers capacity building of staff, stakeholders, and key decision-
makers in the Caribbean; and
• Establishing robust institutional arrangements among the different agencies and at every stage
in the process.

The government of Dominican Republic is interested in implementing these options but has not
done so yet. Other countries in the region are less advanced in the elaboration of such a strategy.


REDUCING DEPENDENCY: ALTERNATIVES TO OIL
CONSUMPTION OVER THE LONG RUN
However, price risk management instruments cannot substitute for basic structural measures
designed to reduce oil consumption over the longer term. To reduce vulnerability in the long run,
countries should think about structural instruments such as: (i) energy portfolio diversification, (ii)
investing in energy efficiency, and (iii) increasing regional integration with countries endowed with
more diversified supply.

Diversifying away from Oil-Fired Power Generation

By diversifying the power generation matrix, countries become less vulnerable to oil prices and
reduce the risk associated with oil price volatility. Today, oil-importing countries have a wide array
of choices—both renewables and non-oil conventional energy sources—for diversifying their en-
ergy generation portfolios away from oil. In particular, the sub-regions of Central America and
the Caribbean have three groups of alternatives that could be developed: (i) hydropower,
(ii) non-hydro renewable power (geothermal, biomass, wind, and solar), and (iii) non-oil
conventional thermal power (natural gas). Wind and geothermal resources, in particular, are
already being evaluated. In general, hydropower resources are the best understood, having been
the most widely used for decades. However, in most Caribbean island nations (with the partial
exception of the Dominican Republic), existing hydropower output is quite small and the remain-
ing potential either insignificant or non-existent. On the other hand, the potential for increased use
of non-hydro renewables is significant. Biomass, in the form of sugarcane bagasse, could offer
immediate output gains as long as appropriate retrofitting is put in place. From a policy perspec-
tive, geothermal could potentially help to diversify the power system, although from a financial
perspective, high initial exploration costs make it less attractive. Other non-hydro options include
wind and solar energy. In addition, non-oil conventional thermal power, particularly natural gas
(and coal to a lesser extent), could help to reduce oil dependency, given their low price correlation
with oil. The countries with the greatest potential to initiate LNG consumption are the larger coun-
tries of the region, Haiti, Jamaica, and Barbados. Given its existing LNG import facility, the Do-
minican Republic is well positioned to expand consumption, once it resolves some legal issues.



                                                                                                          99
      Improving Energy Efficiency

      Investing in energy efficiency, both in the production of electricity (supply side) and in its
      consumption (demand side), is one of the most cost-effective ways to reduce the need
      for oil and oil-derived products. On the supply side, reducing technical losses contributes to
      improving overall system efficiency and conserving fuel; thus, it is considered an instrument that
      directly mitigates exposure to oil price volatility. It is difficult to assess technical losses and thus
      the potential to reduce them, in the Caribbean, since only aggregate-loss data are available for
      most countries in the region, and existing information on energy end uses and subsectors in the
      Caribbean is also spotty.
      Figure 7.1 Energy Savings Potenial in Selected Countries of Central America
      and the Caribbean
                                                                                 Supply-side        technical
                    14	                                                         losses can be reduced by
                                                                                 modifying system char-
         12	  
                                                                                 acteristics and configura-
         10	                                                                    tions.These losses can
                                                                                 also be reduced by care-
      Percent	  




          8	  
                                                                                 fully choosing transformer
          6	                                                                    technology,      eliminating
                                                                                 transformation        levels,
          4	  
                                                                                 switching off transform-
          2	                                                                    ers, improving low-power
                                                                                 factors, and distributing
          0	  
                                                                                 generation. On the de-
                                                                                 mand side, reducing peak
                                                                                 and non-peak use helps
                                                                                 to reduce the generation
                                                                                 capacity and transmission
                                                                                 and distribution assets
      required to supply the system. Demand-side efficiency can be improved by adopting policies and
      programs that encourage efficient electricity consumption by end users. Measures that could be ex-
      panded in the countries analyzed in this study include standards for widely-used industrial equipment
      and residential appliances; building codes; consumer education and demonstration programs; and
      energy management programs for industry, the building sector, and public utilities.


      Promoting Regional Integration

      Regional energy integration can also help countries to reduce oil dependence by opti-
      mizing electricity supplies across the region, which improves efficiency and, owing to
      economies of scale, lowers generation costs. In addition, when the consumption profiles
      of participants are not perfectly correlated, the smoother load pattern that arises means less
      investment in reserve requirements. If these conditions are met, use of fossil fuels, along with
      countries’ vulnerability to high and volatile oil prices, declines. Furthermore, from a market per-
      spective, regional integration promotes competition, helping to realize the trade gains associated
      with specialization of the most efficient producers. Moreover, all such benefits imply a reduction
      in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.

      Although the potential for interconnection in the Caribbean is more limited than in Central Amer-
      ica—owing to the high cost of needed submarine cables and small market size, which reduces
      economic viability—electricity integration could nevertheless significantly reduce dependence
      on oil-fired

100
       Promoting Energy Integration in the Caribbean - A recent study by Gerner and Hans-
       en (2011) evaluated potential opportunities for energy integration in the Caribbean:
       • Renewable energy. Resources found to have the greatest interconnection potential
       are natural gas (pipeline and liquefied natural gas [LNG]), geothermal, wind, small hy-
       dropower, and biomass. All are highly competitive with technologies currently in use.
       A key challenge is to identify sites with good resources that are economically feasible.
       • Electricity interconnections using submarine cables. Interconnecting the various
       islands using submarine cables would improve efficiency and increase electricity sector
       security. Also, it would enable more large-scale energy generation using renewables.
       The level of interconnection could be sub-regional, continental (e.g., linking parts of the
       Caribbean with Mexico, Colombia, or Venezuela), or bilateral (e.g., Montserrat-Antigua
       and Barbuda, or Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic).
       • Gas pipeline interconnections. The study finds that supplying natural gas through the
       proposed Eastern Caribbean Gas Pipeline might be cheaper than current diesel-based
       generation. Natural gas from Trinidad and Tobago could supply Barbados, Guadeloupe,
       Martinique, and St. Lucia at a competitive price. If the islands are interconnected, the
       pipeline could take advantage of economies of scale owing to the large volumes of gas
       transported. In order to be implemented, however, the project must first win consensus
       among diverse stakeholders, ranging from gas suppliers, utilities, and regulators to fi-
       nancial institutions and governments.




generation. Interconnections between two or more countries could be economically feasible, and
these would take advantage of economies of scale and development of indigenous resources.
The geothermal and natural-gas potential of some islands could serve as the basis for a
more diversified power market that is less vulnerable to oil price volatility. The most sig-
nificant geothermal resources are in Nevis and Dominica, while Guadeloupe and Martinique also
have possibilities. The Dominican Republic and Haiti, in particular, could benefit from stronger
integration on both the power and natural-gas fronts. While the economic benefits of integrated
markets are generally accepted, institutional obstacles often prevent their establishment. The
most common problems are use of multiple technology standards; variations in regulatory re-
gimes, legal frameworks, and pricing policies; and environmental concerns. Additional hurdles
that can limit or delay market integration are conflicting perspectives on the sharing of investment
costs and uncertainties about political decision-making (Gerner and Hansen, 2011).




30
   The components of this three-pronged strategy—a more diversified energy supply system, including greater utilization of available renewable sources;
improved efficiency in electricity production and use; and regional integration, which promotes energy diversification—can work together over the long
term to effectively reduce a country’s oil generation and consumption and thus mitigate its vulnerability to high and volatile oil prices. Implementing these
structural measures in a combined strategy would mean significant savings for heavily oil-dependent countries. At the country level, Guyana and Nica-
ragua could witness a reduction in their current account deficit of up to 5 percent of GDP; while the reductions for Haiti and Honduras would be 3.5 and
2.9 percent of GDP, respectively (Yepez and Dana, 2012).



                                                                                                                                                                101
      HOW MUCH CAN IT HELP?

      The components of this three-pronged strategy—a more diversified energy supply sys-
      tem, including greater utilization of available renewable sources; improved efficiency in
      electricity production and use; and regional integration, which promotes energy diversi-
      fication—can work together over the long term to effectively reduce a country’s oil gen-
      eration and consumption and thus mitigate its vulnerability to high and volatile oil prices.
      Implementing these structural measures in a combined strategy would mean significant
      savings for heavily oil-dependent countries. At the country level, Guyana and Nicaragua
      could witness a reduction in their current account deficit of up to 5 percent of GDP; while the
      reductions for Haiti and Honduras would be 3.5 and 2.9 percent of GDP, respectively (Yepez and
      Dana, 2012).


      Potential Fuel Savings from Implementing Structural Measures,
      as a percent of GDP, 2009

                       6	  


                       5	  


                       4	  
         Percent	  




                       3	  


                       2	  


                       1	  


                       0	  




      Source: Authors




102
CON
CLU
SIONS
At a macro level, less oil consumption can directly improve a coun-
try’s aggregate economy and directly and indirectly benefit gov-
ernment finances and balance of payments. At a micro level, the
decrease in vulnerability to oil price risk resulting from lower con-
sumption can facilitate investment planning and consumer deci-
sion-making. Complementary to these structural measures, price
risk management instruments may further mitigate exposure to the
shorter-term economic uncertainty created by oil price volatility,
which also affects investment and planning decisions by house-
holds and firms.

This optimistic outlook is not without its challenges. Making such
a structural transition would entail considerable upfront costs to
utilities, firms, and households; thus, supportive policies and regu-
lations for renewable energy and energy efficiency would be re-
quired. In the case of the LAC region, regulatory, contracting, and
licensing processes would need to be reformed to allow countries
to implement their plans. The use of financial instruments that
make these investments more attractive would be particularly help-
ful. Pricing reforms and technology standards would be needed
to ensure that resources are not wasted. In addition, an appropri-
ate regulatory framework and institutional strengthening would be
required to facilitate regional integration between countries with
differing regulatory policies and power-sector institutions. But the
potential benefits from implementing these measures far outweigh the
costs. Given the far-reaching adverse effects of high and volatile oil pric-
es on oil-importing economies, the potential savings from implementing
the measures suggested in this report could offer substantial benefits at
the macro and micro level, ranging from the long-term financial viability
of the national economy to a higher living standard for households.




                                                                               103
      REFERENCES
      Gerner, F., & Hansen, M. (2011). Caribbean regional electricity supply options: Toward greater
      security, renewables, and resilience. Report No. 59459. Washington, DC: World Bank.

      Yepez-García, R.A. & Dana, J. (2012). Mitigating vulnerability to high and volatile oil prices: Pow-
      er sector experiences in Latin America and the Caribbean. Accessed at: https://openknowledge.
      worldbank.org/handle/10986/9341




104
105
106
      8
PROMOTING
GROWTH IN THE
CARIBBEAN:
GEOTHERMAL
ENEWABLE ENERGY
Migara Jayawardena, Laura Berman, Chandra Shekhar Sinha, Gerry Huttrer
Mandkhai Bayarsaikhan, Nadeem Karmali, and Castalia Strategic Advisors*
                                                                          107
      ABSTRACT
                     The power sector is integral to economic development and inclusive growth in the Caribbean Region.
                     The high cost of electricity is undermining the Region’s competitiveness and growth, and creating
                     hardship for citizens. Unlocking the Caribbean Region’s geothermal potential for power generation
                     can promote growth by reducing the cost of electricity, while also enhancing energy security, improv-
                     ing environmental sustainability, and creating opportunities for greater regional integration. Despite
                     this potential, geothermal resources remain mostly untapped. Preliminary assessments indicate sig-
                     nificant unexploited geothermal potential, especially in the Eastern Caribbean, that could supply base-
                     load power for local markets and beyond. Increased use of geothermal energy would also provide
                     environmental benefits, Increase energy security and improve the balance of trade. This paper out-
                     lines some of the factors that need to be taken into account for successful development of this sector,
                     and argues that the public sector can help reduce investor risks and mobilize funds, particularly at
                     the early stages of development, which can catalyze greater private financing for subsequent stages.

      *Senior Energy Specialist, The World Bank, Energy Specialist Consultant, The World Bank, Lead Financial Specialist,
      The World Bank, Geothermal Resource Specialist Consultant, The World Bank, Energy Specialist Consultant, The
      World Bank, Financial Economist, The World Bank, respectively.



      INTRODUCTION
      Unlocking the Caribbean Region’s geothermal potential for power generation can
      promote growth by reducing the cost of electricity, while also enhancing energy
      security, improving environmental sustainability, and creating opportunities for greater re-
      gional integration. The power sector is integral to economic development and inclusive growth
      as it fuels the productive sectors of the region’s economy. However, the high cost of electricity
      is undermining competitiveness and growth, and creating hardship for residential customers.
      The reason for the high cost of electricity is largely due to over-reliance on expensive, imported
      fuel oils for power generation. A switch to cheaper options with less volatile prices is needed to
      lower costs in order to improve business competitiveness and growth. Preliminary assessments
      indicate significant unexploited geothermal potential, especially in the Eastern Caribbean, which
      could serve as an alternative source of power generation to supply local and regional markets.

      Despite this potential, geothermal resources remain mostly untapped. Challenges such as
      the underlying resource risks, difficulty in securing financing, limited regional geothermal exper-
      tise, and the small and isolated nature of existing power systems makes it difficult to develop
      these resources. The public sector can play a key role in addressing these risks, mobilizing
      financing, attracting credible developers, and promoting greater regional integration to speed-up
      and scale-up geothermal development and catalyze greater private investments.

      This paper is organized as follows. The first section discusses the rationale and need for more
      stable and lower cost electricity in the Caribbean. Next, the paper describes how geothermal
      resources provide an opportunity to diversify and optimize the power generation mix. Finally, the
      key challenges to developing geothermal as a viable power generation option and opportunities
      for addressing these obstacles are presented.




108
THE NEED FOR MORE STABLE, LOWER COST
ELECTRICITY IN THE CARIBBEAN
The power sector is integral to economic development and inclusive growth in the Caribbean Re-
gion. The Caribbean economies are making efforts to rebound from the recession the region faced be-
tween 2008-10, and while some countries have begun to post some sluggish yet positive growth , others
have continued to contract . Economies that rely on significant tourism have been particularly hard-hit, as
it, along with the associated construction and transportation sectors, make up a substantial share of the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of many island economies. Services are another key driver of economic
activity, particularly in the countries that are a part of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS),
where they can account for 70 percent or more of GDP. In addition to the considerable hardships that
many of the economies that rely on tourism and services have faced during the recent global economic
slowdown, structural challenges in many islands have made it difficult for them to adapt. Key challenges
include high levels of external debt, challenges accessing finance, and the extremely high cost of electricity.

The high cost of electricity is undermining the Region’s competitiveness and growth, and creating
hardship for citizens. Electricity tariffs in the Caribbean region are among the highest in the world. This is
reflected in the fact that businesses in the Caribbean region cite electricity as the second most significant
obstacle to successful operation, only surpassed by challenges they face in accessing finance, as illus-
trated in Figure 1. Since electricity costs are a less significant obstacle for the rest of the Latin America
and Caribbean (LAC) region, this creates a regional competitive disadvantage for Caribbean businesses.
As an example, the Caribbean Hotel Energy Efficiency Action Program (CHENACT) benchmarks (2012)
indicate that a guest night in a 50-100 room hotel in the OECS region can include as much as $14 to $18 in
electricity costs . Given that tourism is a key economic driver in the region, such costs will make it harder
for Caribbean countries to compete for tourist revenues. Hardship resulting from expensive electricity is not
limited to businesses: it impacts ordinary citizens as well. Given that average residential consumers utilize
anywhere from about 113 kWh (Dominica) to 173 kWh (Jamaica) in developing islands in the Caribbean,
at prevailing tariffs, poor households can spend as much as 7 to 11 percent of their income on electricity.
Since the poor represent anywhere from 20-40 percent of the population in most developing countries in
the Caribbean, the high cost of electricity imposes a considerable and disproportionate burden on the poor.

Figure 1: Constraints to business success (Percent of Firms)




Source: Business Enterprise Survey, The World Bank Group.


31
   This is true mainly for the commodity exporting countries of Belize, Guyana, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
32
   The East Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU) saw output fall by 0.71% in 2011, according to the Caribbean Development Bank (2012).
33
   Consumption for one night in a hotel room averages 44 kWh of electricity, at tariffs that range from US 32-40 cents.
34
   Defined by Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) as the households at or below the poverty line (monetary measure
of the minimum consumption expenditure that is needed to meet basic food and non-food requirements of an average adult at prevailing prices).



                                                                                                                                                 109
      The high cost of electricity is largely a     Figure 2: Average tariffs in select
      result of the Region’s heavy reliance         developing countries in the Caribbean
      on expensive, imported fuel oil and           region
      diesel for power generation. In 2012,
      around 95 percent of the electricity pro-
      duced in the Caribbean region was from
      fossil fuel sources, according to Castalia
      (2012). While a few islands utilize coal,
      natural gas, and hydroelectric power; the
      majority of the islands primarily use ex-
      pensive imported diesel or heavy fuel oil
      to generate electricity. This is particularly
      true for islands that are members of the
      OECS, as they do not have domestically
      available fossil-based resources and the
      relatively small size of each power system    Source: Annual Report, Caribbean Electric Utility Service
      does not allow them to import coal or gas     Corporation (CARILEC), 2011.
      economically. Although hydro power, biomass, wind and solar are available options that can be
      useful in some of the islands, these renewable resources are intermittent and seasonal (in case
      of hydro and biomass), making them unsuitable to meet base-load requirements throughout the
      year.
      The high cost of diesel and fuel oil in power generation is often directly passed through to busi-
      nesses and residential customers alike through the electricity tariffs. For instance, in 2011, the
      fuel pass-through represented between 45 to 65 percent of electricity revenues 35 in several
      OECS countries 36.

      Where governments cushion this impact through subsidies, the fuel costs create fiscal
      burdens that are also unpredictable given the volatility in international prices for petro-
      leum products. The unpredictability of electricity costs makes it difficult for businesses
      and households to plan for future investments and expenditure as well.


      GEOTHERMAL PROVIDES AN OPPORTUNITY TO
      DIVERSIFY AND OPTIMIZE THE POWER GENERA-
      TION MIX
      It will be important to diversify the generation mix of power systems in the Caribbean
      and enhance energy efficiency in order to lower costs and increase reliability as a means
      towards improving business competitiveness and promoting shared economic growth.
      A significant shift away from utilizing costly fuel oil and diesel is essential, as well as moving
      towards a more optimized generation mix. Renewable energy presents a useful way forward.
      When combined with measures to enhance energy efficiency, which reduces energy intensity
      and therefore demand for electricity, expanding renewable energy supply can provide a lower
      cost solution that will boost the regions’ competitiveness.



      35
           Calculated as fuel cost divided by electricity revenues, based on information from utilities’ annual reports. Cost-reflective tariffs are assumed
           to be a proxy for total cost of supply.
      36
           Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.



110
Unlike fossil fuels that largely need to be imported, many Caribbean islands, especially in the
OECS, possess a rich endowment of renewable energy potential, including hydro37 , solar, wind,
biomass, and geothermal. Several countries already generate electricity from these resources.
However, most of these resources are either intermittent or seasonal, making them poor substi-
tutes for base-load generation38. Geothermal is an ideal renewable technology that, once devel-
oped, can operate reliably on a 24/7 basis. It is a clean energy option that will significantly reduce
local and global environmental impacts; and where it is indigenous, geothermal power can serve
as a natural hedge against the volatility of petroleum based commodity prices.

Figure 3: Preliminary geothermal potential estimates in the Eastern Caribbean




Source: Data from various utilities, geothermal potential based on expert review of various preliminary
estimates.




     Box 1: Geothermal development in Guadeloupe

     The 15MW La Bouillante plant in Guadeloupe is the only geothermal power plant in operation in the Carib-
     bean. The initial reconnaissance work was undertaken by the French Bureau of Geological and Mining Re-
     search, which helped establish the presence of an exploitable resource at La Bouillante. In 1980, Electricité
     de France (EDF) constructed a 5MW power plant, which was later expanded to 15 MW of capacity in 2004.
     The initial 5MW operation performed well with average availability as high as 95 percent. Repairs to the site’s
     foundations and the installation of a brine reinjection system to preserve the geothermal resource quality have
     reduced its availability in more recent years. However, the repairs are expected to eventually increase the
     plant availability.
     EDF is considering further expansion of the La Bouillante operation by possibly adding an additional 30 MW.
     EDF is also considering importing electricity generated from geothermal resources in the neighboring island
     of Dominica through an under-sea transmission line.

     Source: Alstom (2012); EDF (2012); International Energy Agency (2010a, 2010b); Commission de régulation
     de l’énergie (22 juillet 2010).




37
   Mostly small run-of-the-river hydro, with the exception of the Dominican Republic and other isolated instances where there are large hydropower sta-
tions with storage (reservoir).
38
   power stations are designed to operate continuously throughout the day



                                                                                                                                                          111
      Preliminary assessments indicate significant unexploited geothermal potential, espe-
      cially in the Eastern Caribbean, that could supply base-load power for local markets
      and beyond. The Caribbean’s volcanic geology has created many geothermal features,
      especially in the OECS region. Figure 3 identifies seven Eastern Caribbean islands where
      there is initial evidence of geothermal power generation potential, which could be confirmed
      with further exploration. Despite this potential, only the French territory of Guadeloupe has
      developed its geothermal resource by installing the 15MW La Bouillante power plant that
      is in operation. Although estimates of actual potential vary considerably since much of the
      geothermal resources in the region are unexplored, expert opinion suggests that the com-
      mercially exploitable potential can be as much as 850 MW in the Eastern Caribbean islands
      depicted in Figure 3, which exceeds the 770 MW of total current installed capacity from all
      generation technologies in these same Eastern Caribbean islands. Dominica likely has the
      largest potential with a number of geothermal fields that can be progressively developed.
      Confirmed resources at the WottenWaven/Laudat field alone far exceed the generation ca-
      pacity that can be reliably absorbed by the relatively small power system in Dominica. There
      are several other islands in the region, where estimated geothermal potential exceeds the
      relatively small base-load requirement in the respective domestic market. Several islands
      are exploring options for exporting electricity generated by geothermal sources to neighbor-
      ing islands through undersea transmission lines. Such efforts could lead to regional integra-
      tion of power systems within the OECS that would create new markets for trading electricity.
      Over the long-term, integration across the wider Caribbean region might be possible, al-
      lowing reliable and cost-effective generation to benefit the entire region, not just the islands
      endowed with geothermal resources.

      Greater integration of geothermal power in the generation mix can reduce the overall
      cost of electricity supply making it more affordable, while enhancing energy security,
      improving resilience, and providing local and global environmental benefits.

      Reducing the cost of                Figure 4: Geothermal electricity costs compared
      electricity—Geothermal elec-        to selected Caribbean electric utility tariffs
      tricity generation costs have
      been observed to be as low as
      5-10 US cents per kWh, as il-
      lustrated in Figure 4. It is likely
      that the cost of developing ge-
      othermal in the OECS islands
      will be higher for a number of
      reasons. Most countries will
      be attempting to develop geo-
      thermal for the first time with
      limited experience. The initial
      developments are likely to be
      modest in size to match do-
                                          Source: U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL); and
      mestic requirements, which
                                          US Department of Energy.
      will reduce potential for econo-
      mies of scale. The cost of financing large investments in relatively small economies can also
      be high. However, as Figure 4 illustrates, even if the cost of geothermal electricity genera-
      tion were doubled to 20 US cents per kWh, it would still be an attractive lower-cost option
      compared with the high tariffs customers face today in many OECS countries.




112
Working as a natural hedge against
commodity price volatility—As Fig-            Figure 5: Average Tariff and Oil Prices in
ure 5 illustrates, electricity tariffs in the Selected Caribbean Islands
Caribbean have followed a path simi-
lar to the price of oil, which is deter-
mined by international markets. This
has led to a significant rise in electricity
tariffs over the past decade, mirroring
the overall increase in international oil
prices, which reached historical highs
during the same period. During this pe-
riod, oil prices have also been volatile
causing the electricity tariffs to fluctu-
ate. Such volatility and uncertainty cre-
ate significant challenges for business-
es as they find it difficult to plan future
investments and other important func-
tions. In contrast, geothermal genera-        Source: based on data from Caribbean Electric Utility Service Corpo-
                                              ration (CARILEC) for selected representative Caribbean countries;
tion capacity, once developed, can sup-       Crude oil spot price is the Oklahoma West Texas intermediate crude
ply electricity reliably at a steady price,   price (Source: US Energy Information Agency).
r        e       d        u         c       -
ing the vulnerability of businesses and households to electricity price shocks.
Increasing energy security and improving the balance of trade by reducing oil
imports— Figure 6 shows that over 200 MW of geothermal capacity could be absorbed into
the power systems of Eastern Caribbean countries over the next decade based on base-load
estimates and geothermal resource potential. As an indigenous resource, the development of
geothermal would enhance energy security by displacing an estimated 2.7 million barrels of fuel
oil and diesel imports each year. If the international price of oil is $80-$110 per barrel, it would
result in total annual savings between $200-$300 million, as indicated in the table in Figure 6.

Environmental benefits through reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and local pol-
lution—Geothermal is a cleaner, renewable power generation option that emits only about 10
percent as much carbon dioxide (CO2) as diesel generation (Fridleifsson, Huenges, Lund, & Ry-
bach, 2008). Based on potential geothermal generation estimates in Figure 6 and the potential
displacement of diesel and fuel oil generation, the estimated reduction in CO2 emissions would be
approximately 1.3 to 1.6 million tons per year. This reduction in greenhouse gases would contrib-
ute towards mitigation of global climate change impacts. Generating geothermal power can also
benefit the local environment. Geothermal power plants release less than 1 percent as much sul-
fur dioxide (SO2) as the cleanest fossil fuel generation, and do not emit any nitrogen oxide (NOx)
or particulate matter (Boyle, 2004; and Kagel et al. 2007). Limiting local pollution and maintaining
a clean environment are important for sustaining tourism, a key driver of economic growth.




39
     Dominica estimate includes electricity exports to Guadeloupe and/or Martinique.




                                                                                                                     113
      Figure 6: Illustration of potential geothermal benefits – Electricity, fuel
      savings, & avoided CO2

                                                                                          Est.                 Est.
                                                                      Est.               annual              annual             Est.
                               Est. peak and base load             geothermal         geothermal             savings           annual
              Island               demand in 2023a                 capacity in         electricity            from            avoided
                                                                     2023b            generationc         avoided fuel         green-
                                                                                                            importsd           house
                                                                                                                                gas
                                                                                                                             emissionse
                                                                                                                              mil tCO2e/
                                           MW                            MW             GWh/year           US$M/year
                                                                                                                                 year
          Dominica         27                 16                  115f               907                  $109-150 M         0.65 – 0.80
          Grenada          49                 29                  29                 229                  $28-38 M           0.17 – 0.20
          Guadeloupe       371                222                 20                 158                  $19-26 M           0.11 – 0.14
          Montserrat       4                  2                   2                  16                   $1.9-2.6 M         0.01 – 0.01
          Nevis            52                 31                  25                 197                  $24-33 M           0.14 – 0.17
          St. Lucia        85                 51                  30                 237                  $28-39 M           0.17 – 0.21
          St. Vincent      43                 26                  10                 79                   $9-13 M            0.06 – 0.07
          Totals                                                  231                1,822                $219-301 M         1.32 – 1.61

      a
         Demand estimate for illustration, peak load forecast based on recent growth rates, base load assumed to be equal
      to 60 percent of peak demand
      b
         Future geothermal installed capacity is assumed to be the lesser of base-load estimate or potential geothermal ca-
      pacity;
      c
        Assumes 90 percent capacity factor for geothermal power plant operation.
      d
        Assumes generation efficiency of 19kWh per imperial gallon of fuel (based on LUCELEC’s efficiency as reported in
      annual reports); and oil prices of US$80-US$110 per barrel.
      e
        Based on emissions factors of 91 grams per kWh for geothermal and 893 grams per kWh for fuel oil based genera-
      tion, and range of +/- 10 percent.
      f
        For Dominica, estimated geothermal capacity exceeds domestic base-load needs due to assumed electricity exports
      to Guadeloupe & Martinique.

      Although Guadeloupe is the only island with a geothermal power plant in operation, there
      are preparation activities underway in a number of the Eastern Caribbean islands to try
      and exploit the benefits of geothermal power.

      • Expanding existing operations—Guadeloupe is considering expanding the installed capacity
      of its existing 15 MW power plant at La Bouillante (Electricité de France EDF, 2012), while, it is
      also considering, together with Martinique, the possibility of importing geothermal electricity from
      Dominica.

      • Geothermal drilling—a private developer drilled exploratory wells on Nevis in 2008 (SKN
      Vibes, 2008), but the island administration is now seeking a new development partner (Think
      Geoenergy, 2013). Dominica has completed the drilling of three exploration wells, and is poised
      to advance to the production drilling phase (The Government of the Commonwealth of Domi-
      nica, n.d.; The World Bank, 2013). It is evaluating options for trading electricity with neighboring
      islands. Montserrat also has exploration drilling activities underway (Caribbean Journal, 2013).
      Some exploratory drilling took place in St. Lucia in 1988 (Batocletti, 1999), but activity since then
      has been very limited. 40

      40
         In 2010 the Government and US-based company Qualibou Energy signed a development agreement, with interim funding for pre-construction activi-
      ties announced in 2011; but no progress has been reported since.


114
funding the exploration drilling. Investors are also often reluctant to fund this early stage of devel-
opment, since the project will not be in a position to produce electricity and earn revenues for sev-
eral years, even when projects are predicted to be viable. As a result, private project developers
face considerable financial exposure that severely constrains their capacity to undertake quick
and significant expansion of green field geothermal prospects. Since geothermal resource risks
are a common characteristic of the technology, many other countries with geothermal resources
have grappled with addressing this barrier in order to develop the sector.

A recent global survey commissioned by the World Bank, and conducted by GeothermEX (2010)
confirms that the role of the public sector, in particular, to incentivize developers and catalyze in-
vestments during the early stages of development, has proved to be critical in successful geother-
mal expansions. Government interventions have varied, and have included a range of options
including extending resource risk financing, public sector resource confirmation prior to granting a
concession to private developers, open access to early stage surface level reconnaissance work,
establishment of risk insurance facilities, and loan guarantees, to name a few. When implement-
ed successfully, they have proven to be vital in attracting private investments, and scaling-up and
speeding-up geothermal development. In almost all instances, there was some form of public
support, especially at the early stages, which helped reduce investor risks and mobilize financing
for developing the sector.




   Box 2: Geothermal development in Dominica

   Preliminary estimates suggest that Dominica has the largest exploitable geothermal resources in the Car-
   ibbean due to the volcanic geology of the island. Of the several potential sites, the Wotten Waven/Laudat
   (WW/L) field in the Roseau Valley is the most advanced in terms of preparation, although the development
   has not reached the stage of power generation yet. Several development partners, including the World Bank
   are supporting the Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica (GoCD) with this effort.
   The GoCD is interested in attracting a reputable private investor to develop the WW/L project, but saw the
   need to provide enough confidence to prospective developers regarding the sufficient availability of the steam
   resource as well as the commerciality of the investment. Therefore, the GoCD, with the support of develop-
   ment partners, undertook surface level reconnaissance work and drilled three exploration wells at WW/L field.
   This effort has had a significant impact. It has helped confirm the existence of the resource and work is now
   underway to prove its commercial viability. The GoCD is also making efforts to ensure that the development is
   undertaken in line with industry practices and compliant with international standards – something vital for the
   “bankability” of the WW/L project. As a result of this ongoing work, there has been interest from international
   developers to participate in the operation, and discussions are underway, not only to construct a small power
   plant to meet domestic needs, but also to scale-up development for exporting electricity to neighboring islands
   of Guadeloupe and Martinique.




   Source: Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica. (n.d.), The World Bank, (2013); photo credits – Mi-
   gara Jayawardena, The World Bank.




                                                                                                                     115
      Attracting credible and experienced developers is essential for developing the resources
      in line with proven industry practices, and in compliance with international standards.
      Given the limited geothermal experience in the Eastern Caribbean islands, it will be important
      to attract globally experienced geothermal developers who have the technical and financial ca-
      pacity to efficiently exploit the resource. In a number of cases, improper adherence to common
      industry practices has led to excessive depletion of the steam resource and degradation of the
      field causing permanent damage. Examples of such instances include the Geysers field in the
      USA and the Momotombo field in Nicaragua. Given the nascent state of development and the
      relatively small scale of the projects, it may be challenging to attract top global developers to
      partake in the Caribbean geothermal investments. The overall investment climates can also
      deter investors from some countries. Therefore, it will be important to have a credible process
      for selecting developers and awarding concessions in a fair and transparent manner in order to
      attract experienced developers.

      Following successful geothermal resource confirmation, there will be a continued need
      to mobilize greater levels of financing to complete the development of this resource.
      Once geothermal resources are confirmed in a field, risks decline and greater certainty regard-
      ing the overall viability of the development exists. However, the amount of financing that is
      required for implementing the next stage of development can be significantly higher, particularly
      for larger developments. Unlike conventional power schemes, geothermal development requires
      funding to develop the upstream steam
      field as well as the downstream power       Figure 8: Private investments in the energy
      generation operations. Comparatively,          sector for select Caribbean countries
      it requires more up-front financing than
      a conventional power project, which
      can lead to high, and in some cases
      prohibitive, financing costs to cover
      the production drilling, to develop the
      steam gathering system, and to con-
      struct the power plant. A 20-30 MW de-
      velopment may require anywhere from
      $70-$150 million in financing depend-
      ing on a number of factors; while the
      total private investment in the entire en-
      ergy sector in the Caribbean countries     Source: Private Participation in Infrastructure (PPI)
      depicted in Figure 8 has averaged no       Database, The World Bank, 2013.
      more than $125 million per year.

      If the commodity exporting countries with larger economies and more robust growth are ex-
      cluded, then the selected OECS countries included in Figure 8 have only managed to attract a
      mere $17 million per year on average in private financing in the energy sector over the past five
      years. Therefore, it will be a challenge for many of the OECS countries to mobilize the neces-
      sary financing in order to develop their geothermal resources. As an example of the challenge
      they face, the relatively large power plant for export in Dominica may require financing that is
      comparable to the entire GDP of the country. Furthermore, the limited availability of financing
      will likely require developers to contribute more equity in order to carry out investments while
      looking to leverage commercial financing, when available. The Governments in the region can
      also finance some undertakings, but high national debt levels in many Caribbean countries will
      likely limit such contributions to leverage financing.




116
Special consideration is needed for integrating geothermal power into relatively small and
isolated island systems in the Eastern Caribbean. The small scale of the electricity networks will
pose a number of challenges, including limiting the ability to absorb geothermal capacity, requiring
smaller unit sizing in power plants and adequate backup to maintain system reliability, and the need to
strengthen existing transmission and distribution networks to accommodate the influx of geothermal
power. It will also be important that the policy and regulatory environment is adequately designed to
integrate geothermal power. Developers will want to ensure that their investments are secure, that
they can receive a return commensurate with the costs and risks associated with the development, and
that there is sufficient recourse should issues arise. It is also common for investors to seek agreement
regarding the power off-take and pricing. These and other factors that enhance the overall investment
climate in the sector will be crucial for mobilizing private investments to develop the geothermal sector.

Inter-island transmission interconnections provide an           opportunity to exploit the Eastern Car-
ibbean’s full geothermal potential; and promote re-
gional integration. The small size of the power sys-            Figure   9:   Proposed            transmis-
tems in most Eastern Caribbean islands do not allow the         sion   interconnection:
                                                                                  Dominica-
full geothermal potential of the region to be exploited.        Guadeloupe-Martiniqueies
However, this challenge could be overcome by integrat-
ing regional power markets through the development of
transmission interconnections. Figure 9 shows a sub-
marine transmission link to connect Guadeloupe and
Martinique to Dominica that is being actively considered
to exploit the full potential in the WottenWaven/Laudat
geothermal field and beyond. Nevis and Montserrat
may also have geothermal potential in excess of domes-
tic needs, and may benefit from an interconnection with
other islands.

However, developing and operating submarine trans-
mission lines can be costly and complex, likely requir-
ing international expertise that is not available region-
ally. Moreover, interconnecting different jurisdictions will
require regional cooperation. Although no transmission
interconnections exist in the Eastern Caribbean today,
the future may bring greater energy trade and
regional cooperation.

Geothermal development is largely beneficial for the               * Other Caribbean countries include Belize,
                                                                   Dominican Republic, and Jamaica
environment and local communities—and following
                                                                   **Selected OECS include Dominica, Grenada,
industry practices and international standards will                St. Kitts & Nevis, and St. Lucia
adequately address its potential impacts. Geother-
mal is a clean, renewable energy that is environmentally friendly with generally positive impacts.
However, as with the development and operation of any power plant, it will be important to comply
with internationally accepted environmental and social standards such as the Equator Principles. This
will ensure that potential water, air quality, noise, and other impacts are adequately addressed so that
investments continue to be sustainable. Internationally compliant safeguards practices are also an in-
tegral part of a project’s “bankability” as financial institutions are increasingly requiring compliance with
such practices. Therefore, it will be important for each jurisdiction to mandate its own environmental
and social standards based on international best practices; and monitor projects to ensure compliance
with those standards by project developers.




                                                                                                                 117
           CON
           CLU
           SIONS
      Integrating geothermal power into the Caribbean Region’s power genera-
      tion mix can reduce electricity costs and stabilize prices - increasing afford-
      ability and predictability for businesses and households; and enhancing
      energy security and resilience by utilizing an indigenous resource that will
      reduce dependency on imported fuel oils, provide environmental benefits,
      and can help promote greater regional integration. Preliminary assessments
      indicate that the Region is richly endowed with geothermal resources, es-
      pecially in the Eastern Caribbean, but most of these resources remain un-
      exploited.

      A number of challenges, some of which are intrinsic to geothermal development
      and others that are specific to the Caribbean Region, have prevented greater geo-
      thermal exploitation. All developers face challenges because of uncertainty sur-
      rounding the availability of geothermal resources. Such risks also make it difficult
      to secure funding for the early stages of development and also to mobilize greater
      amounts of financing for subsequent stages of development. This is particularly
      the case in the Caribbean Region where most of the geothermal resources are
      not yet commercially proven (despite indication of potential), regional expertise in
      the development of geothermal energy is limited, as are the flows of private funds
      needed to develop this resource. Furthermore, the small and isolated nature of
      the Region’s power systems limits the size of geothermal plants and their ability
      to fully achieve economies of scale.

      As shown by successful geothermal developments worldwide, the public
      sector can help reduce investor risks and mobilize funds, particularly at
      the early stages of development, which can catalyze greater private financ-
      ing for subsequent stages. Attracting credible and experienced developers will
      also be essential to ensure that geothermal projects are carried out in line with
      proven industry practices, and that they comply with international standards. In
      order to fully exploit the region’s viable geothermal potential and take advantage
      of economies of scale, greater promotion and investments in regional integration
      of the power sectors will also be needed. Both the public and private sector can
      play a key role in advancing geothermal development in the Caribbean Region,
      which can in turn foster economic growth and enhance regional competitiveness.


118
119
      REFERENCES
      Alstom. (2012). Bouillante I - French West Indies. Retrieved from http://www.alstom.com/Global/
      Power/Resources/Documents/Brochures/la-bouillante-geothermal-power-plant.pdf

      Batocletti, L. (1999). Geothermal resources in Latin America and the Caribbean. Sandia National
      Labs. Retrieved from http://www.docstoc.com/docs/88836388/Geothermal-Resources-in-Latin-
      America-and-the-Caribbean.

      Boyle, G. ed. (2004). Renewable energy. 2nd edition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press & The
      Open University.

      Caribbean Development Bank. (2012). Annual Report. Retrieved from http://www.caribank.org/
      publications-and-resources/annual-reports.

      Caribbean Electric Utility Service Corporation. (2002-2011). Tariff Survey Among Member Elec-
      tric Utilities. Retrieved from http://www.carilec.com/services/

      Caribbean Electric Utility Service Corporation. (2011). Annual Report. Retrieved from http://www.
      carilec.com/publications/CARILECAR2011.pdf

      Caribbean Hotel Energy Efficiency Action Program. (2012). Caribbean Hotel Energy Efficiency
      Action Program (CHENACT) Final Presentation in Washington DC, October 2012.

      Caribbean Journal. (2013). Montserrat Geothermal Drilling Nears Depth of 1000 Metres. Re-
      trieved from http://www.caribjournal.com/2013/04/14/montserrat-geothermal-drilling-nears-
      depth-of-1000-metres/

      Castalia. (2012). CREF-Castalia Island Renewable Ranking. Retrieved from http://www.caribbe-
      anenergyforum.com/themes/cref/pdf/cref-castalia-island-renewable-ranking.pdf

      Commission de régulation de l’énergie. (22 July 2010). Délibération de la Commission de régula-
      tion de l’énergie. Retrieved from http://www.google.com.mx/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=
      web&cd=2&ved=0CDIQFjAB&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cre.fr%2Fdocuments%2Fdeliberation
      s%2Fdecision%2Finstallation-geothermique-en-guadeloupe%2Fconsulter-la-deliberation&ei=W
      EkhUpWBHMTDsASrroC4CA&usg=AFQjCNEcNe3ZMKsdmUdWf41z6WrPpMCSbw&sig2=uoe
      xVlNguxakAnmx2OLb8Q&bvm=bv.51495398,d.cWc

      Electricite de France. (2012). Bilan Prévisionnel de l’Équilibre Offre / Demande d’électricité. Re-
      trieved from http://sei.edf.com/nos-engagements/bilans-previsionnels-offre-demande-47808.
      html

      Energy Sector Management Assistance Program /The World Bank. (2012). Geothermal hand-
      book: Planning and financing power generation. Washington DC: World Bank.

      Fridleifsson, I.B., Bertani, R., Huenges, E., Lund, J.W., & Rybach, L. (2008). The possible role
      and contribution of geothermal energy to the mitigation of climate change. Report for the Inter-
      governmental Panel on Climate Change. 59-80. Retrieved from http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/support-
      ing-material/proc-renewables-lubeck.pdf




120
GeothermEx. (2010). An assessment of geothermal resource risks in Indonesia. Prepared for The
World Bank/Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility. Retrieved from http://www.ppiaf.org/
sites/ppiaf.org/files/publication/REPORT_Risk_Mitigation_Options_Indonesia_0.pdf

Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica. (n.d). Development Progress in the Wottten
Waven Geothermal Area in Roseau Valley. Presentation by the Geothermal Project Management
Unit. Unpublished.

Government of Grenada. (2011). National Energy Plan of Grenada. Retrieved from http://www.
gov.gd/egov/docs/other/GNEP_Final_Nov_23_2011.pdf

International Energy Agency. (2010a). Geothermal Implementing Agreement Annual Report 2010.
Retrieved from http://www.iea.org/files/ann_rep_sec/geo2010.pdf

International Energy Agency. (2010b). Trends in Geothermal Applications. Retrieved from http://
iea-gia.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/GIA_TrendsGeothermalApplications-2010_Vs2_1-
Ganz-29Aug121.pdf

Kagel, A., Bates, D. & Gawell, K. (2007). A Guide to Geothermal Energy and the Environment.
Washington DC: Geothermal Energy Association. Accessed at http://geo-energy.org/reports/en-
vironmental%20guide.pdf

SKN Vibes. (2008). West Indies Power moves to second geothermal drill site on Nevis. Retrieved
from http://m.sknvibes.com/news/newsdetails.cfm/5637

The World Bank. (2013). Private Participation in Infrastructure (PPI) Database, 2013. Accessed
at http://ppi.worldbank.org

Think Geoenergy. (2013). Nevis Government in Discussion with Several Development Groups.
Retrieved from http://thinkgeoenergy.com/archives/15604

U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. (2009). 2009 Renewable Energy Databook. Re-
trieved from http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy10osti/48178.pdf

US Department of Energy. (2013). Geothermal FAQs. Retrieved from http://www1.eere.energy.
gov/geothermal/faqs.html

U.S. Energy Information Agency. (2013). Oklahoma West Texas intermediate crude price, 2002-
2011. Retrieved from http://www.eia.gov

Ville de Bouillante. (2013). Géothermie à Bouillante—50 Ans d’Histoire. Retrieved from http://
www.guadeloupe-energie.gp/wp-content/uploads/130611-Dossier-de-Pressegeo.pdf
The World Bank. (N.D.), Enterprise Surveys. Accessed at http://www.enterprisesurveys.org.

The World Bank. (2013). Situation Analysis for the Preparation of the Wotten Waven-Trafalgar-
Laudat field in the Roseau Valley. Unpublished.




                                                                                                   121
 9    PROMOTING
      GROWTH IN THE
      CARIBBEAN:
      TAX INCENTIVES
      IN THEORY
      AND IN PRACTICE
      Martin Bes and Daniel Alvarez-Estrada*
122
123
      ABSTRACT

                     The recent international financial crisis, which reduced demand for the financial services and tourism,
                     greatly reduced growth prospects in the Caribbean. Policymakers have begun analyzing the possibil-
                     ity of offering tax incentives to encourage private investment to improve growth prospects. This policy
                     note analyzes this possibility. It points out that there is little evidence that tax incentive policies have
                     not been shown to increase private investment, or economic growth, and cannot be a substitute for
                     structural reform. If a tax incentive policy is being considered, it should target the Corporate Income
                     Tax, by means of an accelerated depreciation allowance tax filing should always be required, and in-
                     centives should be limited to export-oriented activities.

      *World Bank Consultant, and Senior Public Sector Specialist, LCSPS, World Bank, respectively.




      INTRODUCTION
      The recent international financial crisis dealt a hard blow to growth prospects in the Car-
      ibbean, being reflected in reduced demand for financial services and tourism as well as
      falling remittances. This was combined in some cases with home grown macroeconomic
      imbalances and the need to face the costs of financial sector bailouts in other countries.
      Counter cyclical policy response has been limited, since countries in the region do not
      enjoy sufficient fiscal space and debt levels in some of them are at worrisome levels. More
      recently, policymakers have indicated the need to explore the use of tax incentives to fos-
      ter much needed private investment. This Policy Note analyzes the issues associated with
      the use of tax incentives and reviews the challenges faced by the region, which has not
      been completely successful in the past in controlling tax expenditures.

      The Policy Note is organized as follows. The first section explores the diverse nature of the Car-
      ibbean and Latin American group of countries discussed in this note: The Bahamas, Barbados,
      Belize, the Dominican Republic, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
      This is followed by a word of caution regarding the emphasis on factor accumulation in explain-
      ing growth, dampening beforehand any unrealistic expectations regarding growth promoting tax
      incentives.

      A brief analytical review of the main direct and indirect tax instruments is included in section 3.
      Finally, while studies of tax expenditures in Caribbean economies are not infrequent, very little
      empirical work has been carried out in the region regarding their role in promoting investment
      and the effect of such investment on growth. Section 5 will then review the experiences of some
      countries with tax incentives policies. A brief set of Recommendations closes the document.




124
RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
SELECTED GROUP OF CARIBBEAN COUNTRIES

While the Caribbean and Latin American countries included in this Chapter share many cultur-
al, historical, economic and geographic characteristics, they show some striking differences
as well. Their similarities include the fact that most of these countries are island states, and
all are vulnerable to natural disasters. They are also mostly small countries in terms of terri-
tory and population, though there are outliers regarding both variables: Guyana and Suriname, two
countries located in South America have large, if sparsely populated, territories; and the Dominican
Republic and Haiti have over 10 million inhabitants each, overshadowing the rest of the countries
being considered. Living standards are high in The Bahamas, Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago
as measured by the UNDP’s annual Human Development Report. With the exception of Haiti, who is
ranked at the low-end of human development indicators, the countries discussed in this policy note are
ranked in the middle of human development indicators.

Tourism, financial services, and natural resources are the dominant economic activities. The
Bahamas and Barbados are specialized in high-end tourism and financial services while Belize, Guy-
ana, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago are resource-based economies (oil and gas, minerals, agri-
culture and forestry). The Dominican Republic and Jamaica have strong tourist sectors as well as sig-
nificant mining activity and some agriculture. Haiti is a special case, as political instability and natural
shocks have undermined economic performance over the past four decades.

Per capita GDP also ranges widely among the countries covered by this note. With values rang-
ing from $17,000 to $23,500 US dollars, The Bahamas, Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados boast the
highest per capita GDPs among the emerging markets of the Western Hemisphere. At the other end of
the spectrum is Haiti, with a per capita GDP of around $830 US dollars. Belize, the Dominican Repub-
lic, Guyana and Jamaica are low middle-income countries, in a range of $4,000 to $6,000 US dollars
per year, while Suriname’s per capita GDP will be in the neighborhood of $9,500 US dollars in 2013.

With the exception of the Dominican Republic and to a lesser extent The Bahamas, fiscal rev-
enue is at the high end for emerging economies, in the range of 24% to 35% of GDP. Taxes and
social security systems provide the bulk of government resources, although natural resources and
grants represent a significant part of fiscal revenues in the cases of Trinidad and Tobago and Haiti, re-
spectively. Public expenditure in these countries is also higher than average for emerging economies,
in the range of 25% to 40% of GDP, with the exception again of the Dominican Republic where it hov-
ers around 18%. Overall deficits for all these countries will range between 2% and 6% of GDP in 2013.
Public debt is a matter of concern for some countries, ranging between 55% and 82% of GDP in
The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize and Guyana. It is especially high in Jamaica, at over 140% of GDP.

The greatest impact of the international financial crisis was felt in the service-oriented econo-
mies of the region, as well as those that receive significant remittances from their migrants.
Higher energy and food prices compounded their stress. However, even Trinidad and Tobago, an oil
and gas exporter, was not immune to the crisis as it had to rescue a large financial conglomerate in
2009. This has translated into low growth since the crisis, particularly in the non-resource economies.

Rigid expenditures patterns and significant deficits have meant there has been little fiscal space to
finance expansionary policies domestically. High debt levels have limited their ability to finance such
policies through international borrowing, except in the cases of Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago,
where exports of natural resources insulated them to some extent from the crisis.




                                                                                                               125
      GROWTH DETERMINANTS

      For over half a century economists have used a sources-of-growth accounting framework to
      estimate the contributions of changes in the labor force, in capital, and in technology, to growth.
      A logical extension of this analysis is to examine the determinants of factor accumulation and in-
      novation, including the role played by tax policy.

      Taxes affect the labor force in many ways. For example, high personal income tax rates discour-
      age people from working, while tax credits for education may encourage investment in human
      capital, and thus increase productivity. The same is true regarding physical capital. Higher corpo-
      rate income taxes tend to discourage investments, while tax incentives will, all else being equal,
      encourage capital formation. Likewise, while tax policies cannot cause innovation it can stimulate
      the expenditures in research and development that may lead to innovation.

      It would however, be a mistake to conclude that all that is needed to increase economic growth
      is the right combination of tax breaks to provide sufficient stimulus for factor accumulation. Em-
      pirical studies cited in Easterly and Levine (2001) show that factor accumulation only explains
      around 50% of per capita growth in OECD countries and 65% in LA countries, while the rest is
      explained by Total Factor Productivity, a residual that economists don’t yet adequately under-
      stand (Prescott, 1998).

      Without denying the importance of factor accumulation, economists have increasingly
      placed a greater emphasis on the role played by economic policies in setting a framework
      conducive for growth, productivity and innovation. An initial set of policies considered
      includes openness to international trade, sound fiscal management and financial sector
      development. They argue that structural reform often unleashes the growth potential of
      a country in ways barely imagined by tax measures enacted to promote investments in
      certain sectors.

      Tax incentives in emerging economies have been justified for a number of reasons,
      chief among them being the need to compensate for market failures that discourage
      investment41. High capital mobility and international competition for foreign direct investment
      (FDI) has also led countries to offer tax incentives, as well as other enticements, in an effort to
      land coveted investments. Last, tax incentives are frequently seen as an expedient way to ad-
      dress existing bottlenecks and limitations that make a country, or sub-regions of a country, less
      attractive for investment, and that would require lengthy structural reform.

      Possibly the most compelling justification for the use of tax incentives is the existence of
      positive spillover effects. Given these positive externalities, a firm will decide a level of invest-
      ments that will be sub-optimal for the country as a whole, since it will not be able to reap all the
      benefits associated with this investment. In this case, tax incentives could be used to increase a
      project’s profitability, inducing the firm to increase the level of investment to optimal levels. Ex-
      amples of such investments are those located in a country’s less-developed regions or those that
      build human and physical capital that will not exclusively benefit the project’s owners42.




      41
         The infant industry argument was used to justify the use of trade barriers to allow nascent sector to develop the skills, knowledge, etc. that would allow
      it to compete with imports. This argument has lost support due to the unsatisfactory performance of such inward-oriented development strategies vis
      a vis strategies that embraced trade openness.
      42
         Porto (2010) describes Uruguay’s sophisticated investment-promotion regime.

126
First of all, any tax incentive scheme requires a well-functioning tax system. Tax incen-
tives will only work if taxes are collected in the first place, a condition that is not fulfilled in many
countries in the hemisphere due to poor tax designs and weak tax and customs administrations.
Efficient, client-oriented tax and customs administrations are key to collecting taxes. Tax and cus-
toms administrations should enjoy financial and administrative autonomy, and its staff should be
part of a civil service that is independent of the political system. This same degree of professional
skill is required of the budgetary institutions, sectorial ministries and investment boards responsi-
ble for managing and overseeing any investment promotion regime. Furthermore, well-designed
system should separate those responsible for the administration of the tax benefits of projects
from those responsible for selecting these projects based on objective criteria and monitoring that
investors fulfill their commitments.

The next, frequently overlooked, step of a good tax incentive system is a sustainable fiscal
framework. In countries of questionable fiscal solvency, tax incentives are not likely to generate
quality investments, as entrepreneurs will not expect the favorable tax treatment awarded to their
investment to be sustained over time.

But what kind of tax incentives are there? The initial distinction made when considering tax incen-
tives is between incentives through direct taxes, i.e. the Corporate Income Tax, (CIT); and indirect
taxes, i.e. import tariffs and the Value Added Tax (VAT)43.

Corporate Income Tax Incentives

CIT tax incentives target the tax rate, as well as the rate of capital recovery of invested amounts.
Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of these instruments in terms of revenue
and implementation costs, in terms of the distortions they introduce in favor of tax avoidance and
resource allocation and in terms of transparency for the tax system.

The most efficient CIT tax incentives function by means of accelerated depreciation, allow-
ing taxpayers to frontload depreciation beyond the regular schedules accepted in the tax
code, in some cases even expensing the total investment amounts when the investment
is made. The revenue cost associated with accelerated depreciation is bounded by the amount
invested, unlike incentives that operate on profits, which are unbounded and depend on the per-
formance of the project. Expressed from a different angle, the incentive only affects the timing
of the cost–recovery and not its amount. An accelerated depreciation scheme is fairly straight-
forward to implement and does not require a specific arrangement from the tax administration.
Unlike other direct tax-incentive schemes that encourage investors to combine profits from firms
that do not enjoy tax incentives with those that do benefit from them, accelerated depreciation
does not introduce any bias in terms of tax avoidance. Likewise, this alternative is transparent,
since taxpayers are required to file tax returns every year. Nor does it distort the nature of the
investment to be undertaken by the firm.




43
  This is merely an analytical distinction, because many investment promotion regimes (e.g. Argentina and Brazil) provide tax incentives through both
direct and indirect taxes. The tax incentives Argentina gives to investors in Tierra del Fuego can be consulted in http://www.sub-industria.gob.ar/depyme/
regimen-especial-aduanero-y-fiscal-de-tierra-del-fuego.
The incentives Brazil offers for investment in Manaos are described in http://www.suframa.gov.br/zfm_incentivos.cfm.

                                                                                                                                                             127
                                                               Table 1
                                                     Corporate Income Incentives

                                        Preferential Accelerated Investment Investment
                                  Tax Holiday
                                           Tax rate   Depreciation    Allowance     Tax Credit
           Revenue cost Unbounded          Bounded      Bounded        Bounded       Bounded
                Tax      Encourages Encourages          Does not     Encourages Encourages
            avoidance      transfer of    transfer of  encourage        sale and     sale and
                          profits from   profits from      tax         purchase      purchase
                        firms that are firms that are avoidance       of assets to of assets to
                               not             not                        claim        claim
                           exempted       exempted                     allowance    allowance
           Transparency  Normally do Requires tax Requires tax Requires tax Requires tax
            of revenue    not require         filing      filing          filing       filing
                cost        tax filing
            Resource         Tend to        Tend to     Does not     Tend to favor Tend to favor
            allocation        attract        attract  affect life of   short term   short term
                            short-run      short-run     assets.         assets       assets
                             projects       projects     Tend to
                                                        increase
                                                         capital
                                                        intensity

           Administration          Significant             Significant               Some.                    Some                    Some
              Costs                   tax                     tax                   Usually
                                 administration          administration           associated
                                     costs to                costs to             with carry
                                   monitor tax             monitor tax             forwards.
                                   avoidance               avoidance
                                  from related            from related
                                        but                  but non-
                                       non-                 exempted
                                    exempted                  firms.
                                      firms.
           Implementation          Medium to               Medium to               Initially to  Initially to  Initially to
              Costs                  ensure                 ensure                  ensure        ensure        ensure
                                     project                project              investment is investment is investment is
                                    complies               complies                  made          made          made
                                   with goals              with goals

      Tax incentives provided through import tariffs, excises and VAT

      Tax incentives can also be provided in the cases of import tariffs, excise taxes and the VAT44.


      44
        TOver the past two decades most countries have embraced an agenda of trade liberalization. As a result, protective tariffs and non-tariff barriers are
      used less frequently to promote economic activity and create employment.


128
This is usually done by exempting certain inputs from these taxes. While general exemptions are
easy to administer, they may entail significant revenue loss. Targeted exemptions to benefit spe-
cific industries or sectors that use these inputs will narrow the loss. However, these exemptions
interfere with the desired tax neutrality in resource allocation, since they provide tax relief only to
specific beneficiaries. They also pose significant challenges to tax administrations, because the
exempted inputs may be diverted to unintended beneficiaries.

Revenue concerns, allocation distortions and enforcement costs are the three main fac-
tors that discourage the use of indirect tax incentives in most economic activities, the
exception being those that are export-oriented.

The economic rationale for eliminating indirect taxes from exports is known as the desti-
nation principle, under which goods and services are taxed wherever they are consumed,
rather than produced. The most common application of this principle is the zero rating of
VAT on exports, by which the exporter receives a tax credit for the amount of VAT paid on
inputs used to produce the good or service. This implies that the tax treatment a product
will receive will depend on whether it is sold in the domestic market or abroad.

While the destination principle is straightforward, its implementation can present
challenges for many customs and tax administrations in developing countries. In-
direct taxes are reimbursed only on the amounts paid on import tariffs, excise taxes and
VAT for inputs used to produce exported goods and services. However, exporting firms
usually produce more than one good or service, using many inputs in different propor-
tions that may be taxed at different rates. Furthermore, they often sell in both domestic
and export markets.

A final mention should be made regarding Export Processing Zones (EPZ). EPZs are
widely used in the Caribbean region to promote exports and it is not unusual for
governments promoting such activities to exempt them from direct and indirect
taxes. While the former is non-controversial, indirect tax incentives for export-re-
lated-activities, other than VAT exemptions, violate WTO rules and must be dis-
mantled by 2015 for all but the poorest countries.

EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF TAX
INCENTIVES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

In this section, we begin by reviewing analytical work on tax incentives in developing
countries and their impact on investment and growth. While this literature is not abun-
dant, a further source of information on the cost of these policies is available through the
tax expenditure reports prepared by countries’ Budget Offices. Thus, we examine the tax
expenditures of two economies in the region: the Dominican Republic and Jamaica. As
we shall see, both countries provide significant, and unaffordable, tax relief. However,
the fact that there is so little to show for these tax expenditures indicates that there is no
substitute for a targeted policy or for a well-designed tax system.



                                                                                                          129
      We then review the aggressive tax planning behavior of the Dominican Republic’s tourist sector
      under the understanding that it does not differ significantly from that of other countries in the re-
      gion. The strategy of the Dominican Republic’s tax administration, which employs transfer-pricing
      rules developed according to OECD guidelines, will be described, as it can easily be adapted to
      other Caribbean economies.

      Zee et al. (2002) paint a bleak picture of the effectiveness of tax incentives in developing coun-
      tries in their review of the empirical work on this subject: “The main messages of this
      research are that tax incentives can stimulate investment but that a country’s overall economic
      characteristics may be more important for the success or the failure of industries than any tax
      incentive package; and even if tax incentives stimulate investment, they are not generally cost
      effective” (p. 1508).

      Klemm and Van Parys (2009), analyze the use of such incentives as a tool to compete with other
      countries for foreign investment, in an econometric study covering 47 African, Latin American
      and Caribbean countries over a 20-year period45. While they find evidence that tax incentives
      provided by CIT rates and tax holidays are effective in attracting FDI, they found no evidence that
      these investments translated into increases in overall private investment or growth, leading them
      to conclude that the tax incentive’s “ultimate benefits for the economy may be limited”46.

      From a tax revenue perspective, Nassar (2008) found that CIT competition led to an erosion of
      the tax base in 15 Caribbean countries. He concluded that the widespread use of tax holidays
      needed to be eliminated if alternative policy proposals being considered at that time – including
      accelerated depreciation and tax harmonization – were to have an impact on revenue collec-
      tion. Sosa (2006) also finds disappointing results for tax incentives in terms of generating new
      investments, and found that the costs in terms of foregone tax revenue for the small island states
      that comprise the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU) was high. Chai and Goyal (2008)
      also study the tax incentives provided by the same group of countries and find that “The costs
      are very large, while the benefits appear to be marginal at best. Foregone tax revenues range
      between 9.5 and 16 percent of GDP per year, whereas total foreign direct investment does not
      appear to depend on concessions. A rethinking of the use of concessions in the region is needed
      urgently”47.

      Tax expenditure reports by the budget offices of the Dominican Republic and Jamaica provide a
      further estimate of the cost of tax incentives. The Dominican Republic had a tax burden of around
      15.5% of GDP in 2010. VAT and excises are the largest revenue sources, followed closely by
      the income tax and social security taxes. Tax expenditures, i.e. exemptions from taxes, are high,
      around 5.8% of GDP. Almost two thirds of this amount provides relief from VAT, in an attempt to
      mitigate the high adverse distributional consequences of this tax. The remaining tax expendi-
      tures, equal to 2.2% of GDP, benefits export promotion zones, general manufactu ring and the
      tourist sector.




      45
         The Caribbean countries included in both Klemm and Van Parys (2009), and this Policy Note are The Bahamas, Barbados, the Dominican Republic,
      Guyana, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago.
      46
          The authors offer two possible explanations for the limited impact of tax incentives: (1) tax incentives “mainly affect the ownership rather than the
      amount of capital in an economy” and (2) “it is possible that higher FDI crowds out domestically financed investment, with no net effect”.
      47
         Chai and Goyal (2008) use the term concession instead of incentives in their study.




130
Also in 2010, Jamaica’s tax collection reached 23.6% of GDP, with a relatively high share of
total tax receipts coming from income taxes. Tax expenditures are high; they represented 7.3%
of GDP in 2009, reflecting widespread use of tax instruments to promote economic activities.
Tax incentives are grouped under four categories: Statutory Tax Expenditures, Incentives, Dis-
cretional Waivers and Waivers on Tax Arrears. What should be clear is that such a complicated
incentive system not only reduces public revenue but it ends up undermining the capacity of tax
administration by making tax evasion easier and complicating efforts to calculate how much taxes
companies should be paying.


                                         Table 2
       Dominican Republic and Jamaica - Tax Burden and Tax Expenditures As a % of
                                          GDP

                                                    Dominican Republic                            Jamaica
 Income Tax                                         2.9                                           8.7
 VAT                                                4.3                                           7.1
 Excises                                            3.5                                           3.2
 Trade                                              1.0                                           1.7
 Others                                             3.8                                           2.9
 Total                                              15.5                                          23.6

 Tax Expenditures          5.8                        7.3
 Sources: IDB CIAT Data Base, Garcimartín and Diaz de Sarralde (2012), and IDB
 (2010)

Despite the fact that tourism is possibly the most competitive sector of Caribbean countries, it
is also the sector awarded with the most over-generous tax incentives. Tourism on average ac-
counts for almost forty cents of every dollar of export earnings in the region, and this amount can
rise to almost eighty cents in the cases of Barbados and The Bahamas. However, tourism’s share
of tax revenue tends to be modest, in no small part due to aggressive tax planning, to take maxi-
mum advantage of incentives. (Barreix and Velayos, 2013).

In order to improve tax collection from the tourism sector, the Dominican Republic’s tax adminis-
tration (Dirección General de Impuestos Internos - DGII) launched a thorough investigation of the
country’s all-inclusive hotel sector.48 The main findings were that CIT and VAT liabilities were kept
at a minimum due to three reasons: (1) reservations were handled by trading companies linked
to the hotel operator but located in countries with low or no tax; (2) hotels declared daily rates to
the tax administration that were lower than the operating cost per guest; (3) hotels reported per-
manent losses to the tax administration as well as debts to the trading companies.




48
     All-inclusive hotels represent 69% of rooms in the country’s hotel sector (Montero (2012).




                                                                                                            131
      The DGII then designed an arm’s length occupancy rate using the OECD’s Transfer Pricing
      Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations. This rate was then used by
      DGII to assess CIT and VAT liabilities for 2007/2010. According to Barreix and Velayos (2013),
      DGII CIT assessments for 2007/2009 represented an average increase of almost 820% of previ-
      ous self-assessed obligations. The comparable figure for VAT was 70% higher for 2007, 2009
      and 2010. While hotels contested the tax administration’s actions, the Courts ruled in favor of
      the DGII.

      In short, tax expenditure data show that regional governments have showered economic
      activity with all types of tax breaks that most countries cannot afford. These tax expen-
      ditures have not led to more competitive economies and have ended up not only distort-
      ing the tax system but they have also introduced horizontal inequity among taxpayers
      as well. Moreover, even considering tourism, the region’s most competitive sector, bad
      policy design combined with aggressive tax planning practices has undermined the tax
      system and deprived governments of revenue badly needed to finance social expendi-
      tures and infrastructure needs. The conclusion by now should be clear: tax incentives are a
      poor substitute for a dysfunctional tax system. Countries should consider rationalizing their tax
      system and eventually think about introducing a modern and cost-effective tax incentive scheme,
      targeted to offset the negative externalities that discourage growth and the creation of quality




  CON
      jobs 49.




  CLU
  SIONS
      The challenge posed by the international financial crisis, and aftermath, has revived the debate
      regarding the need to review the policy alternatives of a group of small Caribbean and South
      American nations. A key element of this review is the use of tax incentives to promote growth
      and job creation.




       49
         A brief description of the proposed activities regarding the design of tax systems and institutional strengthening of tax administra-
       tions and customs over the 2011-15 Phase IV period is presented in CARTAC (2010) Program Document. (2012).



132
The starting point of any successful tax incentive policy is a well-designed tax system. The
tax system should collect the revenue required to finance government services and help
fund infrastructure needs. Furthermore, taxpayers should perceive it to be fair and equita-
ble, both horizontally and vertically.

Caution with tax incentives is warranted on analytical and empirical grounds. With regards
to the former, policymakers should have a clear idea of the limited scope of what can be ac-
complished with this instrument. Tax incentives can address negative externalities that limit
investments, determine their location and discourage job creation. They cannot however be
used as a Deus ex machina that will solve all of an economy’s structural deficiencies. They
are not and cannot be a substitute for structural reform.

Empirical evidence of tax incentive schemes in developing countries is scarce and in any
case discouraging. Studies carried out in developing countries including in the Caribbean
have found that while tax incentives may attract FDI, they have not been able to increase
overall private investment or economic growth. Moreover, not only have the ultimate ben-
efits proven to be limited, but the cost in terms of foregone revenue has proven to be very
high as exemplified by the small island states of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union.
Additional information on the fiscal costs of tax incentives are available in tax expenditure
reports. The two countries examined in this Policy Note provided a clear picture of the
difficulties of keeping tax expenditures in check as the cost of tax relief has ballooned to
between 6% and 7% of GDP. The description of the aggressive tax planning behavior of the
Dominican Republic’s tourism sector exemplifies the questionable rationale of providing tax
relief to one of the region’s most competitive industries.

A good tax incentive system should provide an explicit rationale of the externality it will ad-
dress and should provide well-defined values of the variables it is expected to obtain (e.g.
invested amounts, jobs, net exports, etc.). This information should be assessed by a gov-
ernment agency that is independent of political pressure and its reports should be available
to the public. Smaller countries could consider creating a regional tax incentive scheme,
administered jointly by a regional multilateral body of member states to alleviate political
pressure and better resist games often played by investors on governments to enhance
their benefits.

Transparency should continue during project implementation. Governments should make
public the results of monitoring by the tax administration and the government agencies re-
sponsible for promoting investments. Furthermore, they should also publically disclose the
goals of tax incentive schemes and of their costs in terms of foregone tax liabilities. Finally,
tax incentives should have a sunset clause, so that they do not continue indefinitely.

In terms of implementation, the Corporate Income Tax is the instrument of choice. For
example, job creation may warrant the use of reduced payroll taxes to finance the social
security system. Similarly, exemptions from local taxes in the less developed regions of a
country may be beneficial. However, the accelerated depreciation allowance is a preferred
instrument to tax rates and tax holidays, and tax filing should always be required. Incen-
tives in terms of indirect taxation should be limited to export-oriented activities and are es-
sentially covered by the destination principle of taxation under which goods and services
should be taxed wherever they are consumed.




                                                                                                   133
      REFERENCES

      Artana, D. and Templado, I. (2012). Incentivos tributarios a la inversión: ¿Qué nos dicen la teoría
      y la evidencia empírica sobre su efectividad? Informe de Consultoría para el Banco Interameri-
      cano de Desarrollo.

      Barreix, A. and Velayos, F. (2013). Towards a new form of international taxation. Intertax, Volume
      41, 128-139.

      CARTAC (2010), Program Document, Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Center. Inter-
      national Monetary Fund.

      Chai, J. and Goyal, R. (2008). Tax concessions and Foreign Direct Investment in the Eastern
      Caribbean Currency Union, IMF Working Paper (WP/08/257), Washington D.C.; International
      Monetary Fund.

      DGII (2010), Informe de actividades: Servicio de hotelería todo incluido, Dirección General de
      Impuestos Internos. Departamento de Estudios Económicos y Tributarios, available in: http://
      www.dgii.gov.do/publicaciones/estudios/Documents/AnalisisSectoriServiciosalojamientotodoin-
      cluido.pdf

      Easterly, W. and Levine, R. (2001). It’s not factor accumulation: Stylized facts and growth mod-
      els. World Bank Economic Review, 15, 177-219.

      Garcimartin, C. y Díaz de Sarralde, S. (2012). Análisis del sistema impositivo de la REPÚBLICA
      DOMINICANA. Informe de Consultoría para el Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo.

      IMF. (2013). Caribbean small states: Challenges of high debt and low growth. Washington DC.

      IDB. (2010). Jamaica: Preliminary Assessment for a Comprehensive Tax Waiver Strategy. Mimeo.

      Klemm, A. and Van Parys, S. (2009). Empirical evidence on the effects of tax incentives, IMF
      Working Paper (WP/09/136), Washington D.C.; International Monetary Fund.

      Montero, W. (2012). Determinación de los beneficios en los hoteles todo incluido en la República
      Dominicana. Santo Domingo, mimeo.

      Nassar, K. (2008). Corporate Income Tax Competition in the Caribbean, IMF Working Paper
      (WP/08/77), Washington D.C.; International Monetary Fund.

      OECD. (2010). Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administra-
      tions, Paris.




134
Porto, L. (2010). Un marco conceptual de política industrial: Aplicación al caso de la promoción de
inversions en Uruguay 2005-2009. Mimeo.

Prescott, E. C. (1998). Needed: A theory of total factor productivity”, International Economic Re-
view, 39. 525-551

Sosa, S. (2006). Tax incentives and investment in the Eastern Caribbean, IMF Working Paper
(WP/06/23), Washington D.C.: International Monetary Fund.

World Bank. (2012). Tax expenditures in Colombia: A proposal for a systematic and integral re-
view. Washington, DC.

World Bank. ( 2004). Tax expenditures – Shedding light on government spending through the tax
system. Lessons from developed and transition economies. Directions in Development Series,
Washington, DC.

Zee, H., Stotsky, J. and Ley, E. (2002). Tax incentives for business investment: A primer for policy
makers in developing countries. World Development , 30, 1497-1516.




                                                                                                       135
136
      10
PUBLIC PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIP IN
THE CARIBBEAN:
BRIDGING THE
FINANCING GAP
            Jose Luis Guasch*
                                137
      ABSTRACT

                    The current strategic development plans of a number of regional governments include a substantial
                    role for private sector resources. Although many countries in the region have implemented one or two
                    PPP projects, and a few—such as the Dominican Republic, and Jamaica—have made more substan-
                    tial use of PPPs across a range of sectors, these projects have met with mixed success, because
                    none of these projects was implemented under a consistent and comprehensive PPP framework. This
                    paper proposes a number of elements needed for successful implementation of PPPs. It argues that
                    some elements would be needed immediately to enable PPP projects to progress, while others can
                    be developed over time. It also highlights four key transversal themes of particular importance for
                    sound PPP programs in the Caribbean: Governance, institutionality, capacity building, and financial
                    platforms. Given the small size of most of these countries, it would be useful to place country efforts (as
                    well as assistance) to improve PPP programs as much as possible into a Sub-Regional/Supranational
                    framework, so as to leverage capacity and resources as much as possible.

      *Professor of Economics at the University of California, San Diego, and Senior Advisor to The Growth Dialogue,
      George Washington University School of Business.


      INTRODUCTION

      Caribbean countries are committed to achieving significant economic and social develop-
      ment to raise the living standards and welfare of their citizens. To achieve rapid develop-
      ment, to support high and sustainable rates of and to reduce poverty rates, many of them
      must make substantial and immediate investments in economic and social infrastructure.
      As small island economies, they must look to international markets for trade, services, and tour-
      ism as part of the strategy for developing their economies, improving productivity, and increasing
      productive employment and living standards. Efficient, cost competitive facilities and services in
      transport and communications, energy, water, sanitation, health, and education are essential to
      drive and support this development effort and to reduce poverty. However, the resources avail-
      able to the public sector for needed infrastructure investments are very limited. Many Car-
      ibbean countries have high levels of public debt as a percentage of GDP and high fiscal
      deficits. Most of them are in the top 30 most-indebted emerging markets countries (among the
      best performers is the Dominican Republic, even though its fiscal deficit and public debt levels
      reached 8.5% and 44% of GDP, respectively, in 2012). This situation is leading countries to reach
      out to the private sector, in order to leverage scarce public resources and to secure private sector
      financial resources and know-how in order to meet these infrastructure needs.

      As a consequence, the current strategic development plans of a number of regional gov-
      ernments, as well as their accompanying budgets, provide for a substantial infrastructure
      investment program, and include both public and private sector resources. Under tradi-
      tional public procurement, governments obtain a public infrastructure service such as electricity,
      water supply, schools and hospitals, by engaging a contractor to construct a facility that the gov-
      ernment then owns, manages and operates. This form of public procurement will continue, but
      as a result of the limited fiscal resources, public infrastructure services development will
      also be sought through public private partnership (PPP) arrangements, which will mean a
      broader role for the private sector in providing infrastructure facilities and services.




138
As mentioned above, the urgency and scale of Caribbean countries’ public infrastructure needs,
and the limited capacity and fiscal resources available to satisfy these needs through traditional
public procurement, make it necessary to rely on PPP arrangements to deliver more projects
with better value for money (since in addition to providing much-needed financing, these projects
also address rehabilitation and maintenance issues, cost reductions, risk transfers and better
know-how) than traditional public procurement. The ultimate solution and outcome ought to be an
intelligent mix of public sector services provided through traditional public procurement, PPP and
hybrid delivery methods combining private sector efficiency with government financing to ensure
viability of necessary facilities and services. When well prepared, public-private partnerships
have proven to be as successful as non-traditional delivery methods, not only in devel-
oped economies, but also in developing and middle income economies.

The governments of most Caribbean countries aim to improve infrastructure through PPP ar-
rangements that harness the development of the private sector to contribute to the growth of GDP
and poverty reduction. Therefore, they are turning increasingly to the private sector to design,
build, finance, and operate infrastructure facilities hitherto provided by the public sector. PPPs of-
fer policy makers an opportunity to improve the delivery of services and the management
of facilities. The other benefit is that of mobilizing private capital: the estimated demand for
investment in public services shows that government and even donor resources fall far short of
the amount required. Access to private capital can speed up the delivery of public infrastructure.

Partnerships with the private sector can help to improve the procurement of public servic-
es, because the PPP process usually requires information about the true long-term cost of
service delivery, which generates a more realistic debate on project selection. By improving
the identification of a project’s long-term risks and the allocation of those risks between the public
and private sectors, the PPP process enables a more efficient use of resources.

The contractual nature of PPPs also acts as a powerful incentive to ensure that this long-
term perspective is put into practice: the public sector can no longer procure infrastruc-
ture assets and then fail to maintain them properly. At the same time, the private sector has
strong incentives to design and build these assets taking into account the costs of longer-term
maintenance and rehabilitation needed to make the investment a success, since their capital is
at risk.

Usually, the starting point of developing a PPP program is the issuing of a PPP policy
statement, a document stating the government’s firm commitment (at the highest level)
to achieving improved infrastructure services by increasing private sector involvement
in the financing, delivering and operation of public infrastructure. These policy statements
typically set out the motivation for the PPP program, the scope, what types of public infrastructure
will be eligible to be considered and how a PPP project will be assessed, procured, and managed.
Establishing a clear policy framework helps both the public and the private sectors to un-
derstand the core rationale for PPPs and how the public sector will go about making such
partnerships function. PPPs are difficult to deliver in an unstable policy environment. When as-
sessing a PPP market, the private sector expects to see a PPP policy that sets out the following:
i) The rationale for using PPPs; ii) The guidelines that the public sector will use to assess projects
in a consistent way; iii) A clear explanation of who approves what and when throughout the pro-
cess of project selection, preparation, and procurement; and iv) Conflict resolution mechanisms.




                                                                                                         139
      THE STATUS OF PPP PROGRAMS
      IN THE CARIBBEAN

      Caribbean countries are not entirely new to PPPs. Many have implemented one or two
      PPP projects; a few—such as the Dominican Republic, and Jamaica—have made more
      substantial use of PPPs across a range of sectors. These projects have met with mixed
      success. While some have enabled clear improvements in services, many have resulted in un-
      expected and significant fiscal costs, delays and challenges, and some have ultimately failed. In
      some cases, these negative experiences have affected the image of PPPs, an issue that has to
      be addressed if countries are to use them more extensively. A misunderstanding of the implica-
      tions of PPPs, which are sometimes perceived as a disguised form of privatization, can also be
      an issue.

      Notably, none of these projects has been implemented under a consistent and compre-
      hensive PPP framework. No Caribbean country has a dedicated PPP law in place yet and only
      a handful (such as Jamaica, Haiti, and Trinidad & Tobago) have issued a PPP policy statement,
      or started to build the institutions and capacity for managing a PPP program. Structuring and
      managing a PPP project remains a challenge, even for those countries that have more substan-
      tial previous PPP experience, such as the Dominican Republic, and not all of the implementing
      agencies have developed the abilities needed to run a successful PPP.

      A number of barriers for effective implementation of PPP in the Caribbean countries re-
      main, such as weak institutional capacity, an absence of clear rules, a limited ability to
      provide funding to finance projects during until their viability is proven, and poor investor
      perception. In addition, a bankable pipeline of projects with high economic/social impact
      is needed. Overall, most Caribbean countries are still in the earlier stages of PPP programs.
      Most of them can be characterized as stage I, while countries such as Jamaica, Trinidad and
      Tobago, and Dominican Republic are entering into stage II to some extent (Table 1). The ob-
      jective of a PPP strategy would be to bring Caribbean countries towards stage III over time. A
      number of countries have been seeking advice and support from the World Bank (WB) and the
      International Finance Corporation (IFC) to advance their PPP programs. Thus, the IFC and the
      WB are already involved in supporting PPP elements, including the preparation of a “Caribbean
      Infrastructure PPP Roadmap” (or transactions in the case of the IFC) in the Caribbean, but not
      yet in a systematic manner.

      In case Caribbean countries decide to embark in establishing comprehensive PPP programs,
      there are some key elements to take into account. Of course, each country does not necessarily
      need to take all elements on board at once. Rather, within this context and framework, each Car-
      ibbean country should select/demand/address the most critical/needed elements/package and
      sequence tasks as appropriate in light of its current circumstances, in order to most effectively
      move forward its PPP program.




140
Table 1. Stages of PPP Program Development



         Stage One                        Stage Two                        Stage Three


                                                                  • Fully-defined “system” estab-
 • Define policy                • Define policy framework         lished
 framework                      • Test legal viability            • Legal impediments removed
 • Test legal viability         • Demonstrate political           • PPP models refined and
 • Demonstrate political        commitment to the PPP             reproduced
 commitment to the PPP          program at highest level          • Introduce a proper risk matrix
 program at highest level       • Develop principles and          and risk allocation
 • Develop principles and       foundations                       • Develop a relationship with
 foundations                    • Apply lessons from previous     committed sources of
 • Apply lessons from previ-    deals to other sectors            financing
 ous deals to other sectors     • Start to build a market         • Long-term political
 • Start to build a market      • Implement a communication       consensus
 • Implement a communica-       campaign                          • Use a full-range of funding
 tion campaign                                                    sources
                                                                  • Thriving infrastructure
                                                                  investment market involving
                                                                  pension funds and private
                                                                  equity funds
                                                                  • Well trained civil service with
                                                                  experience in PPP projects
                                                                  • Broadening the use of PPP
                                                                  to new sectors
                                                                  • Steady flow of PPP projects
                                                                  awarded annually



 A PPP FRAMEWORK
As Caribbean countries identify how best to move forward with the implementation of PPP pro-
grams, it might be useful for them to use a best practice framework against which to judge their
projects. This can help identify shortcomings, as well as suggest possible options on how best to
address them. In that sense, steps toward a comprehensive PPP framework for Caribbean coun-
tries could include the following points:

• The PPP Policy Statement, PPP legal instruments as needed and appropriate, to anchor the PPP
policy, and in particular to address the public administration, public financial management, PPP procure-
ment and public interest matters. While in principle this would be desirable, the British common law legal
tradition of most Caribbean countries might make it less necessary.;
• The PPP institutional set up, including the right set of institutions to accompany the PPP project from
identification of the project to awarding it to the right private sector operator, and then to oversight of how
it is carried out, with proper and clear (not overlapping) jurisdictions and mandates, and with effective
accountability. The functions, jurisdictions and responsibilities in the decision process for a PPP
project need to be established; including clearances and approvals by the relevant entities from project
identification to adjudication and oversight; establishing timetable standard/estimate for the processing
and adjudication of a PPP; considering accounting for the size of projects, setting different standards and
procedures for small projects than for large ones; and finally, establishing the procedures for the treatment
of unsolicited offers. Typical approaches in other countries—such as the establishment of dedicated PPP
Units, and regulatory agencies—may need to be adjusted in the Caribbean context to take into account the
small overall size of government administrations and probable number of projects.


                                                                                                                  141
      • Program of potential PPP projects, and actions to implement PPP Policy, and to inform the
      private sector locally and internationally of the government’s commitment to PPP and of the
      prospects for private sector involvement in PPP projects. Identifying a bankable short pipeline of
      projects (a critical element lacking in practically all Caribbean countries); developing model pilot
      projects (in energy and transport) and then adapting them to specific country conditions
      • Methodology and eligibility criteria and key indicators to make the case for a PPP Project
      and build a bankable pipeline of projects with large economic impact. Bankability and economic
      impact ought to be the two critical criteria for choosing PPP projects. More generally, the process
      of choosing projects needs to be aimed at obtaining answers to the following three questions in
      order to be in a position to approve or reject a proposed PPP Project: i) What is the project scope
      and its requirements and justification (the strategic case); ii) can the project be delivered as a
      PPP (is it affordable, profitable, and manageable); and iii) Should the project be delivered as a
      PPP (would it give value for money).
      • PPP Project Cycle Procedures and Forms are needed to clarify the relevant jurisdictions and
      steps involved in identifying, evaluating and procuring PPP projects and private sector partici-
      pants. Minimal requirements for the formulation and presentation of project proposals need to be
      established. Transactions need to be structured, identifying risks, risk matrix and risk allocation.
      A social assistance program should be considered to accompany the PPP program to provide
      subsidies when relevant and justified; market interest for PPP projects (project specific) should
      be evaluated via market testing and consultations; a focalized and educated marketing strategy
      should be developed to sell PPP projects and to reach strategically key potential investors, stake-
      holders and markets; and different options for carrying out the competitive process/auction and
      possible criteria for awarding projects should be considered.
      • PPP Guidance Materials and Tool-kit, and Operational Manuals (including project evalua-
      tion, and financial modeling and regulatory accounting), and Training and Capacity Building
      Programs to assist the government in implementing the PPP Project Cycle and to inform the
      general public and potential investors and lenders of the diligent and professional approach that
      is being taken in implementing the PPP policy.
      • PPP Standardized Documents (including standardized definitions of key terms, contract tem-
      plates, key contract clauses, matrix of the fundamental risk factors associate the such as agree-
      ment, and common approaches to recurring issues),
      • The PPP Financial Platform to facilitate the bankability of projects when appropriate and rel-
      evant. Issues to be addressed on this platform include assisting with the bankability of projects,
      and properly leveraging the scarce public sector financial resources. Possibly with support from
      multilaterals, consider establishing a Sub-Regional fund to assist in the financing by the private
      sector of PPP projects; design, implement and define scope and eligibility of a financial platform;
      managing government financial obligations, registry and management of investments and finan-
      cial Government commitments, certain and contingent; Partnership programs with donors and
      bilateral and multilateral financial institutions to secure sources of additional finance (donations
      and concessional and non-concessional finance).
      • Legal and regulatory reforms, in order to facilitate investment by addressing the needs and
      concerns of investors and lenders, so that potential PPP projects can become “bankable”, and
      to establish a regulatory framework for PPP oversight, agency design, performance indicators,
      contract compliance; transparency blueprint and a conflict resolution framework converging to
      professional arbitrage.
      • A communications program to inform civil society and population at large about the reasons
      for, and expected outcomes of, the program; along with a program to reach out to



142
the private sector and financial institutions and communicate the opportunities available, as well
as the commitment of the government to bring about a successful PPP program.
Some elements would be needed immediately to enable PPP projects to progress, while oth-
ers can be developed over time. Equally, some are necessarily country-specific, while others
(such as guidance and tools) can benefit from a regional approach—as discussed further below.
Given the urgency of the infrastructure needs in many Caribbean countries, there is no
need to wait for all the pieces of the framework to be in place to implement PPP projects.
Countries can start by implementing the most critical elements of the framework. Critical
elements would include those necessary for better project structuring and risk allocation,
and for clarifying the rules of the process, as well as for identifying a pipeline of projects
and implementing some of the project with the assistance of hired expert advisers, while
local capacity is further developed.

Components of the Program to Improve PPPs in the Caribbean

In general terms, as described above, establishing a PPP program involves a number of steps.
First, the framework needs to be set. This step involves establishing the legal underpinnings and
procedures, institutionalizing the process, and developing conflict resolution mechanisms. The
next step involves selecting projects, which should be selected based on their potential profitabil-
ity and high-impact. Further steps include preparing projects for the market; designing and man-
aging the procurement; managing the interface with the private sector; hiring and training project
advisers; awarding the contract; developing the accompanying financial platform, adoption of the
right operational instruments, selection and optimization of infrastructure portfolios, streamlin-
ing delivery, making the most of existing infrastructure assets (McKinsey Global Institute, 2013),
communications etc.

In addition to these important areas, four key transversal themes merit highlighting, given their im-
portance for sound PPP programs in the Caribbean: Governance, institutionality, capacity build-
ing, and financial platforms.

Focusing on Governance1

The key factors that need to be strengthened in order to improve governance are: (i) Participation:
a greater degree of involvement of stakeholders; (ii) Accountability: making political actors more
responsible to society for what they do and say; (iii) Fairness: applying rules equally to everyone
in society; (iv) Efficiency: using limited human and financial resources without waste, delay or
corruption or without prejudicing future generations and finally (v) Transparency: making all deci-
sions with a greater degree of clarity and openness.

This last point requires a commitment to placing critical contract information and performance in
the Web for easy and wide public access. A strong transparency framework would include: i)
disclosure of PPP contracts (updating it with any changes made since contract was assigned and
relevant side agreements including any government guarantees; ii) disclosure of future streams
of payments and government commitments under PPP contracts; iii) publication of a summary
in plain language giving the most important elements of the contracts and projects and key in-
formation on the reasons for the project, selection as a PPP and procurement; iv) a summary of
procurement process, criteria and awards; v) information on an annual basis of the performance
of the project and compliance with contract agreements; vi) publication of any audit reports.



1
    See also Guidebook on Promoting Good Governance in Public-Private Partnerships (UNECE, 2008).

                                                                                                        143
      Focusing on Institutionality

      This is a critical theme under the objective of seeking a sustainable program that transcends
      administrations. The goal is to build, or strengthen if it already exists, the right set of needed
      institutions with proper jurisdictions, mandate and responsibilities and with accountability
      and operating under utmost transparency. In many countries, this includes dedicated PPP
      Units, Delivery Units, Inter-Ministerial Committees (even the Ministry of Finance, and other
      Line Ministries for establishing jurisdiction and capacity issues around the PPP theme) and
      oversight/regulatory institutions. In the Caribbean, particular consideration should be given
      to adjusting requirements to account for the small size of their economies.

      Focusing on Capacity Building

      This is a major theme for effectiveness and sustainability. The focus will be on short, me-
      dium and long term programs to build, develop and generate relevant skills for PPPs,
      and a flow of appropriate human capital through regional and national Training Programs,
      specialized educational programs and modules, and bilateral cooperation agreements with
      relevant donors and multilaterals. Some possibilities are i) establishing Sub-Regional PPP
      Training programs in partnership with regional universities, such as the MBA program cre-
      ated by SEOPLAN (the association of major Spanish contractors and concessionaires)
      together with a local management training institute; ii) The PPP Knowledge Pool in the
      Netherlands that has consolidated, developed and spread financial, economic, legal and
      contractual knowledge and expertise about PPPs; iii) Partnerships UK runs a PPP Foun-
      dations Course for public sector PPP officials twice a year in the UK; iv) giving a global
      focus to sub-regional training hubs, as in Argentina and Peru for Latin America, or in Public
      Utility Research Center at the University of Florida; and v) use a regional institution (such
      as the Caribbean Development Bank or the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and/or
      regional university (such as the University of the West Indies) to implement sustained train-
      ing programs, following the Central America model where the Central American Bank for
      Economic Integration has played a key role on two themes, training programs and financial
      instruments for the sub-region.

      Focusing on the Financial Platform

      The small size of the economies of the Caribbean countries, limited or incipient capital mar-
      kets, and the nature of the PPP business calls for a special effort to develop supra-national
      and national platforms to support the PPP process as needed and appropriate. Such efforts
      should also include the registry and management of government financial commitments,
      both contingent and non-contingent.




144
CON
CLU
SIONS
Understanding the need of most Caribbean countries to improve their PPP programs, the issue
is how best to move forward. The suggested answer is that it should be through a mix of country
specific efforts and others efforts conducted through supra-national initiatives. Given the con-
text, it would be useful to place country efforts (as well as assistance) to improve PPP programs
as much as it is possible into a Sub-Regional/Supranational framework, so as to leverage capac-
ity and resources as much as is feasible and sensible.

Taking a sub-regional approach would reap significant economies of scale and improve the lev-
erage of the scarce resources available at all levels, countries and external sources, since many
of the interventions would be similar in all countries. The strategy would be to combine interven-
tions, some joint or common to several countries others quite specific. The establishment of a
sub-regional entry point team (composed of members from the Caribbean countries), to collabo-
rate on specific issues and problems, could help support such a strategy.

In designing this regional PPP strategy, a key input would be the results of the “Caribbean Infra-
structure PPP Roadmap”, which is currently underway. The aim of the Roadmap is to identify the
specific project opportunities for using PPP to improve infrastructure across the Caribbean2 in
the short- to medium-term, as well as the barriers to moving these projects forward—whether at
the project, sector, or national level—and how those barriers could be overcome.

In adopting such an approach, necessary elements for an effective and sustainable Caribbean
PPP development strategy include: A joint effort by all of the Caribbean countries involved; in-
volvement of the supranational Caribbean institutions and an increase in their capacity to support
the member countries’ programs;3 a focus on building institutionality, capacity and knowledge
at both regional and national levels; initiatives and interventions focused at the Caribbean level
instead of on a country by country level, as much as possible; and a focus on priority sectors
common to a significant numbers of the Caribbean countries, such as Electricity (Caribbean
countries are plagued by reliability issues and high cost); Transport and Logistics (driven by high
logistic costs); ICT, Water and Sanitation (driven by limited coverage), and Services for Agro-
Industry and Agriculture. Tourism and Special Zones also appear to be relevant.




2
  The Road Map covers eleven countries in the Caribbean and four infrastructure sectors: electricity, water, transport, and telecommunications. The
eleven countries are: Antigua & Barbuda, Belize, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, St Kitts & Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent &
the Grenadines, and Suriname.
3
  Among those supranational institutions are the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), the CARICOM Secretariat, and, for the OECS, the OECS and the
Eastern Caribbean Development Bank (ECDB). While all of these institutions have a tradition of developing cooperation among their members, they have
often been weakened by a lack of resources, with the exception of CDB.

                                                                                                                                                        145
      REFERENCES

      UNECE. (2008). Guidebook on Promoting Good Governance in Public-Private Partnerships. Re-
      trieved from http://www.unece.org/index.php?id=2147

      McKinsey Global Institute. (2013). Infrastructure Productivity: how to save US$1 trillion a year,
      Infrastructure Journal. Retrieved from http://www.ijonline.com/Articles/81655/Preview.


      ANNEX
      Possible items for discussion in              the   context    of   the   implementation      of   a
      Supranational / Caribbean Initiative

      The following themes of the PPP Framework could be considered for development within a Su-
      pranational/Caribbean Initiative (listed next to them are the institutions that – if they can secure
      resources – could lead the program):

      Focusing on the Financial Platform

      The small size of the economies of the Caribbean countries, limited or incipient capital markets,
      and the nature of the PPP business calls for a special effort to develop supra-national and na-
      tional platforms to support the PPP process as needed and appropriate. Such efforts should also
      include the registry and management of government financial commitments, both contingent and
      non-contingent.

      -	     Knowledge Platform (CARICOM).
      -	     PPP Caribbean Forums.
      -	     PPP Caribbean-wide training Programs (CDB or/and CARICOM).
      -	     Communications platform for PPP Programs (CARICOM).
      -	     Operational Instruments: Operating Manuals for Processing PPP Projects; methodology 	
      	      eligibility criteria to make the case for a PPP Projects and to build a bankable pipeline of 	
      	      projects with large economic impact; as well as other instruments; such as standards 	
      	      TORs for the hiring of advisers or transaction firms, and for the undertaking of the needed
      	      project evaluation studies: economic, financial modeling, social and environmental
      	      evaluations, regulatory accounting manuals and benchmark guideline.
      -	     Regional Projects when feasible and appropriate (an example is the CARCIP project, 	
      	      which is specifically designed to support PPP in ICT in the Caribbean Region). Also pilot 	
      	      projects on key themes relevant to most Caribbean countries.
      -	     Legal support (CARICOM).
      -	     Identification and listing of foreign potential investors/operators in PPP projects in Carib	
      	      bean countries (Central Bank of Barbados).
      -	     Roster of Experts able to assist in preparing PPP projects and providing advice to a range
      	      of themes and issues (CARICOM)
      -	     Compilation of the PPP experience in Caribbean countries (and of best practices from 	
      	      elsewhere), distilling the lessons for use by those countries (CARICOM or CDB).
      -	     Conflict Resolution Platform (possibly provided by CARICOM).




146
-	     Financial Platform to support bankability of PPP projects, and Regional Financial Market 	
	      Development (possibly provided/supported by the CDB, and the ECDB). Aside from
	      developing a basket of financial instruments, the initiative could consider, inter alia,
	      encouraging infrastructure bonds; encouraging the listing of infrastructure providers on 	
	      local or regional stock exchanges; encouraging the development of regional infrastructure
	      investment funds; and involving local financial services companies in structuring and ar	
	      ranging transactions.
-	     Regulatory Oversight framework: indicators, fiscalization and regulation (an Advisory 	
	      Council to assist individual countries with oversight/regulatory issues on request, along 	
	      the lines of the Eastern Caribbean Telecommunications Authority and what has been
	      explored in OECS countries).

Among new instruments that could be set up are the following:
-	   A Regional Procurement Agency to manage procurement of government sponsored in	
	    frastructure PPP in the region. It would replace national agencies such as Government 	
	    Tender Boards and Contract Committees and would achieve real independence and 	
	    transparency in procurement by lifting procurement decisions above the national political 	
	level.
-	   A Regional Private Sector Advisory Council to assist in improving communications and 	
	    dialogue with the private sector, to work with the private sector to identify projects, to
	    generate more private sector interest, and to improve the quality and impact of unsolicited
	    proposals of PPP projects.
-	   An Infrastructure Fund to support PPP Projects in the Caribbean (International Finance 	
	    Corporation (IFC) and the Caribbean Development Bank for the region in general, and the
	    ECDB for OECS countries)
-	   A Guarantee Platform and Fund to support PPP Projects in the Caribbean (Funded by the,
	    the World Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank and the Multilateral Investment
	    Guarantee Agency)
-	   A Dedicated PPP Support Platform for OECS countries under the OECS Secretariat
-	   A sub-unit, to be established within CARICOM, with representation of all Caribbean
	    countries, to advise and oversee supranational initiatives to support PPP programs in the
	Caribbean.




                                                                                                     147
148
11
THE CARIBBEAN DIASPORA:
A SOURCE FOR VENTURE
INVESTMENT?
               Qahir Dhanani and Mina J. Lee*

                                                149
      ABSTRACT
                          The large size of the Caribbean Diaspora, its wealth, level of education, and engagement in the region
                          make it an attractive source for further investment the region. This policy note discusses the findings of
                          the study “The Caribbean Diaspora: A source for venture investment?” The Entrepreneurship Program
                          for Innovation in the Caribbean (EPIC) by InfoDev of the World Bank conducted this study, to assess
                          the business and investment interests of the diaspora. In general, participants expressed greater inter-
                          est in opportunities where they could not only “touch and feel” the investments being made, but also to
                          have an active role. Policies to increase Diaspora engagement include addressing investment climate
                          challenges such as legal complexity and enforcement. Furthermore, a platform that showcases inter-
                          esting business venture opportunities could serve as a critical matchmaker for increased investment
                          flows. In the long term, diaspora investments and their deals in the region can serve as a proof of
                          concept to the rest of the world and demonstrate that the Caribbean has viable high growth enterprises
                          and is open for business.

      *Private Sector Development Specialist and Consultant, Private Sector Development, World Bank, respectively


      INTRODUCTION
      This chapter is based on the study “The Caribbean Diaspora: A source for venture invest-
      ment?” which was conducted as part of the infoDev-implemented4 Entrepreneurship Program
      for Innovation in the Caribbean (EPIC) to assess the business and investment interests of the
      diaspora. EPIC places particular emphasis on supporting high-potential, growth-oriented early stage
      companies in the Caribbean. These companies most often face challenges in accessing finance, and
      so the study assessed the potential of leveraging business angel investors5 from the diaspora to bring
      “mentorship-based capital” in addressing this financing gap.

      It is hoped that the findings from this study can be used to improve dialogue and collaboration
      between innovation ecosystem participants, to remove barriers to private sector involvement
      and better engage the diaspora on a wide suite of development and investment objectives. In
      particular, the goal of the study is to obtain information with which to design activities targeted
      at connecting diaspora investors with startup entrepreneurs.

      Engaging over 850 self-identified members of the Caribbean diaspora, the study combines the knowl-
      edge and data gathered from 636 respondents, from over 31 countries of origin, to a widely circulated
      online survey6; together with the inputs from over 200 face-to-face focus group sessions with business
      leaders, opinion leaders, and high net-worth individuals; and insights from individual interviews with
      20 accredited angel investors.

      This note provides a brief summary of the findings from the study, and focuses on three questions of
      particular interest. First, what is the profile of the diaspora? Second, how willing are its members to
      engage with the Caribbean? And third, what kind of investments would they be able to make in high-
      potential, growth-oriented startups in the Caribbean?




      4
        infoDev is a global partnership program within The World Bank Group that pioneers on-the-ground approaches to supporting growth-oriented entre-
      preneurs in developing countries. The program develops and implements scalable programs in the thematic areas of mobile, climate, agribusiness and
      women-led entrepreneurship.
      5
        Angel investors are affluent individuals who invest their own capital and time directly into unquoted companies, to which they have no family connection,
      in return for ownership equity.
      6
        The structured 40-question online survey was distributed through various diaspora organizations and through social media channels. It was open
      for a period of 6 weeks. Respondents therefore formed a random sample of diaspora members claiming affiliation with the following 31 countries or
      territories: Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, Anguilla, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Colombia, Cuba, Curaçao,
      Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guadeloupe and dependencies, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Martinique, Montserrat, Puerto Rico,
      Saint Barthélemy, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Martin, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos
      Islands, and the US Virgin Islands.
150
PROFILE OF THE DIASPORA
The Caribbean region is unique for many reasons. Perhaps most striking among these is
the demographic fact that for every resident in the region there is an individual living in
the diaspora abroad. This one-to-one ratio of nationals to diaspora members presents a tremen-
dous opportunity for cross-border engagement among a people who share common cultures and
histories.

Diaspora members from each country in the Caribbean participated in the study. Half of the dias-
pora respondents are based in the four metropolises of London, New York, Toronto and Miami,
with the remainder spread out over a multitude of cities (See Figure 1). The distribution of the
respondents by age and by gender was normal.




In general, the diaspora is very well educated with 80 percent holding a bachelor’s degree
or higher (See Figure 2). Over 65 percent of the respondents are currently employed in the
private sector with almost 40 percent owning their own businesses.




                                                                                                   151
      A quarter of diaspora respondents are affluent with either net investable wealth or annual
      incomes in excess of USD 100,000 (See Figure 3). This income is held primarily in cash
      savings, real estate holdings, or public equity. A small proportion of respondents (only 8
      percent)

      identified themselves as “accredited investors,” defined as investors having either an annual
      income of over USD 200,000 during the past two years or at least USD 1 million in investible
      assets. These affluent and accredited individuals are of critical importance in making informed
      investments back home. They tend to have a level of investment sophistication and business
      acumen that promotes best practices among investees, demand accountability and results, and
      can therefore make a major contribution to the development of Caribbean economies.




      ENGAGEMENT BACK HOME
      Over 85 percent of diaspora members give back to the Caribbean in some way, shape, or form.
      While the majority send remittances, make donations, buy property or invest in a venture, many
      others are involved as volunteers or mentors (See Figure 4). A large number of diaspora mem-
      bers are active in their high-school alumni associations, a source of deep affiliation and nostalgia.
      Visiting family and friends in the Caribbean is another key source of engagement. Almost 60 per-
      cent of diaspora members make the trip home at least once a year and 24 percent travel home
      more than twice a year.




      4
        infoDev is a global partnership program within The World Bank Group that pioneers on-the-ground approaches to supporting growth-oriented entre-
      preneurs in developing countries. The program develops and implements scalable programs in the thematic areas of mobile, climate, agribusiness and
      women-led entrepreneurship.
      5
        Angel investors are affluent individuals who invest their own capital and time directly into unquoted companies, to which they have no family connection,
      in return for ownership equity.
      6
        The structured 40-question online survey was distributed through various diaspora organizations and through social media channels. It was open
      for a period of 6 weeks. Respondents therefore formed a random sample of diaspora members claiming affiliation with the following 31 countries or
      territories: Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, Anguilla, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Colombia, Cuba, Curaçao,
      Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guadeloupe and dependencies, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Martinique, Montserrat, Puerto Rico,
      Saint Barthélemy, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Martin, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos
      Islands, and the US Virgin Islands.

152
Against a backdrop of already significant engagement back home, when asked whether
they would like to be “more connected” to their home country, 90 percent of the diaspora
remarkably responded positively. This demonstrates a very strong, but latent opportunity for
increasing the level of engagement from the diaspora in a meaningful way. However, there are
a number of constraints to increased engagement cited by diaspora members (See Figure 5).
These range from weak legal frameworks, macroeconomic and political instability, and crime,
among others. Addressing these sources of dissuasion should be a priority going forward.

A number of focus group participants cited the need to address some of these constraints, par-
ticularly transparency and governance, as part of investing in diaspora bonds. They expressed
greater interest in opportunities where they could not only “touch and feel” the invest-
ments being made, but also to have an active role. Thus, they prefer to give directly to
family and friends, alma maters, and organizations they know and trust personally. This
explains the high level of interest the diaspora expressed in serving as mentors, which require a
person-to-person connection (85 percent noted a desire to mentor their compatriots).




                                                                                                    153
      INVESTMENT AND FINANCIAL INTERESTS

      While mentorship is a very meaningful resource that the diaspora can provide, the most
      impactful contributions that they can make are through their investments in business
      ventures back home. In fact, 40 percent of diaspora respondents have already invested in a
      business venture, broadly defined as any company in its early stages. Of these investments, 57
      percent were ventures based in the Caribbean (See Figure 6). This means that 23 percent of all
      diaspora members have made investments in new ventures within the Caribbean region. This is
      a remarkable finding as it provides clear evidence that diaspora dollars are already flowing into
      new ventures in the region and that these funds come from relatively sophisticated investors.




      A closer look at accredited investors shows significant differences in the ability and risk appe-
      tite of the diaspora community. Looking at historical behavior, 26 percent of accredited inves-
      tors, compared to 13 percent of all investors from the diaspora, have made investments of USD
      100,000 or more in new business ventures, demonstrating the quality and desirability of oppor-
      tunities available in the region. Looking forward, 40 percent of accredited investors as compared
      to 14 percent of all diaspora investors are willing to invest over USD 100,000 each year for a five
      year period in startups and high-potential, growth-oriented startups in the Caribbean.




154
A closer look at accredited investors shows significant differences in the ability and risk appetite
of the diaspora community. Looking at historical behavior, 26 percent of accredited investors,
compared to 13 percent of all investors from the diaspora, have made investments of USD
100,000 or more in new business ventures, demonstrating the quality and desirability of oppor-
tunities available in the region. Looking forward, 40 percent of accredited investors as compared
to 14 percent of all diaspora investors are willing to invest over USD 100,000 each year for a five
year period in startups and high-potential, growth-oriented startups in the Caribbean.

These findings are also perplexing as practically all focus group and interview participants
noted awareness of deals as a critical missing link in their attempts to make an invest-
ment, suggesting that a platform that showcases interesting business venture opportuni-
ties could serve as a critical match-maker for increased investment flows. At present, these
matches are made almost entirely through friends and family (86 percent of investors learned
about their investment opportunity through this source); however, this method limits the diaspora
to a narrow universe of potential deals. It stands in stark contrast to the actual desires of the di-
aspora investor community, who take a regional view for their portfolios. When asked about the
countries in which they are interested in making investments, diaspora investors always listed
more than one country, providing further evidence that they are seeking to make deals in multiple
destinations, beyond their country of primary affiliation (See Figure 7).




Historically, diaspora investments in startups have concentrated on a number of sectors ranging
from entertainment and the arts to consulting and retail to real estate and manufacturing. These
interests are also shifting with the times. Looking forward, sectors such as green energy, mobile
applications, education and agribusiness are most attractive among diaspora investors (See
Figure 8). In the case of green energy and technology, future investment interest is forty times
greater than actual investment history. A need for business incubation services that target entre-
preneurs in the green energy and mobile applications sectors is therefore important in meeting
the demand and interests of diaspora investors.




                                                                                                        155
156
CON
CLU
SIONS
Undoubtedly, the Caribbean region is viewed as a destination with a great sense of
opportunity and hope among the diaspora community. The infoDev Caribbean Dias-
pora Survey has shed light on the Caribbean diaspora’s characteristics and investment in-
terests. The diaspora is a sizeable, well educated, and affluent population that remains very
involved in their home country, and is interested in engaging even more back home. There
is investment interest towards both specific Caribbean countries and towards specific sec-
tors. This willingness and ability to engage represents a significant untapped potential for
Caribbean nations. Whether these countries can tap this potential will depend on whether
they are able to reduce the barriers to, and improve the avenues for, further engagement
with the Caribbean diaspora. The diaspora can indeed play an important role in the Carib-
bean region’s development story – but it will require leadership to lower barriers to engage-
ment, facilitate structured opportunities and increase information transparency.

Policies that address investment climate challenges such as legal complexity and
enforcement can provide a significant first step in lowering barriers to engagement.
In the long term, diaspora investments and their deals in the region can serve as a
proof of concept to the rest of the world and demonstrate that the Caribbean has vi-
able high growth enterprises and is open for business.




                                                                                                157
158
12
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT
IN THE CARIBBEAN

             Mónica Parra-Torrado
                                    159
      ABSTRACT
                         This chapter describes the trends in unemployment since 2000 for most countries in the Caribbean.
                         In particular, it presents the landscape of youth unemployment in the Caribbean and focuses on two
                         main factors slowing the youth’s integration into the labor market: lack of skills and lack of information.
                         It also discusses the costs and risks associated with youth unemployment and NEET status (not in
                         employment, education or training). Finally, it discusses two main policy areas for needed intervention
                         in the Caribbean: (i) collection of data and information systems and (ii) active labor market policies.


      INTRODUCTION
      Global economic shocks coupled with natural disasters have left most Caribbean countries with
      zero to negative growth and high unemployment rates. The Caribbean region was strongly affected by
                                                                                                           1
      the last great financial crisis, which resulted in a regional average of zero economic growth in 2010 . While
      some countries like Anguilla and Antigua and Barbuda were worse hit, and experienced negative rates of
      18% and 12% respectively, others, like the Dominican Republic and Guyana, experienced a slowdown but
                                   2
      did not see negative rates . The economic collapse in the United States and Europe, and more recently, a
      fall in commodity prices (induced by a softening in the Chinese demand for raw materials) led to a sharp
      decrease in tourism, remittances and financial activity in the Caribbean countries. The widespread reces-
                                                                        4
      sion, in addition to high indebtedness and fiscal imbalances , has led to a deterioration of labor market
      conditions in the past years. At the same time natural disasters have periodically taken a large toll on the
                                                                                                                  5
      region, and have become a greater source of vulnerability, affecting lives, infrastructure and employment .
      The purpose of this chapter is to evaluate the nature of youth unemployment in order to propose policy
      options to address it. It is organized in three sections. The first section describes the trends and patterns
      of total unemployment. The second section focuses on youth unemployment. The third and final section
      discusses policy considerations.
      Data on unemployment and other labor market outcomes is scarce in the region. This chapter puts togeth-
      er data from different sources including the World Banks’ World Development Indicators and reports, ILO’s
      Key Indicators of Labor Markets, and specific official data and reports produced by some of the countries.
      Official government data was used in cases when more than two sources were found. A detailed descrip-
      tion of the data used is presented in Parra Torrado (2014).



      UNEMPLOYMENT LEVELS, TRENDS AND PATTERNS
      Unemployment rates and trends varied among the Caribbean countries with the most rapid in-
      creases registered in The Bahamas, Barbados, St. Lucia and Belize. In The Bahamas unemployment
      nearly doubled from 7.9% in 2007 to 13.7% in 2011, a 73% increase. In Barbados, unemployment rose
      from 7.4% in 2007 to 11.6% in 2012, an increase of 57%. Although the latest available unemployment
      figure for Belize is 13% in 2009, it already represents a 53% increase compared to the 2007 unemploy-
      ment rate of 8.5%. Finally, unemployment in St. Lucia rose from 14% in 2007, right before the 2008 crisis,
                                                 6
      to 20.6% in 2012 representing a 47% rise . Jamaica, Grenada, Antigua and Barbuda experienced slower
      growth in unemployment. In Jamaica unemployment increased from 9.4% in 2007 to 12.7% in 2011. In
      Grenada, unemployment reached 29% in 2010 from 25% in 2008, an already high pre-crisis rate; it was
                      7
      10.2% in 2001 . In Antigua and Barbuda, unemployment was 10% in 2011, 1.6 percentage points higher
                           8
      than in 2001 (8.4%) .
      The Dominican Republic and Guyana have maintained persistently high unemployment rates while
      Trinidad and Tobago experienced a decreasing unemployment rate. The Dominican Republic experi-
      1
        This average estimation includes Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, the British Virgin Islands, Dominica, the Dominican
      Republic, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname and Trinidad and
      Tobago.
      2
        For a more extensive summary of available statistics, see Parra Torrado (2013).
      4
        External and domestic public debt in the Caribbean surpassed 76% of GDP on average in 2012, and it reached ratios greater than 100% in Jamaica
      and St. Kitts and Nevis (ECLAC, 2014).
      5
        Some examples of costly natural disasters are hurricanes Ivan (2004), Dean (2007), Omar (2008), Tomas (2010), Tropical Storm Nicole (2010), and
      Haiti’s earthquake in 2009.




160
enced higher unemployment rates during the early 2000 years, in particular in 2004 when it reached 18.4%,
the highest rate in the last thirteen years, declining thereafter to 14% in 2008 and remaining unchanged
since then. Guyana has maintained unemployment at around 21% since 2007, after experiencing a peak
of 28.5% in 2006. In contrast to the rest of the countries with available data, Trinidad and Tobago experi-
enced a decreasing unemployment rate from 2000 until 2008, and it has remained practically unchanged
since then. At the beginning of the decade, the unemployment rate in Trinidad and Tobago was 12.1% and
in 2008 it decreased to 4.6%, the lowest rate in the period. Currently, unemployment represents 4.8% of
                                                             9
the labor force in the country, the lowest rate in the region . Nonetheless, this figure should be taken with
caution as it masks high youth unemployment rates, as discussed later.

Unemployment in the region tends to be of long duration. According to a set of four country studies
undertaken in the region between 2007 and 2010 (Country Assessment of Living Condition Barbados 2010,
University of the West Indies, 2012; Country Poverty Assessment Dominica 2008-09, Kairi Consultants
Limited, 2010a; Country Poverty Assessments Grenada, Carriacou and Petit Martinique 2007/08, Kairi
Consultants Limited, 2010; and Country Poverty Assessment St. Kitts and Nevis 2007/08, Kairi Consultants
Limited, 2009), a large share of individuals spend more than a year unemployed after they lose or leave
their job. Half of the unemployed in Dominica (51%) and in Grenada (48%), and one third of unemployed
                                                                                                  10
in Barbados (34%) and St. Kitts and Nevis (32%) have been unemployed for more than a year . There
is no more-recent data on the duration of unemployment in these countries but given current labor market
conditions as well as increasing unemployment after the financial crisis and other external shocks, it can be
expected that duration of unemployment has not improved.

Unemployment is considerably higher among females than among males in most countries. Ac-
cording to the most recent available data on unemployment by gender in the region, women are more af-
fected than men in most countries with the exception of The Bahamas (2011), as shown in Figure 1. The
worst case is Belize, where female unemployment was 20% in 2009, almost three times that of males. In
other countries female unemployment is nearly twice as large as male unemployment. For instance, in
Grenada female unemployment in 2008 was 31.8% while for males it was 17.9%, 14 percentage points
higher. Even in countries with lower unemployment rates such as Dominican Republic, Jamaica, St. Lucia,
                                                                                      11
and Trinidad and Tobago, unemployment for women exceeds that of men by at least 80% . However, the
difference is smaller in Guyana (49%) and even less so in Barbados (13%).




6
   See Parra-Torrado (2014) for sources on unemployment for each country.
7
   Grenada’s 2013 Budget Statement mentions that between 2008 and 2012 unemployment in Grenada doubled, but unfortunately no hard data was
found to confirm this fact.
8
  Unfortunately, data for the years in between these two years, which would give a clearer vision of the effect of the crisis, is not available.
9
   Trinidad and Tobago had the lowest rate among those countries in the region with unemployment data for 2012. For instance, in 2007/2008, St. Kitts
and Nevis had an unemployment rate of 5.1% (6.3% in St. Kitts and 1.5% in Nevis) but more current data is unavailable.
10
    Even though these figures do not refer to complete unemployment spells, they give a sense of the dynamics of labor markets in these countries, in
particular on unemployment duration
11
   Dominican Republic (126%), Jamaica (79%), St. Lucia (85%) and Trinidad and Tobago (84%).




                                                                                                                                                        161
      Figure 1: Unemployment by gender in Caribbean countries, latest year available




      Source: See Parra Torrado (2014).

      However, for some countries gender gaps have been decreasing in recent years,
      although not due to a decrease in female unemployment but rather to an increase
                                12
      in male unemployment . In the second half of the past decade, the difference between
      the unemployment rate for females and males has narrowed in a group of countries. This
      is mainly due to the increase in male unemployment during the years of economic crisis, a
      trend that has been noted in a number of OECD countries including the US (Albanesi and
      Sahin, 2013). In The Bahamas, unemployment among women was about 2 percentage
      points higher on average than among men until 2009, when this difference decreased to
      zero due to an increase of 87% in the men’s rate. Similarly, in Barbados this unemploy-
      ment gap closed in 2009 and 2010 due to a faster increase in men’s unemployment rate
      compared to women; however, the rising trend reverted temporarily for men in 2011 and for
      women in 2012, when the gender difference in this country reached one of its narrowest
      points, although at higher levels of unemployment for both genders.

      The gender story has been more positive in the Dominican Republic. BBetween 2000
      and 2007 the unemployment rate for women was around 17 percentage points higher than
      men’s with the largest gap reached in 2004 (20 percentage points). In 2008 the gap nar-
      rowed to 14 percentage points and continued this trend until 2011, reaching 11 percentage
      points (Parra Torrado, 2014). This result, unlike other countries, derives from a decrease in
      the unemployment rate for women (from 30.7% in 2004 to 21.5% in 2011), accompanied
      by a relatively constant unemployment rate for men. However, in 2012 this trend worsened
      again, with women’s unemployment rate increasing to 22.1% and men’s unemployment
      rate decreasing slightly to 9.8%.




      12
           Another interesting result is that the female unemployment gap widens with age in all countries as shown in Parra Torrado (2014).

162
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT LANDSCAPE
Youth are at higher risk of unemployment. Although the information on unemployment
by age in the region is scarce, available data shows that in most countries youth unemploy-
ment is double the rate of total unemployment. Among Caribbean countries with available
data, the highest youth unemployment rates are found in Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago,
Jamaica and The Bahamas where youth unemployment is about 2.4 times higher than total
unemployment. According to the 2010 Survey of Living Conditions of Barbados, the youth
                                                                               13
unemployment rate was 27.6% compared to 11.1% for the entire population . In Trinidad
and Tobago, the unemployment rate for youth was 12% in 2012 while the total unemploy-
ment rate was only 4.8%; and in Jamaica (2011) and Barbados (2007) it was 30.1% and
18.9% compared to a total unemployment rate of 12.7% and 7.9%, respectively. Youth
unemployment rates in other countries like Guyana (2011) and Dominican Republic (2007)
are around two times as high the total unemployment rates while Grenada (2008), St. Lucia
(2010), and St Vincent and the Grenadines (2008) have experienced youth unemployment
rates around 1.7 times higher than the total unemployment rate (see Figure 2). Also, in St.
Lucia 40% of unemployed were younger than 25 in 2011.

Teenagers have the highest unemployment rates. According to data on unemployment
by age groups for Barbados, Belize, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, and Trinidad and
Tobago, individuals younger than 20 years have the highest unemployment rates. In Bar-
bados, individuals aged 15 to 19 years old face unemployment 5 times higher than the total
                                                                          14
unemployment rate: 47% compared to 14% for those aged 20-44 years old . In Belize, 43%
of women in the labor force younger than 20 years old are unemployed compared to 28%
of those between 20 and 24 years old and 16% for those between 25 and 49 years old. The
comparable rates for men are 26% versus 16%, and 5% respectively. In Dominica, where
                                               15
50% of the unemployed are younger than 30 , the unemployment rate among teenagers
practically doubles that of workers aged 25 to 29 years old, and in the case of males it is
2.8 times larger. Likewise, in the Dominican Republic, the unemployment rate for teenage
females doubles that of individuals between 20 to 39 years old and for teenage males it is
                                                                                           16
about three times that of such group. In Trinidad and Tobago the situation is quite similar .




13
   According to the Barbados Continuous Labor Force Survey (LFS), the national unemployment rate in 2010 was 10.7% (Barbados Statistical
Office, 2010). Unfortunately, the Barbados LFS provides unemployment figures for the age group of 15-19 years old, rather than 15-24 years
old as in other countries, which makes it unsuitable for cross-country comparisons.
14
   The unemployment rate for those older than 19 is 10.8%: 10% for male and 11.6% for female.
15
   In Dominica, the individuals under 20 years account for 13.8% of total unemployed (17.5% of female unemployed and 10.9% of male un-
employed), individuals younger than 25 years old account for 36.4% of total unemployed (44.2% of female unemployed and 30.4% of male
unemployed), and individuals younger than 30 years old account for 49.7% of total unemployed (55.4% of female unemployed and 45.3% of
male unemployed).
16
   Note that although female youth unemployment is higher than male youth unemployment, the age gap is wider for males than for females.

                                                                                                                                             163
      Figure 2: Total and youth unemployment by gender, countries with available data, latest
      year.``




      Source: See Parra Torrado (2014).

      High youth unemployment in the Caribbean is consistent in general with similarly high youth
      unemployment rates worldwide, but some Caribbean countries are among those with the
      highest youth unemployment rates in the world. Figure 3, presents the unemployment rate for
      the total population as well as for the youth in all countries with available data in 2011 (Parra Torrado,
      2014). Two observations can be made from it. First, in practically all countries youth unemployment
                                                                      17
      is double that of the total population (2.3 times, on average) . Even in countries with low total unem-
      ployment such as Trinidad and Tobago where the national unemployment rate is as low as 4.8%, the
                                                                            18
      youth unemployment rate reached 12% in 2012 (2.5 times higher) . Second, some Caribbean coun-
      tries are among those with highest youth unemployment rates in the world. In particular, Guyana
      and Grenada (2008) join the set of countries with rates above 40%, together with Bosnia and Her-
      zegovina (57.5%), Macedonia (55.3%), South Africa (49.8%), Spain (46.4%) and Greece (44.4%).


      Figure 3: Total and youth unemployment, World, 2011




      Source: Parra Torrado (2014).




      17
         The country where youth and total unemployment rates most closely coincide is Kazakhstan with total and youth unemployment rate of 5.4%
      and 4.6% respectively (placed closest to the 45-degree line).
      18
         In 2011, the national unemployment rate in Trinidad and Tobago was 5.2% while the youth unemployment rate was 13%.
164
A. Some key factors contributing to youth unemployment

While no empirical studies on the individual determinants of youth unemployment are available for
the Caribbean, some of the factors are likely to be similar to other countries. For example, sev-
eral studies have found that poor educational attainment, disadvantaged family background and
test-measured ability and behavioral unobserved skills predispose individuals into unemployment
(Gregg, 2001). Also, institutional arrangements in the education and training system as well as in the
labor market (Eurofound, 2012), skills mismatch, low labor demand and specific vulnerabilities are
                                                        19
factors that further contribute to youth unemployment . That said we present the relevant evidence
from the Caribbean on select factors that may contribute to youth unemployment in the region: lack
of skills and lack of information. These are detailed in what follows.

One of the main factors contributing to youth unemployment is the lack of right skills for
the job. Quality of education in the region is low. In addition, the set of skills that youth acquire are
not entirely relevant to the labor market needs; there is a mismatch of supply and demand of skills.
This is aggravated by their lack of work experience, since skills are mastered, and sometimes even
acquired, on the job.

The quality of education in the region has shown to be low, in spite of efforts and significant
public investments in education. The passing rates of the Caribbean Secondary Education Cer-
tificate (CSEC) in Math and English are around 45% on average and it is not better in other subjects
such as Chemistry and Information Technology, to name some. Furthermore, in 2009 only 21.36%
of students passed five or more CSEC examinations, which is the acceptable level of performance
for matriculation and entry-level employment (Jules, 2010). The worst part of this story is that the rest
of the students are far from attaining this goal: 28.14% did not pass any exam, 24.65% passed only
one, 12.62% passed two exams, 7.36% passed three exams, and only 5.88% passed four exams.

Employers face considerable difficulty in finding skilled youth. Employers in Caribbean coun-
tries, report a shortage of skills as one of the key constraints in hiring workers. The 2008 Grenada
Employer’s Needs Assessment Survey, carried out under the World Bank’s Skills for Inclusive Growth
Project, found that 66% of employers were having difficulty finding new workers and were also un-
able to find workers with the required skills (Hickling Corporation, 2008). Results from the Caribbean
Labour Market Survey (CKLN, 2006) show that the main issue employers face in their recruiting ef-
forts is that applicants have poor or no employment skills (42%) followed by lack of qualified workers
(31%). Also, according to a recent study in The Bahamas (IDB, 2013), the main difficulty employers
face for hiring is the under-qualification of applicants (33.8% of employers), followed by applicant’s
lack of experience (28.8% of employers), and by applicant’s lack of soft skills (27.5%).

The shortage of skills is a dominant bottleneck for employers worldwide. AAccording to a recent
                                    20
study in nine diverse countries lack of skills is one of the main problems employers face when re-
cruiting for entry-level positions: 39% of employers mentioned a skills shortage as a leading reason. In
addition, 36% of employers reported lack of skills as a cause of significant problems in terms of cost,
quality, and time in their companies (Mourshed, Farrell and Barton, 2011). Another, more comprehen-
sive, study by Manpower, (2013) in 42 countries and territories corroborates this result, finding that a
lack of technical skills is the main factor behind talent shortages (34% of employers cited this as a chief
factor) while lack of soft skills is the fourth factor (19% of employers cited this as a chief factor).




19
   Cunningham Sanchez-Puerta and Wuermli (2010) propose five general categories of constraints that may limit young people’s access to labor
market: job-relevant skills constraints, lack of labor demand, job search constraints, firm start-up constraints and social constraints.
20
   Brazil, Germany, India, Mexico, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
                                                                                                                                               165
      Moreover, through a meta-analysis of labor demand surveys, Cunningham and Villaseñor (2014) find
      that half of employers rank socio-emotional skills as the most important skill, followed by higher-order
                                                        21
      cognitive skills (29%) and technical skills (16%) . They find that the greatest skills gaps are in socio-
      emotional and technical skills. Furthermore, the recent study by Mourched et. al. (2011) shows that
      the supply of skills is not meeting the needs of labor demand: 72% of educators compared to 42% of
      employers think graduates are adequately prepared for the labor market.

      Inexperience, strongly tied to lack of skills, also contributes to high youth unemployment
      rates in the Caribbean. According to the earlier cited country studies (Country Assessment of Liv-
      ing Condition Barbados 2010, Country Poverty Assessment Dominica 2008-09, Country Poverty
      Assessments Grenada, Carriacou and Petit Martinique 2007/08, and Country Poverty Assessment
      St. Kitts and Nevis 2007/08) an important proportion of job seekers has never worked before, a fact
      that generally makes it more difficult to find labor opportunities. In St. Kitts and Nevis one third of
      the unemployed have never worked while in Dominica and Grenada about one in four has no work
      experience at all. In a recent labor demand study, lack of experience stands as the third most impor-
      tant obstacle to filling vacancies, with 24% of employers agreeing to this being the most important
      issue (Manpower, 2013). According to the mentioned study in The Bahamas, prior work experience
      is the second most important hiring criteria, with 34.5% of employers marking it a decisive factor for
      hiring. Also, 28.8% of employers claimed having difficulty hiring workers due to applicant’s lack of
      experience (IDB, 2013). As younger workers are less experienced than adults, they also tend to be
      less attractive candidates. Employers prefer adult workers, as they, given their work experience, are
      more likely than younger ones to successfully apply job-specific skills and to have stronger socio-
      emotional skills and work ethics, and therefore to be more productive in the workplace. Inexperi-
      enced candidates are also more costly in the sense that they have to be trained, despite the risk that
      they might leave or fail to fulfill expectations.

      Lack of information is another important factor that constrains youth employment. Informal
      job-searching methods such as referrals from relatives and friends, or direct contact with employers
      are commonly used, while information systems or employment offices, which hold better knowledge
                                           22
      of the market, are much less used . This informal practice may be effective only for well-connected
      people with strong networks. However, youth tend to have smaller networks, especially those out of
      school and employment, and the vulnerable. Employers do not have information on young workers
      either. Youth generally write resumes basically with information on educational attainment, if any,
      from which is hard to tell their actual skills. The lack of work experience makes young people less at-
      tractive candidates for two main reasons. First, without work experience they cannot obtain referrals
      regarding their past performance. Second, as mentioned above, employers cite lack of experience
      as a major obstacle to hiring young people, since they value socio-emotional and technical skills the
      most, which are proven and acquired on the job.




      21
        Higher-order cognitive skills refer to logic, abstract and creative thinking, for example.
      22
        In Mexico, for example, among people aged 15-24 years old, 65.7% search for jobs directly with the employer, 11% ask friends and relatives
      and 9.4% answer Internet announcements. Only 1.5% resorted to an employment service and 0.9% to an employment agency. Similarly, 58.6%
      found a job through a friend or relative and 17.9% by contacting directly the employer. Only 0.3% of youth found a job with an employment
      agency and 0.2% with public employment service (calculations based on ENNVIH, 2012).
166
B. Costs and risks of youth unemployment

High youth unemployment also reflects the NEET phenomenon. In the Caribbean, and world-
     23
wide , a significant share of youth is not in employment, education or training (NEET). Information
on NEET youth is only available for two countries in the Caribbean: Belize and the Dominican Re-
       24
public . For Belize, it is estimated that 27.9% of young people ages 15 to 24 are neither in employ-
ment, education nor training; 17% of the male youth and 38.6% of female youth. For the Dominican
Republic, the estimates of young NEET are higher for males (33.3%) and lower for females (26.9%),
while the aggregate figure is 20.9%. The youth NEET rates for these two countries are considerably
                                       25
above the average estimated by ILO for 24 developing economies--(12.4 per cent for young men
and 28.1 per cent for young women). Yet, in the case of Belize, the rates are comparable to those
in Brazil: 16.4% of male youth and 30% of female youth in 2009 (Kovrova, Lyon and Rosati, 2012).
Given the lack of data on the NEET phenomenon in the Caribbean, evidence of declining labor force
participation and low school enrollment is presented in the next paragraphs.

The NEET phenomenon may be reflected in a declining labor force participation of youth in
the Caribbean over the past decade. This decline has been considerable in some countries such
as Jamaica (26% compared to 8% reduction in employment for the overall labor force). This decreas-
ing trend has been stronger and more common for male youths: only the Bahamas, Haiti and Suri-
name experienced positive growing trends of youth labor force participation. In contrast, in the case
of young women, only Barbados, Guyana, Jamaica and St. Lucia experienced negative trends in
youth labor force participation over this period. These declining trends may reflect discouragement,
or an inability to find jobs. However, these may also be explained partially by a recent improvement in
                                                   26
school enrollment in some countries in the region . Other reasons for the low attachment to the labor
market of youth, as cited by youth themselves, include over-qualification, low wages or a preference
for leisure, stress-free time and freedom (UNDP, 2012).

Despite recent improvements, school enrollment rates are still low in several Caribbean
countries, also reflecting the NEET problem. Secondary education is far from universal in most
of the countries with available data. Guyana is the closest with an enrollment rate of 92.6%, followed
by Barbados with 89% of enrollment, then Antigua and Barbuda, St. Vincent and the Grenadines,
and St. Lucia, Jamaica, Dominica and The Bahamas with enrollment rates between 85% and 83%.
Belize, St. Kitts and Nevis, the Dominican Republic and, in particular, Suriname have much lower
secondary enrollment rates. Tertiary education enrollment rates are available for a reduced set of
countries but, in all of these, enrollment rates are quite low, with the exception of Grenada (52.8%)
and Barbados (60.8%). The enrollment rate for tertiary education in St. Kitts and Nevis is 18.2% and
in Belize and Jamaica, it is about 26% (Parra Torrado, 2014). St. Lucia, Guyana, and Antigua and
Barbuda all have tertiary enrollment rates inferior to 15%. Low school enrollment and school comple-
tion rates, in addition to low-quality education, narrows the opportunities of youth in the labor market,
fueling a vicious cycle of youth discouragement.

Youth unemployment can also reduce future employment prospects and earnings. The litera-
ture, theoretical and empirical, on the effects of unemployment on future individual labor outcomes is
extensive and indicative of important scars left by unemployment spells on the labor profile of those
affected. For instance, a recent study by Chaaban, (2009) on a set of Caribbean countries estimates
that the cost of youth unemployment, as forgone wages and lost productivity, ranges between 0.65%
                                                     27
of GDP in Anguilla and 2.46% of GDP in St. Lucia . Furthermore, a series of studies based on data
from the UK (Gregg, 2001, and Gregg and Tominey, 2005) have concluded that unemployment in
23
   According to the World Development Report on Jobs (World Bank, 2012), 621 million young people are idle, that is, they are neither in school
or training, nor working or searching for a job. The report estimates that the rate of idleness ranges between 10 and 50 percent among those
aged 15 to 24 years old.
24
   Author’s estimation based on ILOSTAT (n.d.). Note that for statistical purposes, ILO defines youth as persons between the ages of 15 and 24.
Youth not in education are those who were neither enrolled in school nor in a formal training program (e.g. vocational training) during a specified
reference period (e.g., one week).
25
   ILO’s average is estimated based on household surveys across different years.
26
   A descriptive analysis of labor force participation and secondary enrollment dynamics shows evidence of decreasing youth LFP in favor of
secondary school enrollment in Belize, the Dominican Republic, Guyana, St. Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines. However, further ana-
lytical work is needed in order to show causality.
                                                                                                                                                      167
      early life increases the chances of experiencing unemployment spells in adult life for men and to,
      to a lesser extent, for women. Also, they find that youth unemployment reduces lifetime earnings
      with the effect being slightly reduced if higher education is obtained or future adult unemployment
      spells are avoided. In short, these studies find evidence of permanent scars of youth unemployment
      on labor profiles: after 20 years of the experiencing youth unemployment of at least 13 months the
      negative effect on earnings ranges between 10% (if unemployment has not recurred) and 30% (if
      unemployment recurs).


           Box 1. Active Labor Market Policies in St. Lucia

           An inventory of active labor market policies (ALMP) was created for St. Lucia by a World
           Bank team in 2013 collecting data from official documents and interacting with government
           representatives.
           Spending on ALMPs in St. Lucia in 2012 represented 1.16% of GDP. This percentage is high
           compared to OECD countries, which in 2011 spent less than 1% of GDP, with the exception
           of Belgium (1.6%), Denmark (2.3%), Sweden (1.1%) and the Netherlands (1.1%). Compared
           with Latin America, spending in St. Lucia is particularly high: Chile allocated 0.45% of its GDP
           in 2010, and Argentina and Colombia allocated 0.45 % and 0.35%, respectively, in 2010.

           Figure 4 shows the distribution of                               Figure 4: Distribution of spending on AMLPs in St.
           spending on ALMPs by program cat-                                                    Lucia, 2012
           egory. The largest share of spending
           (47.8%) went to direct job creation,
           followed by apprenticeship programs
           (36.7%), training (9.6%) and start-up
           incentives (5.8%). Direct job creation
           has also the largest number of ben-
           eficiaries (78.3% of the total), followed
           by apprenticeship programs (10.1%),
           start-up incentives (7.2%), and train-
           ing (4.5%). However, the share of to-
           tal AMLP spending dedicated to youth
           programs seems to be low, but there is
           not clear evidence.                                                         Source: Parra-Torrado and Soto (2013)
           A set of challenging characteristics emerged from the analysis of the ALMP in St. Lucia that
           may be preventing individuals from receiving assistance in improving their job prospects.
           First, in St. Lucia there is no unique governing body responsible for the management of all
           ALMPs. Employment and education matters have been integrated in the newly reconfigured
           Ministry of Education, Human Resource Development and Labour. However, the also newly
           reconfigured Ministry of Social Transformation, Local Government and Community Empower-
           ment is responsible for managing and financing five of the fourteen existing activation and em-
           ployment programs. The National Initiative to Create Employment (NICE) program, under the
           Office of the Prime Minister, was conceived as an umbrella instrument, which would absorb all
           other programs, but in practice the programs have continued existing without change, and co-
           ordination and collaboration between actors is marginal. The lack of coordinated management
           has led to a duplication of efforts. For instance, in St. Lucia there are five enterprise-incentive
           programs. This institutional arrangement needs a clear coordinating structure that allow for an
           articulated functional provision of services. Second, St. Lucia does not have a single institu-
           tion that compiles vacancies with unemployed workers. Some programs provide assistance
           for job search, such as HOPE, Skills for Inclusive Growth and NAPP, but the country does
           not offer a single public service for the intermediation of labor supply and demand. Third, St.
           Lucia does not have a unique registry of beneficiaries, nor does it have a profiling instrument
           of beneficiaries and their needs that would support a more efficient provision of services.
           Fourth, most activation programs do not include a monitoring and evaluation component that
           could provide feedback to the design and implementation of the program and, in turn, an op-
           portunity to correct mistakes and maximize good results. Furthermore, there is not a policy
           of evaluating the whole ALMP strategy based on the country’s labor market needs and the
           cost-effectiveness of the programs.
      27
        Note, however, that this estimated cost does not include the forgone opportunity of acquiring skills on-the-job, the psychological costs associ-
      ated with unemployment, and the costs associated with risky behavior.
168
Unemployment and NEET status affect negatively the individual’s mental health, and these
effects are not compensated when securing employment. Studies on mental health have shown
that experiencing unemployment decreases mental health scores, indicating a continued negative
effect on mental health, increasing for those individuals experiencing more than one spell (Milne,
Spittal, Page, and La Montagne, 2013). Mckenzie et al. (2014) find that moving out of employment
into inactivity and individual deprivation has greater effects on mental health and psychological dis-
tress than changes in household income or area deprivation. Furthermore, Flint, Bartley, Shelton,
and Sacker (2013) find that the negative effects of joblessness are not compensated by the positive
gains in psychological wellbeing from transitioning into employment as the latter are smaller.

Unemployment, NEET status and early school leaving may lead to youth involvement in
risky behaviors. In addition to the already mentioned costs, youth unemployment and NEET status
generates discouragement, disaffection, isolation (Eurofound, 2012), and lack of ownership and of
purpose among youth. These sentiments in turn increase the chances of youth engaging in risky
activities such as adolescent fertility and sexual risky behaviors, substance abuse, and crime and
violence. Parra Torrado (2014) presents evidence of these potential risks in the Caribbean as well
as their associated costs.


POLICY DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
The diagnosis above leads to two main policy areas for discussion: (i) collection of data and crea-
tion of information systems; (ii) active labor market policies, which include, inter alia, labor market
intermediation, and employment/training programs—especially those targeted to youth. It should be
noted that active labor market policies and programs are just one policy area that needs to be tackled
in order to address youth unemployment. Ensuring macroeconomic growth, reducing vulnerability
to shocks, developing a vibrant private sector, and investing in a sound education system are other
policy areas that are critical for fostering growth and promoting employment. However, a discussion
of these policy areas is outside of the scope of this paper.

A. Collection of data and information systems

In order to improve labor market policies, the current lack of information about labor markets
needs to be further addressed. It would be useful for the region to produce detailed statistics of
labor markets conditions and outcomes that would help answer simple questions, including what the
labor force looks like and what the quality of jobs in the Caribbean is. It is important for countries to
collect micro-data on a regular basis to estimate basic indicators of employment status, by gender,
age group, education level and sector of work for the employed. It would also be useful to have infor-
mation on the quality of jobs, such as labor income, hours of work, type and terms of contract, social
security, and labor benefits, among others. For the unemployed and inactive, it would be useful to
know what job search methods exist (if any), how long they might spend searching for a job or being
inactive, and the barriers they face, among other variables. Collecting information on personal and
household characteristics, including sources of income, such as remittances, as well as information
on migration at the individual level, would also be useful. In addition, countries should implement
monitoring and evaluation systems at all levels in order to adjust the design and implementation of
these programs according to results and outcomes, as well as to changes in the conditions of the
local economy.




                                                                                                            169
      There are some recent promising initiatives in the region aimed at closing the information
                                          28
      gap. A new World Bank IDF grant aims at improving capacity for labor market monitoring and the
      establishment of information systems for improved labor market performance in a group of Carib-
                      29
      bean countries . The main goal of this grant is to strengthen the institutional capacity of government
      ministries and agencies, through the University of the West Indies, which will be responsible for
      improving labor market policies and programs, by establishing a culture of monitoring and evalua-
      tion, and information management in this group of Caribbean countries. Furthermore,, a World Bank
      team from the Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Unit has been supporting the efforts
      of the OECS Statistical Office to strengthen the statistical units in OECS countries and develop har-
                                   30
      monized labor force surveys . In fact, the OECS Member States are working towards establishing a
      Sustainable Household Data Collection Programme (SDP) for the Measurement of Living Standards
      in the OECS under the leadership of the OECS Living Standards Measurement Committee (LSMC),
      with the additional support of the ILO.

      B. Active Labor Market Policies

      There is a need for effective and affordable labor activation policies in the region.
      AActive labor market policies (ALMPs) form a key pillar of social protection systems. The
      two other pillars are: social assistance for the poor and social insurance to help individuals
                       31
      manage shocks . ALMPs include labor market intermediation and job counseling at public
      employment services, training and skills development programs, employment incentives,
      direct job creation, and start-up incentives, among others. An analysis of some of the ac-
      tive labor market programs in the region indicates that while such programs exist, their
      coverage is small and there is considerable redundancy, duplication, lack of coordination
      and evident gaps in the supply of such services. An analysis of active labor market poli-
      cies in St. Lucia provides an example of the challenges faced by current arrangements of
      programs including poor coordination, weak provision of key services, and inadequate or
      inexistent monitoring and evaluation (See Box 1).

      As noted above, the lack of relevant job skills, in addition to information asymmetries,
      are likely to remain key constraints to youth employment. In what follows, youth acti-
      vation interventions aiming at addressing these constraints are briefly presented in
      three large groups: (i) activation programs that aim at improving skills; (ii) programs that
      focus on matching labor supply and demand, and (iii) programs that combine both skills
      development and matching labor supply and demand. To finalize, a brief argument in favor
                        32
      of the third group , is presented, as well as some implementation modalities.

      Programs that focus on skill development usually aim to provide participants with edu-
      cation towards attaining a degree, generally vocational, high school or equivalent, in order
      to improve their chances in the labor market. Some examples of this type of programs
      are ChileCalifica in Chile, and the National Guard Youth ChalleNGe and Job Corps in the
      United States.




      28
         The grant is the IDF Grant Strengthening Labor Market Monitoring and Performance in the Caribbean.
      29
         Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
      and the Grenadines and Trinidad and Tobago.
      30
         St. Lucia, St Kitts and Nevis, Antigua, Dominica, Granada, St. Vincent and the Grenadines.
      31
         The emphasis of the system (choice of pillars) and complexity varies by country and by the country’s context (e.g. fiscal and administrative
      capacity).
      32
         A broader discussion of the programs’ advantages and disadvantages, and their impact evaluations, can be found in Parra Torrado (2014).
170
Programs that focus on matching employers and job seekers can take the form of job
placement programs or subsidized youth employment programs. For instance, programs
like the public employment service of Argentina (ServicioPúblico de Empleo) and Jobcentre
Plus in the UK provide diverse services to both employers and job seekers. In the region,
an example is the One Stop Job Centre (OSEC) in Antigua and Barbuda, which is currently
being transformed to become fully operational under the World Bank’s Public and Social
Sector Transformation Project. Examples of subsidized youth employment programs are
Subsidio al Empleo Jóven in Chile and Contrato de Aprendizaje in Colombia.

Programs that aim both at developing skills and at bringing together employers and
job seekers include versions of a dual vocational education and training program that pro-
vides both vocational training and apprenticeship opportunities in firms. These have been
implemented in Germany, Austria, The Netherlands, Denmark and Switzerland. Similarly,
the Australian industry-led technical and vocational training system combines training, ap-
prenticeships and development of qualifications. Different alternative approaches that com-
bine on-the-job training or work-based activities and job placement initiatives are the Ca-
                                                                         33
reer Academy model and YouthBuild implemented in the United States . Some successful
examples in Latin America are two programs by the International Youth Foundation (IYF):
                                                         34
Entra 21 implemented in 17 Latin American countries , including Belize and Dominican
Republic; and New Employment Opportunities (NEO) implemented in nine Latin American
                                             35
countries, including the Dominican Republic . The Programa Juventud y Empleo provides
training, a monetary stipend and a two-month apprenticeship in the Dominican Republic.
And in Jamaica, the pilot of the Steps-to-Work program provides training and on-the-job-
experiences to a targeted population.

Of all youth programs, those that combine skills development with on-the-job train-
ing or work-based activities and job placement components are more effective in
improving employability and earnings. Empirical research provides evidence in favor
of programs that provide participants with on-the-job training opportunities. Examples are
the dual-education model in Germany and Switzerland, apprenticeships and work trials
in the UK, Entra 21 in Latin America and YouthBuild and Career Academies in the United
States (Lerman, 2013; Eichhorst, Hinte, and Rinne, 2013; Cahuc, Carcillo, Rinne, and Zim-
mermann, 2013; Eichhorst, Rodríguez-Planas, Schmidl, and Zimmermann, 2012). In the
region, the Programa Juventud y Empleo of Dominican Republic has shown positive results
and the Jamaican pilot Steps-to-Work-Program has also shown good results and is now be-
ing rolled-out on a national scale (Ibarrarán, Ripani, Taboada, Villa, and Garcia, 2012). The
success of this approach is due to three factors: on-the-job training, industry participation,
and government coordination and regulation.




33
   YouthBuild has also been implemented in Mexico as Jóvenes Constructores de la Comunidad (JCC) with some success in terms of continu-
ation of education or training and employability. YouthBuild presentations can be found at http://www.youthbuildinternational.org/.
34
   Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Pana-
ma, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
35
   The nine countries are: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Mexico, Panama, Peru, and Uruguay.
                                                                                                                                             171
      Skills are better learned on the job, in particular life and work skills. The strength of
      these programs is based on the fact that by providing beneficiaries with on-the-job training
      they get the chance to see how the real world works in terms of the work-specific activity
      but also in terms of the relationships and situations that evolve in regular days at work.
                                                                                         36
      Combining the developing of cognitive and technical skills in academic settings with on-
      the-job training or work-based activities allows students to see how the topics learned are
      applied in real life. Also, in working environments students get the chance to face real prob-
      lems, consequences and challenges that help them in the development of self-confidence,
      problem-solving and critical thinking abilities, work ethics, among other life and work skills
      (Lerman, 2013; Halpern, 2012; Halpern, 2009; and Rauner, 2007). Moreover, there is evi-
      dence that youth prefer to learn in interactive settings: on the job (62%), hands-on (58%),
      and multimedia (54%), among others (Mourshed et al., 2011).

      The participation and commitment of employers is fundamental. Having the employ-
      ers on board in a youth employment and training program is essential for ensuring success.
      First, employers know their labor supply needs, so a fluent communication between edu-
      cation providers and employers is crucial to make sure that the education being imparted
      is relevant to the labor market, which will directly improve the employment opportunities
      of graduates (World Bank, 2011a; Mathews, 2013). Second, a commitment on the part of
      employers not only to train apprentices on-the-job but also to support their formal technical
      training, guarantees the sustainability of the program. Furthermore, incorporating mentor-
      ing components involving employers into the program strengthens these programs, since
      youth learn through observation and imitation (Halpern, 2009). Such commitment can be
      leveraged with the imminent need of employers to overcome the increasing talent short-
            37
      ages . Third, continuing interaction between employers and policy makers to keep infor-
      mation systems up-to-date permits better-designed policies and programs.

      Government coordination and regulation is essential to ensure the quality and func-
      tionality of the schemes. Governments are key actors in youth employment and training
      programs not only due to their role as policy makers and financial supporters (although
      private financial support is encouraged) but as coordinators and regulators. It is the re-
      sponsibility of the government to provide the institutional infrastructure for these programs
      to evolve. It should provide spaces for communication among actors (education providers,
      employers, trade unions), guide the dialogue, and make sure that action is taken. Moreo-
      ver, it is the government’s duty to guarantee the quality of training programs as well as the
      labor and social protection rights of participants.




      36
         Real-life classroom settings are also a newer and interesting approach that has shown better results than traditional classroom settings. An
      example of this intervention can be found in Colombia with SENA’s new adapted environment classrooms.
      37
         According to a recent article in the New York Times, companies in the United States have resorted to creating their own apprenticeship pro-
      grams or partnering with specialized providers in order to create their own labor force with the needed skills (Schwartz, 2013).
172
A critical element in effective delivery of programs is ensuring that programs are
delivered in a coordinated fashion, with strong administration. Setting up a one-stop
shop providing tailor-made services allows the job seeker to obtain information on all pro-
grams and services provided for his benefit to help him secure a job even though in some
cases these programs or services are not directly provided by the official labor institution.
Additionally, the one-stop shop allows the coordination of programs and services supply,
avoiding duplication and closing any gaps in provision, thus strengthening a systematic ap-
proach to social protection. Furthermore, setting-up a one-stop shop allows policy makers
to design programs in an interconnected manner to ensure a path out of unemployment
towards a self-sustained income generating status. This approach would also facilitate the
collection and maintenance of databases to the authorities, for example, using a single data
registry and profiling of beneficiaries to enhance service provision.

The heterogeneity of job seekers and their needs must be recognized when provid-
ing employment services. Not all unemployed face the same constraints to employment.
An essential first step in the provision of employment services is to identify the job seekers’
needs and characteristics. The standard demographics or academic qualification do not ex-
plain entirely unemployment spells. The interaction of the individual characteristics with life
trajectories better explains the need for an employment service. In fact, an individual facing
difficulties with securing a job may not necessarily need a service from an employment of-
fice but rather from social services in general. For example, a qualified single woman with
children may not be vulnerable in the labor market just for being female but also because of
her living situation; she may not need more training or any type of intermediation services
but rather affordable child care solutions. A similar argument can be made in the case of a
person having difficulties holding a stable job due to mental health problems. A good profil-
ing of the individual helps make clear their needs and allows for a more effective assistance
by making it possible to refer them to the right service or program. A tailor-made services
approach is more effective in responding to the simplicity or complexity of individual situa-
tions. Another clear advantage of this approach is that resources can be better utilized since
programs and services can be clearly targeted.

Ensuring programs are cost effective and financially sustainable. Given scarce re-
sources it is important that the government assess which programs are most cost effective
and suited to the country context. Therefore, implementing pilot programs, and evaluating
them prior to scale up, is essential. More generally, a system of monitoring and evaluation
provides a feedback loop to policy makers who can then assess whether programs are well
designed, financially sustainable and effective in achieving their outcomes.




                                                                                                  173
CON
CLU
SIONS




174
Youth unemployment in the Caribbean is of major concern. However, systematic informa-
tion on this and other labor market outcomes is only produced for a handful of countries.
This chapter aims at filling this gap by presenting data on unemployment and youth unem-
ployment for most countries in the region in a comparative manner. It focuses on two major
factors hindering the integration of youth into the labor market. The first major factor is the
lack of right skills for the job, due to the low quality of education, the demand for socio-
emotional and work skills not imparted in the school system, and to lack of experience. The
second is a lack of information, which prevents both youth job-seekers and employers from
effectively finding good job matches in the labor market.

This chapter discusses two main policy areas needing intervention in the Caribbean. First,
there is a need for producing detailed statistics of labor market conditions to improve di-
agnostics and to develop monitoring and evaluation systems to provide feedback on pro-
gram design and implementation. Second, there is a need for implementing effective and
affordable active labor market policies that address the skills and information constraints
discussed above. This chapter presents three types of programs and argues that programs
that successfully combine skills development with on-the-job training or work-based ac-
tivities and job placement components, are more effective in improving employability and
earnings of youth. This is mainly due to the fact that skills are better learned on the job, in
particular those skills demanded by employers: life and work skills.

 Finally, the chapter discusses four elements that are crucial for effective and efficient inter-
ventions. The first element is the commitment and involvement of employers in the design
and implementation of youth employment and training programs. The second element is
the role of the government as coordinators and regulators. They need to provide the insti-
tutional infrastructure, as well as communication opportunities for all relevant actors, and
guarantee the quality of training programs and the social protection rights of participants.
The third element is ensuring that programs are delivered in a coordinated manner and that
heterogeneity of beneficiaries and their needs is recognized in program design, for which a
“one-stop shop with tailor-made services” is proposed as a model. The last element neces-
sary for successful employment policies is ensuring that the social protection strategy is
cost-effective and financially sustainable.




                                                                                                    175
      REFERENCES

      Albanesi, S. and A. Sahin (2013). The gender unemployment gap. Working Paper No. 2013-04,
      Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Global Working Group, Economics Research Center,
      University of Chicago.

      Azevedo, J. P., M. Favara, S. E. Haddock, L.F. Lopez-Calva, M. Müller, E. Perova (2012). Teenage
      Pregnancy and Opportunities in Latin America and the Caribbean. On Early Child Bearing, Poverty
      and Economic Achievement, The World Bank Group, Washington DC, USA.

      Barbados Statistical Office (2010). Statistical Bulletin. Continuous Household Labour Force Sur-
      vey. Barbados.

      Blum, R. W., L. Halcón, T. Beuhring, E. Pate, S. Campell-Forrester, and A. Venema. (2003). Ado-
      lescent health in the Caribbean: Risk and protective factors. American Journal of Public Health,
      93, 456–460.

      Cahuc, P., S. Carcillo, U. Rinne, K. F. Zimmermann (2013). Youth unemployment in old Europe:
      The polar cases of France and Germany. IZA Discussion Paper No. 7490, Bonn, Germany.

      Caribbean Knowledge and Learning Network (CKLN) (2006). Labour Market Survey 2006. Final
      Report, prepared by Michael White and Associates.

      Chaaban, Jad (2009). Costs and benefits from investing in youth in the CARICOM member states.
      A quantitative assessment of the youth development strategy. Unpublished manuscript, available
      from the author upon request.

      Cunningham, W. and P. Villaseñor (2014). Employer demands and implication for public skills de-
      velopment policy. Draft in process. World Bank. Available from the author upon request.

      Cunningham, W., M.L. Sanchez-Puerta, and A. Wuermli, (2010). Active labor market programs
      for youth: A framework to guide youth employment interventions. World Bank, Washington, DC.
      https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/11690

      Cunningham, W.; L. McGinnis, R. García Verdú, C. Tesliuc, and D. Verner,. (2008). Youth at Risk in
      Latin America and the Caribbean: Understanding the Causes, Realizing the Potential. Washington,
      DC: World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6483

      Cunningham,W., and R. García-Verdú (2008). Estimates of the cost of early school leaving, youth
      unemployment, and youth joblessness in Latin America and the Caribbean.. Background paper for
      Cunningham, W., L. McGinnis, R. García Verdú, C. Tesliuc, and D. Verner (2008). Youth at Risk in
      Latin America and the Caribbean: Understanding the Causes, Realizing the Potential. Washington,
      DC: World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6483

      ECLAC (2014). Panorama fiscal de América Latina y el Caribe 2014. http://www.cepal.org/publica-
      ciones/xml/8/52008/PanoramaFiscal2014.pdf

      Eichhorst, W., N. Rodríguez-Planas, R. Schmidl, K. F. Zimmermann (2012). A roadmap to voca-
      tional education and training systems around the world. IZA Discussion Paper No. 7110, Bonn,
      Germany.

      Eichhorst, W., H. Hinte, U. Rinne (2013). Youth Unemployment in Europe: What to Do about It? IZA
      Policy Paper No. 65, Bonn, Germany.



176
Encuesta Nacional sobre Niveles de Vida de los Hogares (ENNVH). (2012). http://www.ennvih-mxfls.
org/

Eurofound (2012). NEETs – Young people not in employment, education or training: Characteristics,
costs and policy responses in Europe. Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg.

Flint, E. M. Bartley, N. Shelton and A. Sacker (2013). Do labour market status transitions predict chang-
es in psychological well-being? Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 67, 796-802.

Gaviria, A. (2000). Decisiones: sexo y embarazo entre las jóvenes colombianas. Fedesarrollo, Co-
yuntura Social No. 23.

Gregg, P. (2001). The impact of youth unemployment on adult unemployment in the NCDS. The Eco-
nomic Journal, 111, F626-F653.

Gregg, P. and E. Tominey (2005). The wage scar from male youth unemployment. Labour Economics
12, 487–509.

Halpern, R. (2009). The Means to Grow Up: Reinventing Apprenticeship as a Developmental Support
in Adolescence. New York: Routledge.

Halpern, R. (2012). It takes a whole society: Opening up the learning landscape in the high school
years. A Report to the Nellie Mae Education Foundation, Erikson Institute.

Hickling Corporation (2008). Grenada Skills for Inclusive Growth Project: Employer Needs Survey.
Skills for inclusive growth project Grenada. Final Report. http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/de-
fault/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2008/09/25/000076092_20080929152321/Rendered/INDEX/Pro-
ject0Inform1nt010Appraisal0Stage.txt

Ibarrarán, P., L. Ripani, B. Taboada, J. M. Villa, and B. Garcia (2012). Life skills, employability and train-
ing for disadvantaged youth: Evidence from a randomized evaluation design. IZA Conference Paper,
Processed.

IDB (2013). In pursuit of employable skills: understanding employers’ demands analysis of The Ba-
hamas’ 2012 wages & productivity survey. Inter-American Development Bank, Country Office in The
Bahamas, Nassau, The Bahamas.

International Labour Organization. (n.d.). ILOSTAT database. http://www.ilo.org/ilostat/

Jules, D. (2010). Rethinking education in the Caribbean. Caribbean Examinations Council http://www.
cxc.org/?q=node/7174

Kairi Consultants Limited (2009). Country Poverty Assessment St. Kitts and Nevis 2007/08. Living con-
ditions in a Caribbean small island developing state. Final Report.

Kairi Consultants Limited (2010a). Country Poverty Assessment Dominica 2008-09. Dominica: reduc-
ing poverty in the face of vulnerability. Final Report.

Kairi Consultants Limited (2010b). Country Poverty Assessment: Grenada, Carriacou and Petit Marti-
nique 2007/08. Final Report.

Kovrova, I., S. Lyon, and F. C. Rosati. (2012). NEET youth dynamics in Indonesia and. Brazil: A cohort
analysis. Background Paper, World Development Report 2013: Jobs, World Bank. Washington D.C.




                                                                                                                 177
      Lerman, R. (2013). Are employability skills learned in U.S. youth education and training programs?
      IZA Journal of Labor Policy, doi:10.1186/2193-9004-2-6

      Mathews, C. (2013). Quality education counts for skills and growth. Caribbean Knowledge Series,
      World Bank, Latin American and Caribbean Region.

      Manpower (2013). 2013 Talent shortage survey research results. Manpower Group, 100 Manpower
      Place, Milwaukee, WI 53212, USA.

      Mourshed, M., D. Farrell, and D. Barton (2011). From education to employment: Designing a system
      that works. McKinsey Center for Government.

      Mckenzie, S. K., F. I. Gunasekara, K. Richardson, K. Carter (2014). Do changes in socioeconomic
      factors lead to changes in mental health? Findings from three waves of a population based panel
      study. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, doi:10.1136/jech-2013-203013

      Milner, A., M. J. Spittal, A. Page, A. D. LaMontagne (2013). The effect of leaving employment on
      mental health: testing ‘adaptation’ versus ‘sensitisation’ in a cohort of working-age Australians. Oc-
      cupational & Environmental Medicine, doi:10.1136/oemed-2013-101759

      Näslund-Hadley, E. and G. Binstock (2010). The miseducation of Latin American girls: Poor school-
      ing makes pregnancy a rational choice. Inter-American Development Bank, Education Division
      (SCL/EDU), TECHNICAL NOTES No. IDB-TN-204.

      Parra Torrado, M. (2014). Unemployment, Youth and Active Labor Market Policies in the Caribbean.
      Work in Progress. World Bank. Unpublished manuscript, available from the author upon request.

      Rauner, F. (2007). Vocational education and training -A European perspective. In Brown, A., S.R.
      Kirpal, and F. Rauner (eds.) Identities at Work. Technical and Vocational Education and Training:
      Issues, Concerns and Prospects, 5, 115-144. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2007.

      Riley, R., H. Bewley, S. Kirby, A. Rincon-Aznar and A. George (2011). The introduction of Jobcentre
      Plus: An evaluation of labour market impacts, Research Report No. 781, Department of Work and
      Pensions, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

      Schwartz, N. D. (2013). Where factory apprenticeship is latest model from Germany. The New York
      Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/01/business/where-factory-apprenticeship-is-latest-model-
      from-germany.html?pagewanted=2&_r=0

      Soto, C. (2013). Análisis de políticas activas del mercado de trabajo (PAMT) en Saint Lucia. Back-
      ground Document, World Bank. Unpublished. Available from the author upon request.

      UNDP (2012). Caribbean Human Development Report 2012. Human Development and the Shift
      to Better Citizen Security. New York: UNDP; New York; http://www.regionalcentrelac-undp.org/en/
      hdr-caribbean

      Universidad de Chile (2011). Evaluación de Impacto del Programa de Subsidio al Empleo Joven,
      Informe Final Corregido, Departamento de Economía, Centro de Microdatos, Santiago, Chile.

      University of the West Indies (2012). Barbados Country Assessment of Living Conditions 2010.

      UNODC (2013). World Drug Report 2013. United Nations publication, Sales No. E.13.XI.6.

      UNODC and World Bank (2007). Crime, violence, and development: Trends, costs and policy op-
      tions in the Caribbean. Report 37820. Washington, DC: World Bank.


178
World Bank (2006). Development and the Next Generation. World Development Report 2007, World
Bank, Washington D.C.

World Bank (2011a). Skills strategy options for OECS. World Bank, Washington D.C.

World Bank (2011b). Antigua and Barbuda. Social protection assessment. http://www.zerohunger-
challengelac.org/ab/doc/SocialProtectionAssessmentAG.pdf

World Bank (2012) Resilience, equity, and opportunity. Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/handle/10986/12648.

World Bank (2012) Jobs. World Development Report 2013, World Bank, Washington D.C.




                                                                                                179
13
QUALITY COUNTS FOR
SKILLS AND GROWTH
180
Harriet Nannyonjo and Clark Matthews*
                                    181
      ABSTRACT
                     Improving the quality of education is one of the key ingredients for economic growth in the Car-
                     ibbean. While Caribbean states have made good progress in increasing access, much remains
                     to be done in improving quality of learning outcomes. Despite the high level of investment,
                     quality of education in the Caribbean remains low. Furthermore, the sectoral shift experienced
                     by Caribbean countries, together with the digitization of business processes and production
                     technology, has rendered many repetitive, manual jobs obsolete, while increasing the number
                     of jobs that require non-routine skills. Coupled with the increasingly competitive landscape, the
                     foremost implication of this shift is the increased demand for employees with vastly different
                     skillsets. This policy note argues that necessary actions include investing in early childhood
                     development to ensure that all children develop strong foundation skills, strategically investing
                     in higher education to provide high level skills and research to apply to current technologies, re-
                     cruitment and retention of qualified teachers, and ensuring availability of high-quality and timely
                     data. Achievement of this goal will also require strengthening the partnership with the private
                     sector. Close collaboration among the Caribbean states in addressing these measures would
                     help improve the efficiency of investments and promotion of learning.

      *Senior Education Specialist, Education Unit, Latin America and Caribbean Region, and Consultant, Human
      Development Sector, Latin America and the Caribbean Region, respectively, of the World Bank.



      INTRODUCTION
      The collective skills of the workforce are a critical factor for the promotion of economic
      growth and the improvement of living standards for citizens in the Caribbean. Despite sig-
      nificant investments in formal education, economic growth in the region has slowed in recent years
      and there is a need for improved labor productivity. This note presents findings from the literature on
      education and skills development in the Caribbean, and makes the case that quality education and
      training are essential to achieve the higher growth rates to which the region is aspiring.
      The note briefly looks at the significant progress that has been made in the region towards ensuring
      access to education, and then at the data regarding the quality of the outcomes in the formal educa-
      tion system. It then draws attention to four of the key areas to be addressed in the Caribbean formal
      education system (early childhood education, higher education, teacher quality and accountability),
      as well as to the importance of finding mechanisms for greater collaboration with the private sector
      to shape training that better responds to demand for skills.


      THE RELEVANCE OF EDUCATION
      The quality and relevance of education are of paramount importance to achieving economic
      growth. World Bank (2007) research shows that test scores serve are a better predictor of eco-
      nomic growth than the number of years of school. A study by Hanushek and Woessmann, (2007)
      using a database of comparable test scores for over 50 countries, found that a difference of a single
      standard deviation in tests scores between countries equates to roughly 2 percentage points in
      annual long-term GDP growth. These findings hold true across high-income, middle-income, and
      low-income countries and across all geographical regions.
      Achieving sustained economic growth through enhanced productivity requires good-quality
      education that prepares students for the labor market. The labor market, together with the
      economic landscape of the Caribbean, is changing fast. Falling trade barriers, shifts in global
      production patterns and technological change have fundamentally altered the nature of production
      in all areas of economies. In so doing, they have radically modified the structure of occupations and
      skills, and thus the demands on education. In the Caribbean, the manufacturing and agriculture
      sectors, which have historically been the main drivers of economic growth and employment, are
      quickly giving way to services. Today, the services sector (comprised of tourism, financial services
      and government) is the largest source of employment, accounting for 80 percent of the workforce
      in OECS countries and the World Bank (Blom and Hobbs, 2008) notes a comparable level in other
      Caribbean countries.
182
EDUCATION IN THE CARIBBEAN
Caribbean countries have made significant strides in increasing enrollment in primary and
secondary education and have allocated considerable public resources to the education
sector. For many years the focus was on ensuring access to, and duration of, studies.
Caribbean countries perform well on these dimensions. Since 1960 the average years of
educational attainment of the adult population has increased from 4.3 to 10.3, a rate today
that is comparable with the South American average and approaches the average of OECD
countries.


Table 1: Average Educational Attainment of the Adult Population, 1960-2010

                               1960                        1970          1980            1990         2000         2010
    Barbados                   5.5                         9.5           9.9             10.0         9.6          10.5
    Cuba                       5.0                         7.8           9.9             11.8         10.3         13.1
    Dominican Republic         3.3                         4.6           6.1             7.7          7.8          9.0
    Haiti                      1.2                         1.8           3.0             5.4          6.4          6.3
    Jamaica                    4.3                         5.5           7.8             8.8          10.9         12.0
    Trinidad and Tobago        6.6                         7.5           8.1             9.7          10.7         11.1
    Belize                     8.8                         8.2           8.9             9.8          8.9          10.1
    Caribbean Average          4.3                         6.1           7.5             8.9          9.3          10.3
    South American Average     4.5                         5.9           7.2             8.3          8.9          10.5
    OECD Average               7.7                         9.0           10.1            10.8         11.3         12.1
    Source: Barro and Lee, 2013.

Many of the Caribbean countries have achieved near universal enrollment at the primary and secondary level
(such as Aruba, Belize, Barbados, Grenada, and Guyana). Access to higher education remains low with less
than fifteen percent of secondary school graduates going on to post-secondary education.


Many of the Caribbean countries have achieved near universal enrollment at the primary
and secondary level (such as Aruba, Belize, Barbados, Grenada, and Guyana). Access to
higher education remains low with less than fifteen percent of secondary school graduates
going on to post-secondary education.




7
 The Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) consists of seven member countries (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Mont-
serrat, St. Lucia, St. Kitts and Nevis, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines) and two associate members (Anguilla and the British Virgin Islands).




                                                                                                                                                   183
      Figure 1: Education expenditure as % of GDP




      The strong commitment to education is clear when looking at the high level of edu-
      cation expenditure relative to GDP, which compares favorably to the OECD average
      of 5.2 percent of GDP. St. Kitts and Nevis is amongst the highest relative spenders in the
      region allocating 9.3 percent of GDP to education. St. Lucia and Barbados spend 6.6 per-
      cent and 6.9 percent of GDP on education, respectively. Antigua & Barbuda is at the other
      end of the spectrum, allocating 3.9 percent of GDP.

      Despite the high level of investment, quality of education in the Caribbean remains
      low. In this dimension, Caribbean countries have significant room for improvement. The av-
      erage pass rates for standardized tests in core subjects such as English and Mathematics
      are less than 50 percent, and many students lack basic skills in information and communi-
      cation technology and other disciplines deemed critical for success in the work place. Even
      more worrisome are the reports of poor student Caribbean secondary education examina-
      tion performance on test items that require critical thinking, analysis or communication.
      Despite having received up to 11 years of formal education, school leavers often struggle
      greatly to find employment. This fact is most pronounced amongst the youth cohort – inclu-
      sive of 15 to 29 years olds – where the rate of unemployment is double to quadruple that
      of adults in the region.

      Figure 2: Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Pass Scores, 2006-2009




184
From a formal education standpoint, these less than satisfactory outcomes point to
systemic issues at each level of the education system. Through the Education Strategy
2020, the World Bank advocates for a systems approach to education analysis and reform.
The systems approach recognizes that improving education requires strengthening all fac-
tors that improve learning for all children and youth. Within the context of the Caribbean
region, four of the most pressing areas include:

• Early childhood development (ECD): Early childhood education and care interventions
are essential to build a foundation in the early years to ensure the full cognitive, socio-
emotional, linguistic, and physical development of a child. Access to these interventions
varies across the region; with those in rural and lower socio-economic classes least likely
to attend. As a result, some children lack the foundational skills when entering the primary
school stream.
• Higher education: Higher education is key to improvement in growth and productivity
because it provides high level skills and research to apply to current technologies and
develop new technologies, both of which are key to growth. The recent global economic
and financial crisis has made it urgent that the region focus on areas for improvement of
productivity, and improve competitiveness in the global economy. Tertiary education has
a big role to play in addressing this challenge in the Caribbean. Less than 15 percent of
students attend post-secondary education in the OECS. Of this group, only a small portion
enrolls in programs that are considered to be in high demand (i.e. sciences, engineering,
and mathematics).
• Unqualified teachers: Recent international evidence shows that the quality of teaching
is the most important determinant of cognitive achievement. A chronic challenge in the
Caribbean is attracting and retaining qualified teachers. This is particularly pronounced in
core subject areas. On average, 21 percent of mathematics and English teachers are un-
qualified in the subject matter, and this rate is over 80 percent amongst science teachers
in OECS countries.
• Poor accountability: International evidence shows that the level of local autonomy, which
empowers schools to make appropriate educational decisions that reflect their local en-
vironment and situation, is correlated with better quality outcomes. Education systems in
the Caribbean tend to be very centralized, providing schools with minimal decision-making
authority.


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR EDUCATIONAL
REFORMS
Quickly-evolving demands for skills require new responses from training and education sys-
tems alike. Addressing the skills gap is a priority. The sectoral shift experienced by Caribbean
countries, together with the digitization of business processes and production technology, has ren-
dered many repetitive, manual jobs obsolete, while increasing the number of jobs that require non-
routine skills. Coupled with the increasingly competitive landscape, the foremost implication of this
shift is the increased demand for employees with vastly different skillsets. Employer surveys in the
region show a high demand for skills that increase the trainability of employees. These skills are
acquired, developed, and honed in the education system from ECD through secondary school, and
include skills such as appropriate workplace behavior; team work and problem solving; and a strong
grounding in numeracy, literacy, and social skills. In some countries, such as Grenada, enterprise
surveys have shown that the lack of appropriate skills by workers is a fundamental constraint on
business. Along with the direct economic costs to private firms and society, the misalignment of
skills will, if unaddressed, continue to hinder economic growth and lead to higher unemployment and
higher migration rates for highly-skilled individuals.

                                                                                                        185
      Table 2: Top 10 skill priorities identified by employers


                                  1             Positive Work Habits
                                  2             Communication
                                  3             Technical
                                  4             Writing
                                  5             English
                                  6             Mathematics
                                  7             Problem Solving
                                  8             Reading
                                  9             Computer
                                  10            Team Work
                                       Source: Hickling Corporation, 2008


      A multi-pronged approach, involving both the public and private sector, is required
      to achieve effective and high-quality skill development. Contributions from both the
      public and private sector are critical in order to foster and sustain skill development at the
      different stages of a worker’s career. The formal education system is best placed to provide
      a solid foundation of cognitive, non-routine, and soft skills that employees need in order
      to excel in the labor market. As work places continue to be transformed, employees will
      require constant skill upgrading. All types of businesses and organizations are responsible
      for recruiting employees and upgrading their skills in line with their operational needs. This
      is a cost that employers must manage in order to be competitive in a global economy. The
      absence of the required foundation of skills and competencies amongst employees has re-
      sulted in high costs to employers and in under-training of employees. The evidence shows
      that employers would do more training if entry skills were better and costs lower.

      The Skills Strategy Options for the OECS (The World Bank, 2011) indicates that in-
      ternational experience demonstrates that when employers have a strong voice in
      curriculum and school management, they will enter into partnerships that greatly im-
      prove the employment chances of graduates. Improved synergies between the public
      and private sector are key to developing human capital in the Caribbean. The private sec-
      tor is more attuned to the skills and changing market conditions that affect the Caribbean
      economies. For these reasons, a more nuanced, participatory approach, in which the pri-
      vate and public sector work in collaboration to share knowledge, identify the types of skills,
      and determine a cost-effective, quality approach through which they can be developed, is
      required. This approach could include employers contributing to the design and enrichment
      of the curriculum, with integration of career and academic courses and providing work-
      based learning opportunities for students.




186
 Enhancing education quality, skills, and labor productivity also requires robust data
collection systems. Accurate, comprehensive, and timely data are required to promote
effective policy-making. Currently data are insufficient to effectively assess the skills gaps
and inform policy makers and private sector partners as they work to enhance the educa-
tion system. More information is required regarding the depth of the skills mismatch and the
factors contributing to it. As the Caribbean economies continue to evolve, accurate employ-
ment surveys and administrative data are needed to identify the industries of the future and
the skillsets and expertise that will be required to fill these jobs.




                                                                                                 187
 CON
 CLU
 SIONS
 Improving the quality of education is one of the key ingredients for economic growth in the Caribbean.
 While Caribbean states have made good progress in increasing access, much remains to be
 done in improving quality of learning outcomes. Necessary actions include investing in early
 childhood development to ensure that all children develop strong foundation skills, strategi-
 cally investing in higher education to provide high level skills and research to apply to current
 technologies, recruitment and retention of qualified teachers, and ensuring availability of high-
 quality and timely data. Achievement of this goal will also require strengthening the partner-
 ship with the private sector. Close collaboration among the Caribbean states in addressing
 these measures would help improve the efficiency of investments and promotion of learning.




188
REFERENCES

Barro, R.J. & Lee, J.W. (2013) A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950–
2010. Journal of Development Economics, 104, 184–198.

Blom, A. & Hobbs, C. (2008). School and Work in the Eastern Caribbean: Does the Edu-
cation System Adequately Prepare Youth for the Global Economy? World Bank Country
Study No 42909. Washington DC: The World Bank.

Hanushek, E. A., & Woessmann, L. (2007). The role of education quality for economic
growth. Policy Research Working Paper Series 4122, doi: 10.1596/1813-9450-4122

Hickling Corporation (2008). Grenada Skills for Inclusive Growth Project: Employer Needs
Survey.

McKinsey& Company (2007). How the World’s Best Performing School Systems Come
Out on Top. Retrieved from http://mckinseyonsociety.com/how-the-worlds-best-performing-
schools-come-out-on-top/

Moock, P. R. and Nannyonjo H. (2010). Education in the OECS. Challenges and Implica-
tions for Financing, Washington DC: World Bank.

UNESCO. (2008). Global education digest 2008. Comparing education statistics across
the world. UNESCO Institute for Statistics: Montreal. Accessed at: http://www.uis.unesco.
org/Library/Documents/ged08-en.pdf




                                                                                              189
14
NON-COMMUNICABLE
DISEASES IN THE
CARIBBEAN: THE NEW
CHALLENGE FOR
PRODUCTIVITY AND
GROWTH
Shiyan Chao and Clark Matthews*
190
191
      ABSTRACT
                     Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) represent a major, and increasing, cause of death in the
                     Caribbean. In addition, they lead to significant productivity losses, due to absenteeism, disabili-
                     ties, reduced productivity, and less years of working life, and they have a disproportionate effect
                     on those with lower incomes. Therefore, Caribbean governments need to address the preva-
                     lence, and growth of NCDs as part of their growth and development strategies. Some policy
                     options for the region to consider include tackling risk factors; developing legislative and policy
                     actions, such as taxes, to encourage healthy behavior; develop health promotion policies; de-
                     velop primary prevention programs aimed at the entire country, as well as secondary prevention
                     programs aimed at high-risk individuals; adopt regional and multi-sectoral approaches; and use
                     lessons from other countries to mobilize resources.

      * Senior Economist, Health Unit, Latin America and the Caribbean Region, and Consultant, Human Develop-
      ment Sector, Latin America and Caribbean Region, respectively, of the World Bank..



      INTRODUCTION
      Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) pose significant challenges to individuals,
      communities, and nations alike, and represent a major cause of death in the Carib-
      bean. This paper highlights the linkage between NCDs and economic growth in the Car-
      ibbean and explores the impact of NCDs on productivity and economic growth based on
      the recent World Bank publications on NCDs in the Caribbean region (World Bank 2011a,
      2012b and 2013).
      NCDs, which by definition are non-infectious and non-transmissible, include autoimmune
      diseases, heart disease, some forms of cancers, and diabetes, among others. Over the last
      few decades, NCDs have reached epidemic levels in many parts of the world. The sever-
      ity of this problem is particularly pronounced in the Caribbean region, and has resulted in
      considerable loss of life, as well as economic and social costs. The prevalence of NCDs
      affects labor market outcomes, including significant productivity losses due to absentee-
      ism, disability, reduced productivity, and less years of working life. The costs of NCDs
      are increasingly a burden for low- and middle-income countries, affecting people’s lives
      by reducing household income and increasing spending on treatment. NCDs are putting
      more pressure on already stretched health systems and family and government budgets.
      Addressing NCDs is no longer solely a health sector strategy, but rather a requirement for
      maximizing investments in human capital to enhance productivity and achieve sustained
      economic growth.
      This paper reviews the status of NCDs in the Caribbean and the risk factors that contribute
      to the increase of NCDs, then assesses economic impact of NCDs on productivity and fol-
      lowed by the review of some international evidences on NCDs and productivity. The final
      section of the paper discusses policy options for moving forward.


      THE EMERGENCE AND PREDOMINANCE
      OF NCDS
      Key demographic and migration trends have contributed to the predominance of
      NCDs. Since 1960, the rate of life expectancy at birth in the Caribbean region has in-
      creased from 61 to 72 years. During this period there has also been a move towards urban-
      ization as workers often relocate from rural communities to city settings. The percentage
      of urban dwellers varies across the region, with countries such as the Dominican Republic
      (69 percent) and the Bahamas (84 percent) having among the highest proportion of citizens
      in urban settings.
192
The result is an increasingly aging population concentrated in high-density locations.
Crowded living conditions and significant environmental pollution due to air, land and ma-
rine based sources such as increased cruise ships traffic or rising tide of household and
industrial wastes are some of many factors that contribute to heightened health risks in the
region. Sewage is one of the most significant pollutants affecting the coastal environments
of the Caribbean. In 1993, Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) indicated that only
10% of the sewage generated in the Central American and Caribbean Island countries was
properly treated (UNEP). These factors contribute to the rise of chronic non-communicable
diseases in the region.

NCDs are linked to more than 70 percent of deaths in the Caribbean region, well
above the global average of nearly 60 percent. In contrast, the occurrences of deaths
as a result of communicable diseases are on average 8 to 15 percent in the region.
Within the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) countries, the three types of
NCDs that account for the largest portion of deaths includes: cardiovascular disease (30
to 46 percent of deaths), malignant neoplasms (10 to 20 percent of deaths), and diabetes
mellitus (3 to 14 percent of deaths) (World Bank 2011b). Table 1 contains detailed informa-
tion on burden of diseases for some OECS countries.

Table 1. Burden of disease in selected OECS countries: age standardized disability
adjusted life-years per 100,000 of population by cause
                                                                                            St. Vincent
                              Antigua and                           St. Kitts
                                              Dominica   Grenada                St. Lucia    and the
                               Barbuda                             and Nevis
                                                                                            Grenadines
  All causes*                   16511          16395      20810      18234       16329        20278
Communicable                     2103           2317      3582       3227         2109         4128
                 Selected
    NCDs                        12871          12798      15601      13433       11856        13828
                 Causes
                Malignant
                                 1363           1768      2136       1073         1333         1655
                neoplasms
                 Diabetes
                                  869           629        784        506         915          1301
                 mellitus
                 Endocrine
                                  694           303         -         672         400          376
                 disorders
                Neuropsy-
                  chatric        3554           4141      3626       3713         3609         3674
                conditions
                   Car-
                diovascular      2616           2117      4065       3569         1849         2804
                 diseases
                Respiratory
                                  750           646       1169        530         782          833
                 diseases
                 Digestive
                                  654           691       1199        702         573          700
                 diseases
                   Geni-
                 tourinary        214           241        437        414         200          241
                 diseases
Percentage of
                                 78%            78%       75%        74%          73%          68%
   NCDs
Data source: WHO 2004
* Communicable diseases, NCDs, and injuries




                                                                                                          193
             Box 1: Risk factors of NCDs

             NCDs share common underlying, interrelated risk factors, including tobacco use, unhealthy diets,
             physical inactivity, and excessive alcohol consumption. Despite overwhelming evidence of the harmful
             health consequences associated with these risk factors, the prevalence of these factors is on the rise
             in Caribbean countries.
             - Unhealthy diet: Due to the change from a diet high in fruit and vegetables to a diet that is increas-
             ingly high in sugar, salt and trans fat, the rate of obesity and overweight people in the Caribbean has
             steadily increased across all countries and age cohorts since the 1970s. Diets rich in salt, sugar, and
             fat increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, cancers and dental diseases (WHO 2003).
             - Physical inactivity: Physical inactivity is the fourth leading risk factor of global mortality. Country sur-
             veys provide moderate insight and demonstrate that populations are insufficiently active.
             - Smoking: Smoking kills more than five million people a year worldwide – more than tuberculosis,
             HIV/AIDS and malaria combined (WHO) and it is responsible for at least 10 percent of all deaths in
             Caribbean countries. Among countries possessing statistical data tracking tobacco usage, the rate is
             highest in Trinidad and Tobago, where 33 percent of adult male and 6 percent of the adult females
             smoke cigarettes.
             - Alcohol: The excessive use of alcohol is a global problem that compromises both individual and
             social development, and can result in serious health concerns. Data from a subset of Caribbean coun-
             tries shows that the total per capita consumption of alcohol per year is in excess of 5 liters in most
             countries. Studies show that alcohol is causally linked to eight different cancers with the risk increas-
             ing with the volume consumed. Alcohol use is also related to many cardiovascular diseases (Parry,
             Patra and Rehm 2012; and Rehm, Room and Monteiro, 2009).




      ECONOMIC IMPACT OF NCDS
      Reducing the prominence of NCDs is an important economic growth strategy. Along
      with the social and human merits for intervention, there are strong economic motives for
      addressing NCDs. NCDs contribute to poverty and is becoming a major barrier to de-
      velopment and achievement of the MDGs. The loss of productivity reduces the effective
      labor force and economic output. For every 10% increase in mortality due to NCDs, the
      yearly economic growth decreases by about 0.5% (Beaglehole, Bonita, Adams Alleyne et
      al. 2011). A global analysis of the economic impact of NCDs by the World Economic Forum
      and the Harvard School of Public Health indicates that if the intervention efforts remain
      static and rates of NCDs continue to increase, cumulative economic losses from four major
      NCDs8 between 2011-2025 are expected to total nearly US$500 billion per year for low and
      middle income countries (WHO 2011). The Caribbean region is expected to bear a heavy
      burden of NCDs, since they were particularly affected by the 2008 global financial crisis
      and have not fully recovered. They are heavily indebted, and economic growth has slowed.

      NCDs are costly, and have a direct and significant impact on economies, health systems,
      households and individuals. Even though the analysis of the economic impact of NCDs
      on economy in the Caribbean is limited, some case studies show that the cost of NCDs
      is high. The World Bank’s study in Jamaica estimated that an individual suffering from
      NCDs spends on average approximately one third of household per capita expenditure on
      healthcare services and purchases of pharmaceuticals. National aggregate out of pocket
      health expenditure amounted to 3.08 percent of Jamaica’s GDP. The poorest, the elderly,
      and persons with hypertension spent more on healthcare, indicating important targets for
      government intervention (World Bank 2011a).



      8
          The four NCDs under this analysis are cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, cancer and chronic respiratory diseases.
194
Public health systems bear a significant portion of direct costs as a result of NCDs.
People with NCDs have a higher rate of utilization of health care services. Data for Jamaica
from the period 1990 to 2007 shows that over the 18-year period, the percentage of health
care visits by patients without NCDs was relatively stable, whereas the rate for patients with
NCDs increased 20 percentage points (World Bank 2011a). These visits are labor intensive
and require costly technology and physical space, which results in the diversion of limited
financial and human resources away from other pressing needs in the medical system.
For example, in the OECS the total annual public health expenditure per diabetic patient
ranges from USD 326 in St. Vincent and Grenadines to as high as USD 776 in Antigua and
Barbuda. Expenditure on diabetes patients totaled USD 1.8 million and USD 2.4 million in
the two countries presented, respectively (World Bank 2011a).

Figure 1: Jamaican Health Services Visits for individuals with and without
NCDs (%)




The economic burden of NCDs on individuals is high. Both direct and indirect economic
burdens must be examined in order to estimate the total economic burden of NCDs to indi-
viduals. The direct economic burden can be defined as the sum of out-of-pocket spending
by NCD patients on outpatient visits, inpatient care, and medication. In contrast, an evalu-
ation of the indirect economic burden measures the reduction of productivity due to illness.
A 2006 study estimates the total average private economic burden of NCDs to be approxi-
mately USD 1,320 in St. Lucia per year, or roughly 25% of per capita GDP. The implica-
tions of this high level of expenditure can be seen in many different ways. Allocating scarce
financial resources to treat NCDs can impoverish families, diverting financial resources
from other important areas, such as extracurricular activities for children and quality of life
activities. Data from Colombia, Nicaragua and Peru also show that out-of-pocket expendi-
tures in households that include someone with a chronic condition more than double those
of households that do not. The use of health care services is higher among people who
reported to have a chronic condition, regardless of gender, age and education level, socio-
economic status or urban/rural residence (World Bank, 2013).




                                                                                                  195
      NCDs disproportionately affect the poor more and increase inequality.

      NCDs usually require prolonged treatment, and if a household lacks insurance, or resourc-
      es to cover these expenditures, they can drive people into poverty. Among NCD patients,
      the poor suffer more from lack of resources to access to care and treatment. The St. Lucia
      household data show that the economic burden of NCDs is heavier for poorer people.
      Poorer households spend 48 percent of their per capita expenditure on healthcare while
      better off households spend less than 20 percent. Even though the poor spent less, their
      spending represents a higher proportion of their annual income triggering a vicious circle,
      since poverty often increases exposure to NCD risk factors and NCDs in turn drive the poor
      into deeper poverty, unless strong interventions take place (World Bank, 2011b).


      ADDRESSING NCDS TO ENHANCE
      PRODUCTIVITY
      Reducing the prevalence of NCDs can lead to positive labor market outcomes. NCDs
      can affect labor market status in three ways: labor force participation and type of employ-
      ment; labor supply or hours worked; and labor earnings. NCDs create barriers and im-
      pediments that limit employees’ abilities to perform duties in the work place, which in turn
      affects the level of labor force participation and type of employment, and results in a lower
      labor supply and less hours worked. Although there is insufficient information to accurately
      assess the full extent in the Caribbean region, data from select South American countries
      shows that individuals with NCDs work less hours than do average workers, and have more
      pronounced working life cycles (that is, a greater share of hours are worked mid-career
      compared with early and late stages of a career). Anecdotal evidence also suggests that
      individuals with NCD-related disabilities are less able to undertake a full spectrum of work
      duties, which limits employment opportunities.

      International evidence shows that individuals with NCDs have lower income. Studies
      undertaken in Brazil and Chile find that workers without NCDs earn between 30 and 40 per-
      cent more than those with NCDs (World Bank 2013). Research also indicates a relationship
      between income and productivity. However this relationship is difficult to quantify because
      labor earnings are a result of several factors, including education, ability, industry, and tech-
      nological factors, amongst others (World Bank, 2013). To assess the full impact of NCDs
      on income requires a detailed analysis in the Caribbean region. Individuals suffering from
      NCDs in the Caribbean are already at a disadvantage. Reduced income potential, coupled
      with the high cost of treatment, leads to reduced quality of life for individuals with NCDs and
      to a diminished stock of human capital. Employers may then suffer from reduced profits
      as a result of higher labor costs and inefficiencies, and each level of government receives
      less revenue from taxation (from both business and personal taxation, World Bank 2013).




196
CON
CLU
SIONS
 Addressing NCDs should be at the forefront of the economic growth agenda in the Carib-
 bean. In recent years, the World Bank has conducted and supported several studies, both
 in the Caribbean region and internationally, to underline the impediments, risk factors, and
 consequences associated with NCDs and to complement the efforts that governments in
 the Caribbean region have undertaken to address NCDs. The Bank has the technical ex-
 pertise to support the development of customized road maps that combine short, medium,
 and long-term policy actions to curb the prominence of NCDs and mitigate risks factors.
 Much of the NCDs and associated costs are avoidable, since NCDs and related risk
 factors are preventable. Experiences and lessons learned from developed coun-
 tries in addressing NCDs could be useful for developing national strategies to con-
 trol their impact. The following are some policy options for the Caribbean to consider:

 • Tackle risk factors. The four priority population-based programs should tackle excessive alco-
 hol consumption, tobacco use, unhealthy diet, and promote physical activity. Together with the
 traditional diet of starchy and high-sugar foods, such unhealthy habits are fueling an NCD crisis in
 the region. Across the Caribbean, women tend to be more obese and less physically active than
 men. Smoking prevalence is low but is responsible for ten percent of all deaths in the Caribbean.
 The limited information available on alcohol consumption indicates that it has been increasing
 since 1961. Of particular concern is the growing trend of the risk factors in adolescents. Specific
 policy options should be developed to address the higher tendencies for women’s obesity and
 physically inactivity, and for prevention programs to reach the adolescent population but a first
 step should be education on healthy food choices, while ensuring accessibility and affordability.

 • Develop and enforce legislative and policy actions. Develop pricing and taxation regulations
 on tobacco and alcohol, such as smoke-free work and public places, and restrictions on alcohol
 outlets and operating hours. Develop standards and improve enforcement, especially on sales
 restrictions, advertising and drunk driving.	




                                                                                                        197
      • Develop health promotion policies. The private sector should be involved in disease prevention
      and health promotion, starting at the work place and in schools. Work place health promotion
      should extend beyond occupational safety to target smoking, alcohol, stress, and healthy eat-
      ing. Middle-aged, employed males often neglect their health, and are a difficult target group to
      reach. School programs have the largest return on investment in promoting a healthy lifestyle
      and decreasing the future disease burden. Health ministries should work with education au-
      thorities to integrate prevention efforts and health promotion into curricula and teach about the
      risk factors that lead to NCDs, and the importance of diet and physical activity. Governments
      need to develop strategies and incentives to encourage the food industry to manufacture, dis-
      tribute, and market healthier products, and to include health messages in marketing campaigns.

      • Develop primary prevention through population-based programs that target the whole
      population. Successful programs require an integrated approach with: (a) mass me-
      dia activities to promote healthy lifestyles; (b) feasible public awareness and health ed-
      ucation campaigns; (c) supportive structures that engage non-governmental organi-
      zations and private sectors; and (d) health promotion messages based on reliable,
      evidence-based information with wide distribution of material through different channels.

      • Develop secondary prevention through individual clinical intervention programs to iden-
      tify high-risk individuals at the point of service delivery. Interventions and follow up are
      needed for individuals with risk factors to prevent deterioration, incapacity, and fatal-
      ity. Clinical interventions require a focus on primary healthcare with an emphasis on conti-
      nuity, integrated management of key chronic conditions, ensuring adherence, periodic re-
      testing and adjusting of treatment regimens. An effective primary healthcare system with
      close links to secondary and social care can improve prevention and management of NCDs.

      • Train health professionals in delivering preventive services. The capacity and motivation of phy-
      sicians and nurses is often key to promoting health and preventive care. The Caribbean countries
      have a history of using regional institutions for training health workers, especially physicians, so
      regional cooperation can develop new qualifications to prevent and treat NCDs and share facul-
      ty, didactic materials, educational strategies, learning methods and lessons learnt. They should
      increase the involvement of health professionals in health promotion; organize continuing educa-
      tion on prevention, especially intervention strategies and methods; involve nurses in screening
      and management of risk factors; organize risk factor management services for health profession-
      als (e.g. smoking cessation), and enhance collaboration between health professionals in primary
      healthcare and other public and civil society entities involved in prevention and health promotion.




198
• Apply a multisectoral approach. Experience with implementing HIV/AIDS projects has giv-
en the OECS countries the tools and methods they need in order to change behavior and to
advocate changes in lifestyles through awareness raising, sensitization campaigns, work-
ing with mass media and NGOs, prevention activities, and treatment programs. These
could be applied to reduce the impact of NCD risk factors. Reducing the occurrence of
NCDs will require regional and national coordination, as well as intersectoral strategies that
involve the public and private sectors; government and non-governmental organizations;
and communities and families. The Caribbean Public Health Agency could coordinate tech-
nical assistance to countries. The experience of high-income countries could be exam-
ined for insights into tried and tested approaches that yield results in addressing NCDs.

• Develop a regional approach. Successful prevention requires harmonized legislation and poli-
cies, especially in the areas of tobacco, alcohol, food, essential medicines, and information tech-
nologies. A regional strategy would be cost-effective for reasons of economies of scale and the
presence of positive or negative externalities. This will be gradual, however, as countries will move
at different speeds according to internal pressures and abilities. Harmonization could be achieved
by assigning overall coordination to an already existing regional authority. The Mesoamerican
Initiative and other diagonal approaches offer opportunities to learn about regional approaches.

• Mobilize resources for implementing strategies and programs. Lessons from other countries can
help identify approaches for mobilizing resources. For example, Jamaica’s experience may provide
insight on how NCD treatment can be financed as well as ensure that incentives are designed to focus
on prevention programs. Jamaica’s National Health Fund (NHF) provides free or subsidized medi-
cines to patients with NCDs and finances prevention programs. It generates a sustained revenue
stream through tobacco tax and special consumption taxes on petrol, alcohol, and motor vehicles.

The prevalence of NCDs is rampant, and the consequences well documented. From an eco-
nomic perspective, Caribbean governments must address NCDs in order to increase labor pro-
ductivity and achieve sustained economic growth.




                                                                                                        199
      REFERENCES
      Beaglehole, R., Bonita, R., Horton, R., Adams, C., Alleyne, G., Asaria, P.,...Watt, J. (2011,
      April). Priority actions for the non-communicable disease crisis, Lancet. 377, 1438-1447.
      doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60393-0

      Parry, C., Patra, J., & Rehm, J. (2011 October). Alcohol consumption and non-communicable
      diseases: epidemiology and policy implications” Addiction, 106, 1718-1724.

      Rehm, J., Room, R., Monteiro M, Gmel, g., Graham, K., Rehn, N.,… Jernigan, D. (2003, Octo-
      ber). Alcohol as a risk factor for global burden of diseases. European Addiction Research, 9,
      157-164. DOI:10.1159/000072222 .

      United Nations Environment Program. (2013 August) - An overview of land based sources of
      marine pollution. Caribbean Environment Programme. Retrieved from http://www.cep.unep.
      org/issues/lbsp.html

      World Bank. (2013). Promoting healthy living in Latin America and the Caribbean: Governance
      of multisectoral activities to prevent risk factors. Washington, DC.
      World Bank. (2011a). The non-communicable diseases in Jamaica: Moving from prescription to
      prevention. World Bank, Washington, DC. Retrieved from http://www.worldbank.org/lac.

      World Bank. (2011b). The growing burden of non-communicable diseases in the Eastern Carib-
      bean. Washington, DC.

      World Health Organization. (2003). Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: Re-
      port of a joint FAO/WHO expert consultation. WHO Technical Report Series 19. Geneva.

      World Health Organization. (2013). 10 facts on secondhand smoke. Retrieved from http://www.
      who.int/features/factfiles/tobacco/en/index.html

      WHO and World Economic Forum. (2011 September). From burden to “Best Buys”: Reduc-
      ing the economic impact of non-communicable diseases in low- and middle-income countries.
      Retrieved from: http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/best_buys_summary/en/




200
A collective action approach to growth   Andrea Gallina and Sara Giannozzi




                                                        worldbank.org/lac
