                                                                                                    89812
                                                   Document of
                                                 The World Bank




    TUNISIA URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNANCE
                        PROGRAM


                  FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT 1REPORT


                                                    Final Version




                                                   June 26, 2014




1
  The Fiduciary Systems Assessment report was prepared by the following task team for the Tunisia Urban Development and
Local Governance Program: Franck Bessette, Sr FM Specialist and Shirley Foronda, FM Specialist (Financial Management), Salim
Benouniche, Lead Procurement Specialist and Walid Dhoubi, Procurement Specialist (Procurement), Rama Krishnan
Venkateswaran, Lead FM Specialist (Governance as well as compilation of the Fiduciary Systems Assessment report). The team
would like to express its sincere thanks to Hisham Waly, Manager Financial Management, MENA and Yolanda Taylor, Manager,
Procurement as well as to Aymeric Albin-Meyer, Lead Operations Officer, OPCS for the guidance provided.

                                                             1
                                                          Table of Contents
Executive Summary....................................................................................................................................... 3
Section 1: Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 6
   1.1 Program Design and Expenditure Framework .................................................................................... 6
   1.2: Institutional arrangements for Program Implementation ................................................................. 9
Section 2: Program Financial Management Systems .................................................................................. 14
   2.1 Institutions involved in Program Financial Management ................................................................. 14
   2.2 Planning and Budgeting .................................................................................................................... 15
   2.3 Payments and Flow of Funds ............................................................................................................ 16
   2.4 Accounting and Financial Reporting ................................................................................................. 16
   2.5 Controls and Audits........................................................................................................................... 17
   2.6 Disbursement arrangements from the Bank .................................................................................... 18
Section 3: Program Procurement Systems ................................................................................................. 19
Section 4: Fraud and Corruption Risks and Mitigation ............................................................................... 24
Section 5: Program Implementation, Audit and Disbursements ................................................................ 27
Section 6: Program Fiduciary Risk Assessment ........................................................................................... 27
Section 7: Program Action Plan .................................................................................................................. 31
Section 8: Implementation Support............................................................................................................ 32




                                                                            2
                                      Executive Summary

As part of the preparation of the Tunisia Urban and Local Governance Program (ULGP) using the
Program for Results (PforR) instrument of the World Bank, the Bank task team carried out a Fiduciary
Systems Assessment (FSA) of the Program in accordance with OP/BP 9.0. Based on the findings of the
FSA, it is concluded that Program Fiduciary Systems have the capabilities to provide reasonable
assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes. However considering the
existing weaknesses in Program Fiduciary systems, the residual fiduciary risk rating for the Program is
rated as Substantial.

The Program will finance a portion of the Government of Tunisia’s (GoT) existing program for financing
municipal service delivery that involves a combination of Capital Grants, and Loans in addition to the
Own Source Revenues generated by the municipalities themselves. The PforR Program intends to reform
the system of Capital Grants by making it predictable and based on an allocation formula that is
principle based and transparent. It has been agreed with client counterparts that GoT will issue a Decree
prior to the start of the Program that will spell out the design and operating rules of the reformed
capital grant. Indicative allocations for Capital Grants will be included in the Five Year Plans and
indicative allocations will be provided by MoEF in advance of the annual plan preparations. The budget
allocations for Capital Grants will be transferred from the Treasury Current Account at the Central Bank
(BCT) to the Caisse des Prêts et de Soutien des Collectivités Locales (CPSCL) (referred to as the Caisse),
who will act as the Program Manager for the ULGP. Caisse will in turn transfer the grant funds to
municipalities in accordance with the operating rules for the Unconditional and Conditional Capital
Grants. Preliminary assessment of the Program expenditure framework shows that in addition to the
changes in the design of the Capital grant through the proposed decree, additional steps such as
publishing the indicative allocations of capital grants in advance and reforming the existing system of
multiple ex-ante checks and controls into a coordinated system of ex-post controls are necessary for the
efficient implementation of the proposed Program.

Municipalities will utilize the Capital grants to implement various investment projects that are approved
under their Five Year and annual plans and are included in their annual budget. All municipalities are
adequately staffed with technical, financial management and procurement skills adequate for
management of the municipal work program. Municipalities have financial managements systems
adequate for the custody, accounting and reporting of Program funds. The expenditure cycle for
municipalities is submitted to the same controls applicable for the Central Government. The Contrôle
Général des Dépenses under the Prime Minister’s office has to approve ex ante, at the commitment
stage, every single expenditure through the ADEB system. Then the receveur (municipal accountant)
exercises control over the payment process (contrôle concomitant). Municipalities are subject to the
oversight and supervision of the General Inspectorate of the Ministry of Interior, by the Contrôle
Général des Finances (Internal Audit of the MoEF) and, the Cour des comptes (Supreme audit
Institution). The controls and audit framework related to LGs provides some level of fiduciary comfort
but at the same time constitutes a major risk of not achieving desired results due to their weaknesses in


                                                    3
implementation and capacity. For strengthening the accountability framework of municipalities an
agreement has been reached with the Cour des Comptes to carry out annual financial audit of
municipalities. The capacity building element of the Program will provide the necessary support to the
Cour des Comptes to carry out the annual audits in time.

Procurement processes and systems at the municipal level are adequate for the efficient
implementation of the Program. Despite the weak capacity of smaller municipalities, the procurement
process at municipalities are found to be more efficient than even many line Ministries' at the central
level in terms of the time required to complete the procurement process. Tunisia has recently
promulgated a new Decree for public procurement that emphasizes transparency and efficiency and the
provisions of which will apply to municipalities also. The Local Governments’ compliance with national
procurement regulations is also found to be good. Tunisia has a functioning institutional structure for
the handling of complaints relating to public procurement. The Haute Instance de la Commande
Publique (HICOP) provides overall technical guidance on public procurement and monitors the
compliance of procurement standards and practices. The Comité de Suivi et d’Enquête sur les Marchés
(COSEM) receives complaints relating to public procurement and takes follow up action. However,
despite the strengths of the procurement system, the multiple layers of controls and approvals that are
required by municipalities pose a risk to the efficient and timely execution of the municipal budget and
thereby affect the achievement of the Program results to a certain extent. As part of the Program
Action Plan, the Bank has recommended to transform the role of CPSCL role by moving it from ex-ante
control and prior clearance to post-review and ex-post control in order to shorten significantly the
average duration of procurement processes. The Program Action Plan also recommends designing a
procurement capacity building program after a systematic assessment of local government
requirements, and implementing it as part of the capacity building element of the Program. To enhance
the transparency of the procurement process, all contracts awarded by municipalities will be displayed
in the national procurement portal of the observatory.

The design of the PforR Program relies on many of the existing institutions and systems of Governance
in Tunisia as well as introduced a few additional ones as part of Program design for mitigating possible
risks relating to Fraud and Corruption in the proposed Program. The Program will interface with existing
institutions of Governance like the Haute Instance de la Commande Publique (HICOP), the Comité de
Suivi et d’Enquête sur les Marchés (COSEM) as well as the Secrétariat d’Etat à la Gouvernance et à la
Fonction Publique. Tunisia has recently formulated a National Strategy on Anticorruption that is based
on the International Convention on Anticorruption. There is a high powered body in the Prime Minister’s
office that will be responsible for the implementation of the strategy and all Government programs
(including the PforR Program) will be under the scope of the body. The National Authority for Fighting
Corruption ("Instance Nationale de Lutte contre la Corruption?) is responsible for the investigation of
complaints relating to corruption. In addition there is an Anticorruption hot line and a website where
any citizen can file complaints/grievances which are both functional. Municipalities have a Citizens
Relations Bureau where citizens can submit grievances. The Bank will rely on the existing country
systems and processes for preventing and combating corruption. The Caisse will maintain an up-to-date
list of contractors debarred by the Bank and convey such information to all municipalities. The Program


                                                   4
is financing the design and implementation of an E-Portal where all relevant information (both financial
and operational) relating to the implementation of the projects that are part of the annual plan and
budget will be displayed for public information. The municipalities will be preparing their plans and
budgets in a participative manner in consultation with their citizens. The Performance Assessment of
municipalities will include areas relating to transparency, accountability and participation in municipal
management and the performance of each municipality on these areas will be evaluated.

As Program Manager, Caisse will also be responsible for preparing the Program Financial Statements
compiling them from municipal financial reporting as well as financial reporting from other agencies, if
any. The annual audit of the Program financial statements will be carried out by an independent auditor
acceptable to the Bank.




                                                   5
Section 1: Introduction

As part of the preparation of the ULGP (hereafter referred to as the “Program?), the World Bank task
team carried out a Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) of the Program in accordance with OP/BP 9.0 of
the World Bank Operations Manual. In addition, the FSA was carried out according to the OPCS
Guidance Notes for PforR Operations. The objective of the assessment was to examine whether
Program systems provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for their
intended purposes, with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness,
transparency, and accountability. Accordingly, the Program procurement assessments were assessed to
find out the extent to which the planning, bidding, evaluation, contract award and contract
administration arrangements and practices provide a reasonable assurance that the Program
procurement systems will enable the achievement of intended results. The financial management
systems were assessed to gauge the extent to which the planning, budgeting, accounting, controls,
funds flow, financial reporting and auditing systems and practices provide a reasonable assurance on the
appropriate use of Program funds and safeguarding of its assets. The FSA also considered how Program
systems handle the risks of fraud and corruption and how such risks will be managed and/or mitigated.

The FSA was carried out by an experienced team of World Bank staff that included Financial
Management and Procurement Specialists. The team went through the existing country and sector
reports, discussed with client counterparts both at the Central Government as well as at the Local
Government levels. The team also visited a sample of municipalities to assess the working of systems on
the ground. The initial findings were discussed informally with client counterparts to get validation on
the findings and conclusions. Based on the feedback, the draft assessment was finalized. The findings of
the assessment will be incorporated in the Program documents for the proposed PforR operation.

1.1 Program Design and Expenditure Framework: The proposed PforR Program involves
an outlay of $300 million as World Bank financing and is part of the overall GoT program of financing
municipal service delivery. GoT’s existing program for financing municipal service delivery includes a
combination of capital financing (through PIC allocations), loans to municipalities (through the Caisse) as
well as the Own Source Revenues (OSRs) of the municipalities. The development objective of the ULGP
is to enhance the institutional performance of the municipalities of Tunisia in order for them to be
better able to respond to the Constitutional decentralization mandate. The proposed PforR operation
takes a subset of the Government’s program and supports it. This subset called the Bank financed
Program (the “Program?) intends to support the following:

 1. Performance based Capital Grants for Municipal Infrastructure. The Program will provide
 performance-based Capital grants to incentivize LGs to achieve improved standards of institutional
 performance in key areas of their municipal functions. The target would be for 60% of LGs to achieve
 scores of 70% or more on their evaluation for the fifth year of the Program. To achieve the targeted
 outcomes, the Program provides resources under the capital grant for investments in local
 infrastructure services, with funding levels modulated by each LG’s ability to meet annual performance
 standards applicable to unconditional grants as measured by annual Minimum Mandatory Conditions

                                                    6
    (MMCs) and Performance Assessments (PAs) undertaken according to agreed criteria. The annual
    performance standards include implementation of participatory planning and transparency initiatives.

    2. Targeted Capital Grants for Improving Access to Basic Municipal Service in Disadvantaged
    Neighborhoods. This conditional capital grants represents a vehicle for the government to address
    policy priorities. Currently, government priority is focused on upgrading service levels in disadvantaged
    neighborhoods. A total of TDN 225 million has been allocated under the conditional grant for the PIC
    2014-2018 period for this purpose. Due to resource constraints and the uneven distribution of
    disadvantaged neighborhoods across LGs in the country, a regional consultation process (involving
    elected officials from the National Constituent Assembly, representatives from regional and local
    governments, civil society, deconcentrated agencies) was undertaken to pre-identify neighborhoods
    and municipalities that would qualify to receive these grant funds during the FY2014-2018 cycle.
    Municipalities currently covered by ongoing urban upgrading programs are not targeted by the
    Program.

    3. Capacity support for improved LG institutional development and accountability. The capacity
    support would contribute to the LGs ability to achieve the standards required under the performance
    assessment system in order for them to access their full entitlement to the capital grants. It will focus
    on the key support required to assist municipalities to achieve MMCs and performance criteria, and
    thus contribute to the achievement of the Program Development Objective.


The proposed Program will be included in the annual budget of the Government of Tunisia under the
budget allocation head for the Caisse. Indicative allocations for Capital Grants will be included in the Five
Year Plans and will be informed to the municipalities in advance of the preparation of the annual plans
and budgets. The annual Capital Grant allocations will be included in the annual Investment Budget of
GoT and will appear in the Ministry of Interior’s budget as transfers to the CPSCL2 (the Caisse) (Titre II,
line 2.13). There will be specific budget lines that will provide for each of the elements of the Program.
As part of the reform to the existing system of capital grant allocations, the MoEF will issue separate
decree that will spell out the changes in the mode of allocation and utilization of the Performance based
Capital Grants. The Program Operations Manual will describe the access conditions, as well as operating
rules for the Capital grants. The budget allocations for Program elements will be transferred from the
Treasury Current Account at the Central Bank (BCT) to the Caisse, in one or more tranches per year.
Caisse will in turn transfer the grant funds to municipalities as well as other Program implementing
entities in accordance with the Program Operating rules.

           2
1.       Caisse des Prêts et de Soutien des Collectivités Locales (the Caisse), is a municipal development
fund operating within the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Interior (MoI), but reporting to its own Board.
The Caisse was formed by Article 4 of Law No 75-37 of May 14, 1975, and operates under the provisions
of Decree 97-1135 as issued in 1992 and amended in 1997.
3
 See link
http://www.finances.gov.tn/index.php?option=com_jdownloads&Itemid=712&view=finish&cid=537&catid=1&lan
g=fr p. 15 of the document

                                                       7
The PforR Program is bringing a critical shift in the financing and expenditure model for Capital Grants.
Currently the municipalities are forced to adopt a financing mix comprising of Capital grants (PIC
allocations), loans provided by Caisse and a pre-specified share of own revenue contribution. As a result
municipalities are able to access grant funds only after they have availed of loans which have resulted in
many municipalities having taken on debt when they did not require such loans or could not afford
them. An adverse consequence of this model has been that municipalities with weak revenue and tax
base and often with significant demands for urban services are not able to access grant funds as they are
already severely indebted. The PforR Program aims to reform this model by delinking the Capital Grants
from loans and in this regard the GoT has already started the process of issuing a Decree and Circular
that will clearly delink the Capital Grant allocation from debt financing. Accordingly allocation and
disbursement of capital grants will be made of a simple set of criteria that incentivizes municipal
performance rather than their ability to avail of loans. In addition a significant aspect of the reform of
the Capital Grant system will be the replacement of the existing system of ex-ante review and clearance
of project proposals with an ex-poste review of Program implementation and results which will be
elaborated in the Program Operations Manual. This is expected to expedite the approval, allocation and
disbursement of the Capital Grants annually.

As part of the annual allocation process for Capital Grants, municipalities will be required to satisfy
certain Minimum Mandatory Conditions (MMCs) upon which they will be allotted their eligible annual
Capital Grant allocations. The annual allocation of the Unconditional Capital grants (horizontal) will be
based on a formula that will be communicated to the municipalities well in advance. The allocation for
the conditional Capital Grants will be based on the municipalities satisfying one or more MMCs in
addition to the MMCs for the unconditional grants. Those municipalities that satisfy the MMCs will
receive their eligible grant allocations from Caisse at the start of the financial year. The Caisse transfers
the necessary funds to the account at the Postal Service (CCP) maintained by the accountant of the local
government (receveur), who will in turn make payments based on payment invoices issued by the
municipality.

Preliminary assessment of the expenditure framework has revealed that the MoEF makes adequate
budget allocations every year as a matter of course for meeting the financing requirements of the
annual plans. However in the current system, municipalities do not receive any advance information on
the annual allocations in advance nor do they know the list of specific projects that will be allotted
funding. This makes municipal budgeting a guessing game and results in inefficient and unaccountable
allocation of budgetary resources. The proposed PforR Program aims to reform this model by insisting
on MoEF providing information on indicative Capital Grant allocations in advance to municipalities and
in turn municipalities preparing their annual plans and budget in a realistic manner. At the same time
the previous system of allocation of Capital grants based on a project basis and after a series of ex-ante
review and control processes had also resulted in significant delays in project implementation cycles and
the result delay in the utilization of budget allocations resulting in the accumulation of budget
allocations in the hands of the implementing entities. Recognizing this, the MoEF has relaxed its annual
fiscal year rule for transfers to municipalities and as a result municipalities are not required to return
unspent budget allocations (relating to Capital Grants) at the close of the fiscal year. With the reform of


                                                     8
the Capital Grant process, this issue is expected to be resolved with a more efficient financial planning
and budget execution system in place, the Program design will, in consultation with the relevant
Government counterparts, will put in place adequate safeguards that will prevent the accumulation of
unspent balances at the municipal level and thereby raise a fiduciary risk.

Another related issue regarding the Program Expenditure Framework is the difficulty in obtaining a clear
picture of the various fiscal and financial flows to local governments from the existing budget
documentation for a variety of reasons. First, the specific booklet for the CPSCL is not public and is with
the government’s representative at the Caisse (administrateur). Second, a number of financing flows are
directly on the budget of line ministries and it is not clear whether they are for operating or investment
expenses, whether there are certain conditions attached to their use. Besides, they are not processed
through the Caisse but directly within the Treasury and are not consolidated in terms of reporting. To
address this issue and to bring about greater transparency in local governance, the DGCPL is designing a
“E-Portal? that will provide comprehensive data on the spatial, demographic, financial, and service
delivery aspects of municipalities.

The sustainability of the investments being made by municipalities through the Capital Grants will
depend on the ability of the municipalities to improve the mobilization of their own revenues as well as
on the ability of both GoT and the municipalities to restructure the municipal lending program. Currently
Agence Francais de Developpment (AFD) is conducting a study to advise the Caisse to redesign their
lending policies and appraisal methods with the objective of transforming Caisse into a financial
intermediary that will operate in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable to financial
institutions. Though there is an ongoing program for debt rescheduling for the seriously indebted
municipalities, the PforR Program will help the MoF and DGCPL to put in place a financial recovery plan
to enable municipalities to undertake prudent debt management strategies and will provide necessary
incentives for their speedy implementation. Also the PforR Program will also incentivize municipalities to
improve own source revenue mobilization by including this as a key performance area under the
performance measurement system. In addition, efforts are underway to carry out a PEFA assessment of
local governments that is expected to enhance the Public Financial Management framework of
municipalities.

1.2: Institutional arrangements for Program Implementation:                              the legal and
institutional framework for the Program is well defined. Chapter 7 of the recently approved
Constitution provides for administrative and fiscal decentralization and empowers local governments to
deliver accountable and responsive local services. The GoT is currently in the process of revising the
existing Organic Laws and Decrees to reflect better this Constitutional focus on decentralization and
local governance.

The Program scope includes all the 264 municipalities in Tunisia and those which might be created at a
later stage. The Ministry of Interior is in charge of supervising all local governments through its Direction
Générale des Collectivités Publiques Locales (DGCPL). The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MoEF)
contributes to the financial and budget supervision of municipalities. Administratively, the country is
organized under 24 Governerates (waliyas) headed by a Governor. The Governor, who is appointed by

                                                     9
the President, is the representative of the Central Government at the regional level and is responsible
for the regional administration including the supervision of the deconcentrated arms of line ministries.
The Governor and the Regional Council provides overall oversight of local government affairs as well as
coordinates the support of the deconcentrated arms of line ministries to the municipalities.

Municipalities are headed by a Mayor who is elected from among town councilors for a period of five
years. The Mayor chairs the municipal council and has responsibility for planning, public security, traffic,
environment management. The municipal council drafts the municipal development plan, levies
municipal taxes and prepares and implements the municipal budget. The Mayor is assisted by a
Secretary General who is the executive head of the municipal administration as well as other technical
and financial staff. Following the Revolution, the elected municipal councils were replaced by appointed
interim councils namely, “Delegations Spéciales?. However, as part of the reform, reinstatement of
municipal elections is now anticipated for late 2014 or early 2015.

The Central Government and its line ministries also provide direct and indirect support to municipalities
in service delivery. Each municipality has a government accountant attached to it (le receveur). This
accountant is paid and managed by the General Directorate of Accounting of the MEF and implements
the Accounting Code which applies to all accountants at central and local levels. This accountant uses
the IT systems of the government (ADEB for expenditures, RAFIC for revenue, SIADE for debt) which are
accessible at every point in the system and allows immediate issuance of financial reports.

Program Implementation at the municipal level: Municipalities will utilize the Capital grants to
implement various investment projects that are approved under their PIC and annual plans and are
included in their annual budget. All municipalities are adequately staffed with technical, financial
management and procurement skills adequate for management of the municipal work program.
Wherever there are staff or skill deficiencies, municipalities rely on the back up support provided by the
deconcentrated unit of the Ministre de l’Equipment at the Governerate level. For specialized activities
relating to slum upgrading (using the Conditional grant funds) the municipality will rely on the services
of national agencies like the ARRU or on contractors. The Caisse will be coordinating the capacity
building activities supporting the Program in consultation with DGCPL as well as the municipalities.

Tunisia has a long history of local governance starting with the establishment of the Municipality of
Tunis in 1858. There are 264 municipalities and their roles and responsibilities are well defined in the
Constitution as well as through various executive orders (Decrees and Arrêtés). Chapter 7 of the
recently approved Constitution lays out clearly the intention of the country to move towards greater
decentralization and for a transparent and accountable system of local governance. Municipalities, the
lowest tier of the State being close to citizens, are expected to fulfill their mandate to provide local
services in a responsive and accountable manner. The Program design is built around this fundamental
principle and therefore fits in well with the current priorities of the country to strengthen governance,
including participatory governance.

Local Governments in Tunisia report administratively to the Direction Générale des Collectivités
Publiques Locales (DGCPL), within the Ministry of Interior. Administratively, the country is organized


                                                    10
under 24 Governorates (Wilayas) headed by a Governor. The Governor, who is appointed by the
President, is the representative of the Central Government at the regional level and is responsible for
the regional administration including the supervision of the deconcentrated arms of line ministries as
well as the 165 rural communes. The Governor, on behalf of the Ministry of Interior, exercises broad
administrative and regulatory supervision over local governments and is the approving authority for
local government budgets. In addition, the deconcentrated arms of the line ministries at the
Governorate level provide technical and administrative support to local governments in the
implementation of programs and projects funded from the Central Government budget on an as needed
basis.

Municipalities are headed by a Mayor who is elected from among town councilors for a period of five
years. The Mayor chairs the municipal council and has responsibility for planning, public security, traffic,
environment management. The Mayor is assisted by a Secretary General who is the executive head of
the municipal administration as well as other technical and financial staff. The Mayor and the Municipal
Council are responsible for the day today management of municipal affairs and provide the necessary
guidance to and oversight of the executives. The Municipal Council will exercise oversight over the
implementation of the municipal plans and budgets that include the Capital grants provided through the
Program. The existing Municipal Councils are appointed (not elected) and the elections are schedule for
next year.

The Program will be managed by the Caisse de Prêts et de soutien aux collectivités locales (CPSCL) or the
“Caisse? under the overall direction of the Secretary General, Ministry of Interior. The Caisse is an
autonomous agency created by law (établissement public non-administratif) and governed according to
the provisions of decree 92-688 of 16 April 1992. The Caisse has its own Board of Directors chaired by
the Minister of Interior and its day to day management is handled by a Chief Executive. The Caisse in its
capacity of Program Manager will exercise Program oversight especially in the implementation of capital
investment plans at the municipal level. In addition, the Caisse in its capacity as the lender to
municipalities will exercise financial due diligence as part of the review of loan application packages.
The roles and responsibilities of the Caisse relating to Program governance and oversight will be
described in the Operations Manual for the Program.

1.3 Transparency and Accountability
The Program is subject to the oversight of existing system of public sector oversight in Tunisia that
includes the external audit by the Cour des Comptes (the Supreme Audit Institution in Tunisia), the
inspection by the Inspector General of the Ministry of Interior and the Inspector General of the Ministry
of Finance. Though the Constitution has brought about a shift from the stiff ex ante controls imposed by
the previous “tutelle? system, the day to day operating rules and procedures have not been revised.
Therefore there exists to a large extent the system of process controls imposed by the Ministry of
Interior (for example the budget of municipalities are reviewed by the Governor) as well as those laid
out by the country’s PFM system for making payments. Thus the recently approved Procurement Decree
continues to insist that the adherence of municipalities to procurement rules are verified and approved
by the regional branch of the Contrôle Général des Dépenses before contracts can be awarded. Similarly

                                                    11
prior approval is required from the Contrôle Général des Dépenses before any payment can be made by
the municipality.

Transparency: coming out of a system that was centrally driven (“tutelle?) and with very low levels of
transparency, the Governance system in Tunisia is making rapid progress to embed the principle of
transparency in the public sector including local governments. The current system of allocation of
financial resources from the Central Government to Local Governments is very opaque. The proposals
submitted by the municipalities as part of the annual PIC (Plan d’investissement communal) process are
revised at the discretion of the Ministry of Interior without any consultation or recourse by
municipalities. At the municipal level, there is essentially no sharing of information between the
municipality and its citizens. A household survey just undertaken in a municipality in the greater Tunis
area showed that only around 2% of households had received any information at all from the
municipality in the past year. At the same time there are several changes happening at the country level
that will help to strengthen overall transparency. A new decree providing Access to Information
(Decree # 2011-41) has recently been issued that allows citizens to have easier access to Government
documents and records. There are independent initiatives by Civil Society Organizations such as the
website called Marsoum41 (http://www.marsoum41.org/en) that provides a platform for access to
information. A national Procurement website is a place where all contract awards by public sector
entities including local governments are required to be uploaded and thereby making all information
relating to contract awards available to the public. The Program intends to build upon these measures
and will be strengthening participative planning where the municipality will be required to present the
proposed five year and annual plan proposals to their residents in open meetings and obtain public
validation of the plans.

The Program intends to strengthen transparency through the following specific measures to strengthen
transparency:

       Creation of a national level E-Portal that will be populated with relevant geographic, spatial,
        demographic, financial, service delivery performance data of each municipality. The E-Portal will
        be maintained by the CPSCL and will be updated regularly and will have easy and ready access to
        citizens. The E-Portal will also be linked to municipal websites wherever feasible.
       Key information relating to the local government such as financial reports, audit reports,
        procurement plans, contract awards etc. will be displayed either in the municipal website (if
        such a website is up and running) and also at a designated place in the municipal offices.
        Additionally, municipalities will be encouraged and assisted in disseminating budget and plan
        information to its residents through various media. Caisse, as the Program Manager will display
        all relevant information connected with the Program in its website.

Accountability: Tunisia’s new Constitution has put in place a strong accountability framework for local
governments. The PforR Program reinforces this Constitutional mandate through the unconditional
capital grants system that will provide resources to municipalities to be used at their discretion to meet
local service delivery responsibilities. Municipalities will be incentivized to prepare Five Year and Annual
Plans and Budgets in a participative manner, which will need to be validated by their residents in

                                                    12
dedicated public meetings. Municipalities will be accountable to their citizens as well as to the Central
Government for meeting their institutional and service delivery responsibilities. The Program will
strengthen downward accountability of the municipality to its citizens, and better reflect citizens’
service priorities through the strengthening of citizen participation in the municipality’s planning and
budgeting process. The Performance Assessment system introduced by the Program will measure
institutional performance and will make the results available to the public which will strengthen the
accountability relationships between the local government and its citizens. Formal channels of upward
accountability such as regular and timely financial reporting, independent annual external audits will be
strengthened under the Program.

Participation: the extent of public participation in local governance has been very weak in Tunisia partly
because of the centralized nature of the State previously. The Tunisian Revolution and the consequent
changes resulting in the new Constitution that focusses on decentralization provide a significant fillip to
enhanced public participation in local governance. Article 134 of the new Constitution states that “Local
Governments will adopt the mechanisms of participatory democracy and the principles of open
government so as to ensure the widest participation of citizens and civil society in the preparation and
planning of development projects and monitoring of their implementation, in accordance with the law?.
The DGCPL has recently issued a Circular (dated March 7, 2014) where local governments are required
to adopt a participative approach and consult with their citizens during the preparation of their five year
and annual plans. The Program builds upon the existing momentum in Tunisia on enhancing citizen
participation and provides for specific measures such as:

       The Five Year Plans and annual Plans of municipalities will be prepared/finalized after
        consultation/validation with citizens. This will be part of the Mandatory Minimum Conditions
        (MMCs) for local governments to receive the Capital Grants.
       The Program intends to provide incentives to local governments to introduce participative
        budgeting in municipalities around a small proportion of their capital investment grants as part
        of their annual planning and budgeting process.
       The Capacity Building component of the Program will provide training to municipalities to
        strengthen their communication with citizens and capacity to effectively implement
        participatory planning and participatory budgeting.

Grievance Handling: Tunisia has established a system for receiving grievances and their resolution. At
the municipal level, each municipality is required to establish a Citizens Relations Bureau, where any
citizen can file a grievance on any issue relating to the municipality. Field level assessment has revealed
that while the Bureaus exist in many municipalities, their functioning is poor. The Program will provide
incentives, via the participatory planning process, for municipalities to strengthen the existing grievance
mechanisms, including by ensuring complaints are systematically logged and resolved in a timely fashion
under the Bureau’s guidance. The grievance log and timely resolution of the complaints will be an
indicator for the municipality’s performance assessment. The Program Action Plan will recommend the
establishment of the Bureaus in all municipalities as part of the Program Action Plan. The Good
Governance Cell in the Ministry of Interior will monitor the efficiency of grievance handling by the


                                                    13
Citizens bureaus and their effectiveness in the resolution of citizens’ grievances. The Annual
Performance Assessment process will assess the performance of the grievance handling mechanisms.


Section 2: Program Financial Management Systems

Financial Management of the Program is proposed to be carried out using Tunisia’s existing systems and
processes for Public Financial Management. The Program will be located within the country’s budgetary
framework the will rely on existing institutional systems for implementation.

2.1 Institutions involved in Program Financial Management


   1. The Ministry of Economy and Finance: The MoEF is responsible for the formulation of the
      Budget and its implementation and in particular in relation with the grants transferred to
      municipalities and other LGs. In terms of Budget formulation, the Comité de Préparation du
      Budget is the relevant entity which coordinates with the various sectors, including the Ministry
      in charge of LGs (Interior). The Direction Générale des Finances Locales is the General
      Directorate under the General Directorate of accounting and Resource collection that is in
      charge of managing the implementation of LGs’s budget and transfers to LGS from central
      government. This Directorate supervises and manages the network of government accountants
      assigned to municipalities (receveurs).

       The MoEF elaborates the standards and processes for local financial management. Its guidance
       is reflected in the organic law for municipal finance will be replaced soon to comply with the
       new Constitution. The current organic law for municipal finance has been reviewed and does
       not entail negative implications for the Program. The Public Sector Accounting Code (Code de la
       Comptabilite Publique) applies at both central and local levels for budget implementation and
       accounting rules. The systems maintained by the MEF provide a guarantee in terms of fiduciary
       risks.

   2. The Ministry of Interior (MOI): The Ministry in charge of LGs is the Ministry of Interior, and in
      particular the General Directorate for Local Government (Direction Générale des collectivités
      Publiques Locales, DGCPL). The DGCPL has a monitoring and supervision role (“tutelle?) as well
      as a policy and advisory role towards LGs. The MOI is the tutelle of Governors.
   3. The Caisse de Prêt et de soutien aux collectivités locales (CPSCL) : The Caisse was created by law
      (#75-37 of 14 may 1975) and replaced a Caisse de Prets aux Communes that existed since 1902.
      It is a non-administrative autonomous agency (établissement public non-administratif) now
      organized according to decree 92-688 of 16 April 1992. It is not a bank and its missions are
      defined by the government and aim at economic and social development of municipalities. The
      CPSCL manages 4 regional branches in Beja, Gafsa, Sousse and Sfax. The Caisse manages
      approximately half (the proportion varies each year) of the Common Fund for Local Government


                                                  14
        (Fonds commun des collectivités locales) which is the global subsidy of the State to LG’s
        operating costs. It manages also investment subsidies (Titre II).

        The Caisse’s resources are: (i) its share of the FCCL; (ii) return on loans it makes available; (iii)
        loans received from external donors (World Bank, AFD, BEI) or internal; (iv) product of financial
        operations; (v) other resource created by decree or law; (vi) transfers from the Budget (Titre II).

        The Caisse has a substantial experience in implementing Bank-funded project and ensuring
        fiduciary responsibility. Its systems of financial management have been assessed regularly and
        recently (2013) and have been deemed to provide sufficient guarantee to manage Bank
        proceeds. Caisse’s FM staff capacity has been assessed and is deemed acceptable. Caisse has
        also capacity to monitor the activity of municipalities and provide advice. Caisse’s financial
        statements are audited annually as per the law by an independent audit firm. Caisse’s financial
        statements are compiled according to business accounting standards. The Cour des comptes
        conducted 2009 a performance audit of the Caisse covering the period 2002-2009 that has led
        to a number of useful recommendations but also a generally positive assessment of the general
        management, including financial management of the Caisse.

2.2 Planning and Budgeting


Municipalities’ investment budget (Titre II) is funded i) through grants that appear in the Interior
Ministry’s budget as transfers to the CPSCL (the Caisse) (Titre II, line 2.14); ii) through local tax and non-
tax revenues and the balance of previous year’s current budget (auto-financement).

In the existing system, the municipality prepares a financing request to Caisse based on the 5-year
investment plan (PIC). A Financing Committee comprising of representatives from the Ministries of
Finance, Interior, Development and Planning as well as the Caisse approves the request which triggers
the procurement process. Before payment, the Board of the Caisse (headed by Minister of Interior, with
Finance, Development and Planning, Central Bank, Cities ‘Federation, Public Works and State Council),
which meets every three months, has to issue a “final agreement? to allow issuance of a joint decision
(arrêté conjoint, Finance/Interior) or a loan agreement. The whole process takes approximately 8
months when everything goes well but municipalities have reported delays and cancelations often due
to excessive formalism of the procedure.

The Central Government Budget shows the annual PIC allocations to local governments as transfers to
the Caisse. Funds are transferred from the Treasury current account at the central bank (BCT) to an
account of the Caisse in 4 tranches per year. The Caisse never make advances from its own resources to
municipalities. According to a schedule of payments the Caisse transfers the necessary funds to the



4
 See link
http://www.finances.gov.tn/index.php?option=com_jdownloads&Itemid=712&view=finish&cid=537&catid=1&lan
g=fr p. 15 of the document

                                                     15
account at the Postal Service (CCP) maintained by the accountant of the local government (receveur)
who makes the final payment.

The Program will substantially modify the role of the Caisse as the funds that are provided as capital
grants are in the nature of fiscal transfers (unconditional and conditional) instead of project financing.
The municipality has the discretion to use the funds to finance capital investment projects of its choice
and as reflected in its annual plan and budget. Accordingly, once the municipality satisfies the
Mandatory Minimum conditions (MMCs) for gaining access to the funds, Caisse will disburse the funds
to the municipality. Each municipality will enter into an agreement/ Memorandum of Understanding
with Caisse that will spell out the roles and responsibilities for both. The Program Operations Manual
will provide details of the frequency and timing of the disbursement of grant funds by the Caisse to the
municipalities.

2.3 Payments and Flow of Funds


All payments of the Program will be made through the centralized Treasury system of Bank accounts
held at the Central Bank of Tunis (which uses also the network Postal Current Accounts, comptes
chèques postaux, CCP). For each municipality, the receveur is in charge of making the payment and the
Tunisian PFM system, including at the local level, is based on the principle of the separation between
those who order payments (ordonnateurs) and those who make the payments and record it in the
accounting system (comptables, here receveurs). Program funds will be entirely reflected in the central
government budget under the budget line for Caisse and will then be channeled through the Caisse to
municipalities for conditional and unconditional grant as well as for capacity building activities. For
unconditional grants, the funds will be released based on the attainment of minimum conditions
(MMCs) as well as based on a performance assessment later in the Program. These funds may then be
mixed with loans and own source revenues by the municipality.



2.4 Accounting and Financial Reporting


Accounting principles to be followed by LGs are specified in organic local Budget law (75-35 completed
by 2007-65 of 18 December 2007) which details the chart of accounts for the formulation of the Budget
as well as for accounting. This is a cash-based single entry accounting. The Budget is voted by the LG’s
council and after this submitted to the “tutelle? for approval. The Budget is annual and comprehensive
(all financial operations must be reflected). If a budget is not voted before the start of the fiscal year the
expenditures are incurred based on a quota of one twelfth of previous year’s budget. Virements and
transfers during the year from one credit line to the other are strictly defined by the law. Budget must
be balanced between resources and expenditures.

Strong central government systems are supporting LG finances. (i) each municipality has a government
accountant attached to it (le receveur). This accountant is paid and managed by the General Directorate

                                                     16
of Accounting of the MEF and implements the Accounting Code which applies to all accountants at
central and local levels. This accountant uses the IT systems of the government (ADEB for expenditures,
RAFIC for revenue, SIADE for debt) which are accessible at every point in the system and allows
immediate issuance of financial reports. ADEB allows for the production of real-time fiscal situation of
municipalities; (ii) this accountant is submitted to a comprehensive control and audit framework (ref.
infra); (iii) the accountant works also with the head of the municipality and municipal staff in terms of
resource collection and expenditure cycle.

Though generally well structured, this system presents several weaknesses. In particular, the accounting
and financial reporting framework is based on a budget execution framework and the system does not
allow for the production of financial statements that would present financial assets and liability. This
single entry accounting is also a weakness that is well known and analyzed at the central level where
there is an effort to generalize double entry accounting in 2014 and then a plan designed to
progressively move towards accrual accounting.

Financial information at the LG level will therefore rely on the “compte de gestion? produced by the
accountant and sent systematically to the Cour des comptes. These end-of-year accounts provide the
annual balance of all accounts used by the LG for collecting resources and incurring expenditures. The
capacity of these receveurs has been evaluated and is satisfactory. They are part of a national cadre of
government accountants and are recruited through competitive exams. They are on average well
trained and skilled.

2.5 Controls and Audits


The control framework comprises several layers. They are:

The Caisse follows a good set of internal control procedures before making disbursements to
municipalities. The funds are released through a check which cannot be used for other purposes than
the payment it is meant to cover (fonds affectés). The Caisse keeps an accounting book for each
municipality which produces financial statements, which are provisional the 30th of June and final, 31st of
December and are based on commercial accounting standards (modified to reflect the quasi-banking
nature of the activities). The accounting department of the Caisse also follows separately payment
arrears of municipalities, for which central government is the guarantor. ADEB, the IT system used by
government accountants (including municipalities) is accessible at the Caisse but it does not seem that it
is reconciled with the accounting done by the Caisse. The Internal Audit Unit of the Caisse, (4 staff,
including a lawyer and 2 finance specialists) includes the Program within the scope of its work and will
submit reports to the Board of Directors of the Caisse.

(ii) The expenditure cycle for municipalities is submitted to the same set of controls as that of central
government departments. The Contrôle Général des Dépenses under the Prime Minister’s office has to
approve ex ante, at the commitment stage, every single expense through the ADEB system. Then the
receveur has to control the whole process and the justifications before making the payment (contrôle
concomitant). This systematic ex-ante control is being reformed at the central government level and is

                                                    17
evolving towards a more strategic and risk-based approach whereby only around 20% of operations
(representing 80% of the total expenditure) are systematically controlled while the smaller and more
simple operations are controlled only through randomized samples. The government is receiving
support from the EU on this. This system of ex-ante control of expenditures should be progressively
extended to the control of municipalities’ expenditures, which would be in line with the objectives of
the Program as well as with the formulation of the new Constitution.

(iii) Municipal receveurs are controlled ex post by the General Inspectorate of the Ministry of Interior, by
the Contrôle Général des Finances (CGF, Internal Audit of the MEF) and systematically by the Cour des
comptes, Supreme audit Institution. The Inspector General the Ministry of Interior implements an
annual program of inspection that involves a substantial sample of municipalities each year.

Independent external audits on an annual basis are an important instrument for ensuring oversight as
well as to enforce public sector accountability. In Tunisia the Cour des Comptes has the mandate to
carry out the external audit of municipalities. The Cour des comptes is equipped with a dedicated
chamber at the central level (7 magistrates) as well as four regional chambers covering the entire
territory. However due to internal capacity issues as well as the pressure to complete the audit of the
Central Government and its agencies, the Cour is not able to carry out the audit of all the municipalities
on a regular and timely manner. Currently, the Cour audits all LGs once in three to five years (though
that audit will cover in its scope all those years since the previous audit). These audits are meant to be
compliant with INTOSAI norms and vary in intensity and modalities based on the size and risk level of
the municipality. The Constitution approved in January 2014 changes the control framework by
establishing the principle of management autonomy of LGs, the removal of ex-ante controls and the
strengthening of ex-post audits under the responsibility of the Cour. The Cour has the mandate over
performance and financial external audit of LGs and municipalities in particular.

As part of the Program design, it has been agreed with the Cour des Comptes that they will initiate a
program to carry out annual external audit of municipalities within a reasonable time period after the
end of the financial year. Since this is a substantial change from the current practice and creates a
significant demand on the capacity and resources of the Cour, the President of the Cour has agreed with
the Bank to schedule the annual audits in a phased manner so that majority of municipalities will be
subject to an annual financial audit by the end of the Program. It has also been agreed that capacity
building support will be provided to the Cour under the Program that will enable it to carry out the
annual external audit of municipalities in a timely manner.

The Program Financial Statements will be audited by an independent external auditor in accordance
with the country practices. The audited Program financial statements will be sent to the Bank no later
than 6 months after the end of the fiscal year.

2.6 Disbursement arrangements from the Bank
Disbursements of the IDA credit proceeds will be made at the request of the borrower upon
achievement of Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs). Loan proceeds will be disbursed into a single
treasury account held at the Central Bank and then transferred through the Caisse to the bank account

                                                    18
of the LG held within the Treasury system. Disbursements requests will be submitted to the Bank using
the Bank’s standard disbursement forms thru the e-disbursement functionality in the Bank’s Client
Connection system. It was identified that advances under the PforR operation might be necessary in
order to allow the borrower to achieve the results for one or several DLIs, quantification of specific
needs for advancement as well as determination of the need of prior results to be achieved prior to the
signing of the legal agreement will be further developed in next stages.


Section 3: Program Procurement Systems
Municipal public procurement has been so far governed by the Decree 2002-3158 of 27 December 2002
on the regulation of public procurement as amended and supplemented by Decree 2003-1638 of 4
August 2003, Decree 2004-2551 of 2 November 2004, Decree 2006-2167 of 10 August 2006, Decree
2007-1329 of 4 June 2007, Decree 2008-561 of 4 March 2008, Decree 2008-2471 of 5 July 2008, Decree
2008-3505 of 21 November 2008 and Decree 2009-3018 of 19 October 2009.


                                      , since the Revolution, the Interim Governments have embarked
on the revision of the existing public procurement decree to address the major weaknesses while
ensuring transparency and efficiency of the system. This has resulted in the promulgation of two
additional public procurement decrees (decree 2011-623 of 23 May 2011 and Decree 2012-515 of 2
June 2012) modifying and completing the provisions of the decree 3158. The revisions brought by the 2
decrees aimed at increasing the transparency and efficiency of public procurement. In parallel, the
Government launched with the World Bank and African Development Bank support a thorough review
of the procurement system using the (OECD-DAC/MAPS) Methodology for the assessment of
procurement systems to undertake a more comprehensive reform in order to modernize the
institutional and regulatory frameworks in line with international standards. This exhaustive review has
resulted in the enactment of a consolidated and revamped procurement decree (No 2014-1039 dated
March 13th, 2014) which will come into effect on June 1st, 2014.


Municipal Procurement procedures: Municipalities are responsible for the entire procurement process
and contracting process, which encompass the following: (i) planning; (ii) preparation of bidding
documents; (iii) receipt and evaluation of bids or proposals; (iv) finalization and signing of the contract;
(v) monitoring the execution; and (vi) filing and archiving documents. Large municipalities have a
Receveur Municipal/Tresorier at the level of the Municipality and small municipalities have one at the
level of the "Recette des Finances" for smaller ones. However, each governorate has a Bureau Regional
de Controleur(s) de Depenses in charge of conducting ex ante control of procurement processes within
the Municipal or Regional procurement committee. The Bureau Regional de Controleur(s) de Depenses
is in charge of all procurement oversight at the regional (governorate) level which includes, inter alia,
municipality’s procurement. The number of controllers per Regional Office depends of the regional
budget size. Nevertheless, it is important to mention that some big municipalities such as Tunis have
their own “controleur?.

                                                    19
Technical preparation, technical oversight and technical Audit: Municipalities manage core
procurement processes (such as preparation of bid documents, design of construction and
infrastructure works) in a variety of ways. While large municipalities have their own strong in-house
capacity, small and medium municipalities rely on technical support from the deconcentrated line
ministries at the Governorate level or contract out with private sector consultants. For the PforR
Program, the Ministry of Interior may keep a technical oversight role, but it is mainly the role of the
CAISSE to provide technical oversight including physical field inspections.

The procurement processes at the municipal level are subject to various levels of oversight and
approvals. Based on the cost estimate for a contract, the municipality could be subject to one or more
(1) of the following procurement committees: Before going to the High Tender Board, all steps of
procurement subject to prior review shall be submitted first to the ministerial procurement committee
for a preliminary prior review before being submitted to the High Tender Board:

                   Local/Municipal Regional Committee           Ministerial       High tender Board
                   committeei                                   Committee
Works              Up to TND 2 Up to TND 5 millions             up to       TND10 above      TND10
                   millions        And up to TND10 Million      Million           Million
                                   for regional projects
Goods and non-     Up to TND 400K Up to TND1 million            Up to TND 4        Above      TND4
consulting services                                             million            million
IT equipment        Up to TND300 K Up to TND1 million           Up     to  TND4    Above      TND4
                                                                       ii
                                                                million            million
Software and IT Up to TND300 K Up to TND500K                    Up     to  TND2    Above      TND2
services                                                        million            million
Consulting ServicesUp to TND150 K Up to TND200 K                Up to TND300 K     Above TND 300 K
(Etudes)
Preliminary        Up to TND2 Up to TND5 Million                Up     to   TND7 Above           TND7
breakdown          Million                                      Million          million
of estimated
quantities and
cost and force
 account

All commitments are submitted, before contract signature, to the prior clearance by the controleur de
Depenses (as per art. 12 of Decree no2012-2878 dated November 19th, 2012 governing the “Controle
des Depenses Publiques?. Only Municipalities whose annual budget exceeds and amount to be defined
by decree have their own municipal procurement committee and the procurement committee of
Municipality of Tunis has its own procurement committee whose competency thresholds are up to
those of the High tender Board. Quality and Cost Based Selection, QBS: Quality Based Selection and LCS:
Least Cost Selection newly added by the new decree.


The procurement methods thresholds are summarized in the table below:

                                                  20
                           Purchase Order             Shopping    (simplified     Competitive bidding
                                                      procedures)
Works                      Up to TND200 K             Up to TND500 K              Above TND500 K
IT Goods and services      Up to TND100 K             Up to TND200 K              Above TND200 K
Other    Goods      and    Up to TND100 K             Up to TND300 K              Above TND300 K
services
Consulting services        Up to TND50 K              Up to TND100 K              QCBS, QBS and LCSiii

Tunisia has been engaged in the past years with the Bank in a dialogue for procurement systems reform,
starting with punctual improvements through two revisions of the public procurement decree dated
May 2011 and June 2012, which resulted mainly in (i) simultaneous opening of technical and financial
bid envelopes in the same public session, (ii) publication of invitations to bid, awards, and decisions of
the complaints body in the web based public procurement portal (iii) introduction of a standstill period
for complaints , (iv) higher prior review thresholds, (v) of post reviews for small contracts, (vi)reduction
of the award process mandatory minimum duration. The Tunisian national public procurement and
program systems have very recently been entirely re-organized by the PUBLIC PROCUREMENT
REGULATION DECREE (PPD) No 2014-1039 dated March 13, 2014, published in Tunisian Gazette No 22
dated March 18, 2014. This decree which applies to all local Government levels when they act as public
procuring entities has filled in several gaps with international good practices as mentioned in the action
plan annexed to the MAPS /OECD-DAC self-assessment report dated August 2012.




                                                    21
It must be noted that the threshold for entities’ own tender committees or “commission d’achats?
allows municipalities to procure or purchase without seeking review and clearance of the Governorate
level regional tender boards – the “Commissions regionales des marches?- has been raised up to the
new shopping threshold of 500K TND for works, 300 K TND for goods, 100 K TND for consultancy
services (approx. 50 K Euros).

There are several aspects of the institutional systems for public procurement that can be helpful to the
Program. An electronic procurement System called “Tuneps? is being piloted which could possibly be
scaled up to municipalities. The national public portal of the “Observatoire des Marches publics? –
National Observatory – is operational and available to all national procuring public entities including
municipalities for mandatory advertising of procurement opportunities and for the upcoming publishing
of awards rendered mandatory under the new PPD decree.

There is a functional system for handling complaints relating to public procurement and municipalities
come within their ambit. The Comité de Suivi et d'Enquête sur les marchés publics (COSEM) is part of the

                                                  22
HICOP and is responsible for receipt, follow up and resolution of procurement complaints. Statistics
available with the COSEM showed that the complaints recorded were 350 in 2013 (number increasing
year after year: was 316 in 2012) , out of which 149 were judged irrelevant, 108 accepted for instruction
with legitimate grounds, 54 not related to competence of COSEM, and 39 awaiting the response of
procuring entity. According to the new PPD decree, COSEM decisions are now binding and no longer
consultative, and a new standstill period of 5 days is slightly increased compared to 3 days before,
however it remains less than the international good practice of 10 days. They also are periodically
advertised on the public procurement portal, and therefore access to information is furnished to all
citizens.

Specific complaints relating to Procurement: All complaints relating to the procurements done by the
Program including those at the municipal level will be filed with the Comité de Suivi et d'Enquête sur les
marchés publics (COSEM) that is part of the Haute Instance de la Commande Publique (HICOP). As part
of the existing system, the municipalities will be publishing all Invitations to Bids in their website and in
the local news media and posting all approved contracts in the National Procurement website. Any
aggrieved party will have the opportunity to file a complaint within a period of five days after the
contract awards are posted in the website. The COSEM will examine the complaints and resolve them
with a specified time period. The Program Manager (Caisse) in consultation with the DGCPL will put in
place measures to coordinate the processing and follow up of complaints between the COSEM and the
National Authority for Corruption so that there is no duplication in processing of complaints.

However, there are a few weaknesses in the system that could potentially result in a fiduciary risk to the
Program. They are the following:

(a) the institutional architecture, which remains characterized with too many layers of prior controls
and back and forth ex ante review and clearance redundant loops, bureaucratic practices delaying the
procurement process ( commission municipale des marchés, commission régionale des marches,
controôleurs des dépenses, contrôle de la Caisse CPSCL . This results in an overall time for the
procurement process which exceeds by 2 to 3 times the minimum mandatory time per decree
regulation), and

(b) lack of respect of the principle of separation of functions, more particularly in the new decree No
2013-5096 Dated November 22, 2013 creating the High Institution for public procurement “HICOP?:
“Haute Instance de la Commande Publique?, which includes under the same presidency the policy role
as well as the oversight large transactions

(c) there is no clear definition of the roles and responsibilities for the follow up of complaints relating to
corruption involving procurement. According to article 173 of the PPD the HICOP is clearly in charge of
fraud and corruption cases for what concerns the sanctions and blacklisting part of the procedure (the
investigation role is somewhat fuzzy in case of allegation when not transmitted to courts and the
distinction between the role of the Investigation Committee – still being implemented - of the High
Institution fighting fraud and corruption (INLCC “Instance Nationale de Lutte contre la Corruption?



                                                     23
which includes a “Comite d’investigation des cas de corruption et de malversation? and was create d in
the “decret –loi? No 2011-120 dated November 2011 ).

(d) The heterogeneous fiduciary capacity of procuring entities with the upper end of the spectrum
mostly the large municipalities having strong and developed technical and procurement skills,
procurement methods and procedures and at the other end of the spectrum small remote
municipalities with low capacity and with low procurement skills. This weakness in procurement
capacity could possibly pose a fiduciary risk to the Program. Therefore it is proposed to organize as part
of the capacity building component, a systematic baseline assessment of all LG procuring entities using a
simplified set of procurement capacity assessment questionnaire. Depending on the questionnaire
based findings, appropriate capacity building support will be designed and provided through the
Capacity Building elements of the Program.


Section 4: Fraud and Corruption Risks and Mitigation

The fiduciary assessment also specifically examined the potential risks relating to fraud and corruption in
the Program and the institutions and processes for mitigating such risks both at the Central and Local
Government levels and assessed their applicability to the design and implementation of the proposed
PforR Program. Discussions were held with key institutions responsible for the policy and
implementation aspects of addressing fraud and corruption. Relevant documents and studies relating to
Governance and Anticorruption in Tunisia were referred to. This section, summarizes the findings of
the assessment and proposes a Program Action Plan that recommends additional measures to mitigate
the risks relating to governance and corruption for the proposed Program.

Though Tunisia is a signatory of the UN Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC) since 2004, the
country’s record of recognizing and fighting corruption was very weak under the former regime until the
Tunisian Revolution in 2011 brought the issue of corruption into center stage. The subsequent changes
in the country that built upon the strong public opinion against corruption and favoring good
governance have resulted in the setting of a policy and institutional framework for good governance and
anticorruption at all levels of Government. This has culminated in the specific provisions included in
Article 130 of the country’s new Constitution that provides for the setting up of a Commission for Good
Governance and Anti-Corruption.

Institutional arrangements for handling Corruption and their applicability for the Program: Tunisia has
set up a robust institutional framework for preventing and combating corruption. At the national level,
the Department of Good Governance and Anticorruption (Département chargé de la Gouvernance et de
la lutte contre la Corruption) headed by Secretary of State sets the broad policy framework for
governance and anticorruption. As mentioned above, the new Constitution provides for an independent
Commission for Good Governance and Anticorruption composed of independent impartial members
and who shall be in charge of monitoring cases of corruption within the public and private sectors,



                                                    24
investigating and confirming them, and submitting them to the relevant authorities. Steps are currently
on for providing institutional form to this Constitutional provision.

The Department is currently in the process of preparing a National Strategy for preventing and
combating corruption with the support of UNDP. As part of its efforts to strengthen transparency and
good governance the department has set up a website called http://www.anticor.tn/ that provides a
platform to bring together the main national stakeholders committed to anti-corruption by being more
open and transparent to civil society organization and citizens’ contributions and provides a repository
of laws and decrees relating to anticorruption as well as articles and documents relating to good
governance and anticorruption.      The Department of Good Governance through circular # 16-2012
(March 2012) has required all line ministries, Governorates and public institutions to set up a cell for
good governance under the supervision of the head of the organization. The key responsibilities of the
good governance cells according to circular#55-2012 include:

       1)   Alerting the Secretary of State of Governance and Public service of any cases of corruption
            and mismanagement reported directly to them or through the general control bodies or the
            departmental inspections.
       2)   Following up on all the corruption allegations that are being investigated by the appropriate
            body.
       3)   Preparation and execution of the good governance guidelines in the institution to which the
            cell belongs to.
       4)   Following up on all the decisions and planned reforms related to administrative and financial
            management procedures and assess their adequacy with the good governance guidelines.
       5)   Coordinating with the control bodies/internal audit or inspection agencies of the institution
            to which the cell belongs to carry out preliminary investigation regarding allegations that
            comes to its knowledge.

The Fiduciary Systems assessment revealed that even though good governance cells have now been
established in most line ministries at the Central level, they have not been established and functional at
the municipal level. The Program will recommend the setting up of the good governance cell in all
municipalities as part of the Program Action Plan and monitor their performance through the annual
performance assessment.

The National Authority for Fighting Corruption ("Instance Nationale de Lutte contre la Corruption?) is
responsible for the investigation of complaints and for taking follow up action. Established by Article 12
of the Decree 2011-120 of 14 November 2011, the authority is composed of its president, board, general
secretary and the prevention and investigation committee. The National Authority is administratively
under the Department of Good Governance and Anticorruption, and is headed by a President and
comprise of twenty staff. The Authority is empowered to receive and investigate corruption allegations
in all public and private organizations and includes municipalities in their scope. The Authority receives
complaints either through the national anticorruption website (www.anticorruption-idara.gov.tn)
directly through mail. According to Article 34 of the Decree referred to above, it is obligatory for local
governments to report any allegations/complaints of corruption to the National Authority. The National

                                                   25
Authority for Fighting Corruption is in the process of setting up of a national portal for complaints and
for reporting corruption cases called “E-People? to better manage, track and collect complaints and
corruption allegations. In addition to the above, there are initiatives by civil society organizations that
provide a platform for citizens and civil society to bring issues relating to corruption into the public
domain. (Please see text box below)


                                          www.Billkamcha.tn

         www. Billkamcha.tn is a crowd-map developed by I WATCH Tunisia to help citizens
         report cases of corruption. “Bilkamcha? means in Tunisian dialect “Caught Red
         Handed?. Its aim is to empower the citizen and engage her/him in the long fight
         against corruption. The platform allows receiving information through electronic
         messages about corruption and for records to be made available to bloggers and
         media.


Complaints Handling: Citizens can file complaints relating to the municipality directly through the
national anticorruption website to the Department of Good Governance and Anticorruption as well as
send written complaints to specialized agencies such as the National Authority for Fighting Corruption
and to the Good Governance cells maintained by the Ministry of Interior. Those complaints received by
the Department of Good Governance and the Ministry of Interior’s Good Governance cells and relating
to allegations of corruption will be conveyed to the National Authority for Fighting Corruption for
investigation. Those complaints relating to irregularities in the procurement processes will be conveyed
to the COSEM for further follow up action. The Caisse will compile a list of complaints filed relating to
the Program and will monitor their follow up.

After a preliminary scrutiny of the complaints, the Authority carries out detailed investigations of
credible complaints to establish whether there is a prima facie case of corruption involved. Once a
prima facie case is established, the Authority transfers the case to criminal investigation authorities for
initiating prosecution steps under the Criminal law of the country. Though the Authority is making
serious efforts to provide speedy resolution, the huge backlog of cases (relating to the previous regime
in the country) has reduced the Authority’s ability to process new complaints quickly. The Authority is
currently in the process of addressing this issue through donor supported technical assistance. The
Authority is also working together with the Department of Institutional Integrity (INT) of the World Bank
it is expected that an agreement will be signed soon to exchange information and experiences between
the two organizations as well as for joint investigations and capacity building.

The complaints handling and processing systems of the Authority are found adequate for the purposes
of the PforR operation. It was discussed and agreed with the Authority that complaints relating to the
Program, if any, will be conveyed to the Authority through the existing complaints handling mechanisms
functioning at the Central and local government levels. The Authority will take steps to investigate the
complaints expeditiously in accordance with its procedures and convey the results of the investigation
through a report to the Secretary General, Ministry of Interior with a copy to the Caisse, who will in turn

                                                    26
share the report with the World Bank. In accordance with the INT guidelines for PforR operations, if any
further follow up investigations are required, the Bank will rely on the Authority to carry out such
investigation and will rely on the findings of such investigation for initiating any follow up action. The
Program will provide specific support to the Authority for carrying out specific investigations in an
expeditious manner through consultant and/or logistical support as necessary, which will be organized
by the Caisse. The Program Operations Manual will describe the procedures for the conveyance of
complaints and the sharing of the investigation results in detail.

Debarment of Contractors: in accordance with the Bank’s AntiCorruption guidelines for PforR operations
the Program will take steps to ensure that “any person or entity debarred or suspended by the Bank is
not awarded a contract under or otherwise allowed to participate in the Program during the period of
such debarment or suspension?. At the conclusion of the procurement process for each contract and
prior to the award of the contract, each municipality will convey the details of the contract in a specific
format that will include the names and details of the contractor as well as relevant particulars relating to
the contract. Caisse will verify the names of the contractor against the World Bank’s list of debarred or
suspended contractors to ensure that no such contractor is awarded any contract under the Program.
The Caisse will convey the results of the verification to the municipality within two business days of the
receipt of the receipt of the information from the municipality. Caisse will maintain a master list of
contractors awarded contracts under the Program and will periodically compare the list with the Bank’s
list of debarred/suspended contractors to ensure compliance.

Section 5: Program Implementation, Audit and Disbursements
Caisse will be the Program Manager for the PforR Program and will be responsible for the disbursement
of the Capital Grants to municipalities as well as for the management of the capacity building support
provided under the Program. Caisse will also be responsible for preparing the Program Financial
Statements compiling them from municipal financial reporting as well as financial reporting from other
agencies, if any. Unaudited quarterly financial reports covering the entire program will be produced by
the CPSCL at the disbursement and payment stage (using information produced by the CPSCL and
ADEB). The protocols for the receipt and compilation of annual Program financial statements will be
discussed and agreed with counterparts by appraisal. The annual audit of the Program financial
statements will be carried out by independent external auditors in accordance with existing country
practices.


Section 6: Program Fiduciary Risk Assessment

Assessment of Program Financial Management Systems: The lack of a comprehensive information
system at the municipality level and at the aggregated level is a major weakness that emerged during
the preparation of the Program and that has been noticed by the Cour des comptes in its various audits.
The Cour noted that very often the auditor has to produce the information they are supposed to audit.
The creation of an e-platform, which h has been envisaged as part of the Program could efficiently

                                                    27
mitigate this risk if it is accompanied with a substantial effort to design a system of data collection for
municipalities.

 The CPSCL and municipalities have substantial cash reserves amounting to respectively (200 MTND and
350 MTND), which has been confirmed by the Director General of CPSCL. These reserves seem to
correspond to projects that are already launched and for which most of the funds have been committed
but there seems to be a disagreement between the MEF and the Caisse on the conclusions to be drawn
from this. To mitigate the risk of funds getting accumulated at the municipal level without being spent,
the Program will build in suitable mitigation measures such as monitoring and rewarding good
expenditure performance by municipalities, rigorous internal and external audits that will include the
quality and efficiency of spending within the scope of the audit Terms of reference, strengthened social
accountability processes such community participation, sharing of information through the e-portal etc.

It is difficult to have a clear vision of municipal financing based on published budget documentation.
First, the specific booklet for the CPSCL is not public and is with the government’s representative at the
Caisse (administrateur). Second, a number of financing flows are directly on the budget of line ministries
and it is not clear whether they are for operating or investment expenses, whether there are certain
conditions attached to their use. Besides, they are not processed through the Caisse but directly within
the Treasury TSA and are not consolidated in terms of reporting. To mitigate the risk of lack of
transparency, the Program is supporting the design and implementation of a “E-Portal? that will display
all relevant information relating to municipalities. In addition municipalities will be encouraged to
maintain an up-to-date website of their own that will also provide all relevant information.

The controls and audit framework related to LGs provides some level of fiduciary comfort but at the
same time, these controls are redundant, overlapping and seem to create risk avoidance behaviors if not
situations of failure to implement projects. The Program will help promote a new balance through a
strengthening of ex-post controls and audits and less stringent ex-ante controls on expenditures. This
could create a risk in the transition period between the two phases. Therefore the capacity building
program for financial management needs to start as early as possible.

Nevertheless, the PFM systems in the country are generally considered solid by international standards
as it is reflected in the 2010 Tunisia PEFA assessment. In particular, PI-8 on intergovernmental fiscal
relations has received a score of B. Other PFM diagnostics have confirmed this favorable judgment. The
fact that financial management of municipalities relies on strong and tried FM systems (ADEB,
Accounting Code, Single Treasury account system maintained at the Central Bank) provides overall a
guarantee that the specific risks detailed above will not prevent Program’s FM arrangements to be
acceptable.

It is assessed that Program’s Financial Management arrangements relying on country wide system are
acceptable in terms of procedures and results after appropriate mitigation. Program’s FM systems
present no significant risk against result achievements, with respect to Program resources management
and financial information for the stakeholders. The country wide system helps central government and
local governments (i) to keep close control of fiscal risks and to maintaining overall budget discipline, (ii)


                                                     28
to plan and execute the budget in line with its set priorities; and (iii) to effectively manage public
resources to deliver services. The country PFM at central and local levels gives reasonable assurance
that fiduciary risks would be maintained at substantial level and could be mitigated through the
implementation of appropriate mitigation measures; the Program can be implemented through the
existing PFM system, provided that some identified challenges, at the country and local levels, are
addressed, either through the PAP or other initiatives (accounting and reporting, internal and external
audit). Based on the elements above, the overall fiduciary risk is rated Substantial.

Assessment of Program Procurement Systems: The assessment of the current program procurement
systems for public procurement of Local Governments, based on post review during missions of a
sample of 6 cases documented in the archives of the Caisse and from the field visits to selected
municipalities it was found that municipalities complete the whole procurement process up to award
and signature of the contract much more quickly than national level procuring entities such as line
ministries. Also it was found that there exists a very high level of compliance with the procedures and
very low risk of corruption in Local Government procurement which is illustrated by the fact that over
one full year only one case of noncompliance was detected, and this case is a minor violation of a
provision in the decree relating to the constitution of an evaluation committee. Therefore the main
procurement risk for the program arises from the slow/sluggish procurement process that results in high
overall time for completing the procurement process (5 to 7 months due to redundant ex ante controls).
Therefore based on the assessment, the Procurement risk for the Program is rated as “Moderate?.

Based on the findings of the assessment the following improvements in the Program Procurement
systems are recommended:

The ex-ante procurement control model of the Caisse needs to be reformed and changed into an ex-post
control which will be supplemented by the ex-post audit by the Cour Regionales des Comptes. Use the
freed capacity and skilled workforce of the CPSCL procurement staff to alleviate the role of procuring LG
services and provide them assistance for the verification of the debarment, anti-money laundering and
other mandatory Bank databases (or of other international organizations in application of article 1 of
the PPD) which are only accessible in English language through internet. Municipalities to be equipped
with internet network access to transmit to CPSCL their proposed contracts award information among
other MIS and monitoring information.

At the program level, this national complaints treatment system should be completed by (i) the internet
connection of all municipalities to report all complaints and allegation cases to the Caisse, and (ii) at
central program level the Caisse recording and follow-up system, (with electronic monitoring and
archiving of the results), which should aim at making sure that the complainants obtain a response in a
reasonable time frame.

Assessment of Fraud and Corruption Risks Mitigation systems: The Fiduciary Systems Assessment found
that Tunisia is in the process of establishing a robust system of dealing with fraud and corruption at the
national and local government levels. There is monitoring by the Central Government departments as
part of their inspection and oversight responsibilities. Though Audits are well established they are not

                                                   29
regular or timely. Systems for grievance handling and redressal are being established. The National Anti-
Corruption agency has established a strong procedural framework to deal with complaints of corruption.
There is a growing civil society involvement in monitoring the public sector. However most of these
initiatives are still in the early stages and therefore requires considerable capacity support from the
State and other agencies to be sustainable. Also capacity and experience at the local government level is
also weak to make full use of these systems to deal with instances of fraud and corruption.

Based on the assessment, it is concluded that the Program Fiduciary Systems have the capabilities to
provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes. However
there are significant gaps and weaknesses in these systems which need to addressed as part of Program
implementation. These gaps and weaknesses have the potential to make the fiduciary risk of the
Program to be high thereby impacting the ability of the Program to achieve its intended results.
Therefore a Program Action Plan is recommended based on the findings and conclusions of the
Fiduciary Risk Assessment that will mitigate to a large extent the fiduciary risks and weaknesses
identified. Considering the existing weaknesses in Program Fiduciary systems and the time and effort
required to implement the Program Action Plan and the capacity building initiatives, the residual
fiduciary risk rating for the Program is rated as Substantial.




                                                   30
Section 7: Recommended Program Action Plan
Sl    Program Action                         Base line            Responsibility   Schedule            Verification
#
1     All Municipalities to publish          Not published        Municipalities   Starting with the   Annual
      their budgets and annual plans,        now                                   second year of      Performance
      annual financial statements and                                              the Program         Assessment and
      audit reports in the e-Portal (and                                                               Program Reports
      the    municipal     website     if
      available)
2     Municipal Councils to prepare          No such action       Municipalities   Starting    from    Annual
      annual action plan to address          plan exists                           the first year of   Performance
      audit findings within a period of                                            the Program         Assessment and
      six months after the receipt of                                                                  Program Reports
      the audit report

3     The Citizens Bureau in each            Citizens             Municipalities   Starting    from    Annual
      Municipality         to         be     Bureau exist in                       the first year of   Performance
      operationalized      and      their    all                                   the Program         Assessment and
      performance in speedy and              municipalities                                            Program Reports
      effective resolution of grievances     but         are
      monitored by the Municipal             functional only
      Council                                in about 25%

4     Good       Governance          Cells   Cells not set        Municipalities   By the start of     Annual
      established in all municipalities      up in most                            the third year of   Performance
                                             municipalities                        the Program         Assessment and
                                                                                                       Program Reports
5     Municipalities to publish the          Some                 Municipalities   Starting    from    Performance
      award of all tendered contracts        municipalities                        the first year of   Assessment
      (NCB and simplified shopping           do             it                     the Program
      procedures), on national public        occasionally
      procurement web site.
6     Staff capacity and skills of           No       such        CFAD             Starting    from    Performance
      municipalities   in    financial       assessment is                         the first year of   Assessment
      management       and      public       in place                              the Program
      procurement to be assessed and
      a suitable capacity building
      program to be designed and
      implemented


Proposed DLIs in the Program

     1. E-Portal to be designed and made operational in Year one of the Program
     2. Cour des Comptes to carry out annual financial audits of municipalities




                                                             31
Section 8: Implementation Support

Implementation support will focus on implementation of the Program Action Plan, and will be part of
the implementation support provided by the World Bank for the Urban and Local Governance Program.
From a fiduciary perspective, the implementation support will focus on the following:

       Fraud and corruption: Supervise the implementation of the agreed fraud and anti-corruption
        measures under the program and provide guidance in resolving any issues identified;
       Procurement: review of procurement performance of the central level entities implementing
        the program as well as the municipalities. In addition, the task team will help to design and
        coordinate the capacity support provided to local governments.
       Financial Management: the task team will review the Program financial statements and audit
        reports as well as the Program reports such as the Results Verification reports prior to
        disbursement. The task team will coordinate the results reporting for the DLIs with the
        disbursement of the IDA credit funds.

The Bank has a strong fiduciary team based in Tunis who will play the lead role in implementation
support. Additional support will be provided by international staff as part of the implementation support
missions.




i
 Only Municipalities whose annual budget exceeds and amount to be defined by decree have their own municipal
procurement committee and the procurement committee of Municipality of Tunis has its own procurement
committee whose competency thresholds are up to those of the High tender Board




                                                     32
