                                      89811
             Document of
            The World Bank




TUNISIA URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND LOCAL
         GOVERNANCE PROGRAM




   Technical Assessment Report



             Final Version




             June 26, 2014




                   1
                                                                         Table of Contents
A.       Program Description ................................................................................................................................................ 3
     Government program ................................................................................................................................................... 3
     PforR Program (Program) ........................................................................................................................................... 6
B.       Program Strategic Relevance ................................................................................................................................ 9
     National Context ............................................................................................................................................................ 9
     Strategic Relevance.................................................................................................................................................... 10
C.       Technical soundness........................................................................................................................................... 12
D.       Institutional Arrangements ............................................................................................................................. 15
E.       Description and Assessment of Program Expenditure Framework ............................................... 17
F.       Description and Assessment of Program Results Framework and M&E ...................................... 24
     Disbursement Linked Indicators ........................................................................................................................ 26
G.       Program Economic Evaluation ....................................................................................................................... 27
H.       Technical risk rating ........................................................................................................................................... 30


Annex 1: Detailed Program Description
Annex 2: Financial Status of Local Governments
Annex 3: Results Framework Materix
Annex 4: Detailed DLI Matrix, verification protocols and basis fordisbursement calculations
Annex 5: List of mandated LG functional assignments
Annex 6 : List of LGs targeted to receive funds for improving basic infrastructure services in
disadvanted neighborhoods
.




                                                                                         2
A. Program Description
Government program

1.      The government program consists of state financial support to municipal infrastructure
delivery and institutional strengthening covering 264 municipalities (local governments - LGs)
for the period 2014-2019. Through this program, the government intends to shift from a purely
“infrastructure delivery? approach to more focus on LG performance and accountability. To this
end, the government’s program aims at: (i) strengthening LG institutional capabilities while
transforming their relationship with their citizens through measures that are designed to foster
transparency, participation and accountability; and (ii) improving municipal infrastructure
delivery with special attention to disadvantaged communities.

2.      In this context, the reform of the LG capital grants and municipal investment planning
framework forms the main strategic actions undertaken by the government towards the
implementation of its decentralization agenda recently anchored in the new Constitution
adopted in January 2014. This grant system, which had operated under an ex ante system of
controls, is being restructured through the revision of the Decree 97-1135 governing the LG
capital grant system. Through the restructuring, the government intends to improve the
efficiency of the state financial support to municipal investment, make the allocation of capital
grants more transparent and predictable, strengthen the decision-making power of LGs on the
use of their investment funding, and progressively introduce a performance based dimension to
their capital grant system. Along with revision of the above decree, the government has also
issued a Ministerial Decree to introduce participatory municipal investment planning and
budgeting systems, hence promoting citizen engagement in identifying investment needs and
priorities. Under the same reform, the government will progressively introduce an independent,
annual assessment to measure the performance of LGs in line with the above amended decree.

3.       The performance assessment system, in addition to serving as a tool for monitoring LG’s
performance, has proven to be a very effective means of incentivizing LGs to strengthen their
institutional performance, where access to grant funds is linked to results. The areas covered
under the performance assessment will include governance, sustainability and management.
The results of this performance assessment will be used to adjust the capital grant allocation
starting the third year of the program.

4.      The government program consists of three sub-programs, namely:

    Subprogram 1: Municipal infrastructure delivery;
    Subprogram 2: Improving access to basic municipal infrastructure in disadvantaged
     neighborhoods;
    Subprogram 3: Capacity support for improved LG institutional development and
     accountability.

Subprogram 1: Municipal infrastructure delivery (US$591 million)
5.      Consistent with past practice under the municipal investment program – the Program
des Investissements Commun (PIC), the subprogram involves the preparation of five-year
investment plans for each LG to deliver municipal infrastructure, underpinned by capital
resources derived from three sources: (i) local government contribution; (ii) capital grants from
central government; and (iii) investment loans provided by the Caisse des Prets et de Soutien


                                               3
aux Collectivites Locales (the Caisse - - CPSCL), which is also taked with managing capitalmgrant
transfers form the center to the LGs. In addition, LGs receive capacity development and
technical support to prepare and implement their plans via training programs offered by the
Centre de Formation and Appui à la Decentralisation (CFAD – see para 47) and technical
assistance from regional offices of the CPSCL and line agencies of central government, as well as
through local consultancy services. This sub-program will entail the following activities:

6.      Capital Block Grants for Municipal Infrastructure Delivery (USD203 million). The
use of capital grants for municipal infrastructure delivery is determined solely at the discretion
of each LG (without any ex ante control), subject to its being used for municipal infrastructure
investments that fall within the mandates of the LGs. The the Capital Block Grant or
performance based grants (PBGs) to LGs for capital investments will be allocated according to a
formula and the use of the grant resources will be determined solely at the discretion of each LG
(without any ex ante controls). The PBGs, which will be reflected in the LGs’ PICs (their 5-year
indicative investment programs), and their detailed annual investment plans, and will conform
to municipal infrastructure (works and equipment, including engineering studies and
supervision costs) that fall within the mandate of LGs. The grant will be administered by the
CPSCL (on behalf of the state) and validated through a participatory planning and budgeting
approach. The LGs will be responsible for planning and implementing the sub-projects
comprising their investment plans and financed either in toto by the PBG, or in combination
with other sources of funds. The PBG funds will be reflected in the revenues and expenditures
of the LGs’ annual budgets, with the resultant assets incorporated into their asset registers. Sub-
project implementation will be undertaken by LGs with the support, if needed, of private sector
consultancy services.

7.      The PBG will function according to the following principles: (a) a PIC whereby each LG is
allocated an indicative envelope of resources available to it, according to an allocation formula,
for capital investments over a five year period, to be transferred annually at the beginning of
each FY; (b) the allocation formula is to be made public, as are the annual allocations to each
LG; (c) the allocation formula is built around objective, measurable criteria that also include
equalization considerations; (d) use of the funds is discretionary to the receiving LG and is not
subject to ex ante review by central agencies; (e) access to the funds, which can be integrated
with other untied LG revenues at the local level, is not tied to other parallel fiscal or financial
instruments; (f) LG performance is assessed annually, ex post, by an independent evaluator,
whose findings are made public and are presented comparatively across all LGs; and (g)
performance assessment criteria cover three areas: (1) Governance, comprising consideration
of: (i) participatory planning and budgeting; (ii) transparency in LG operations (access to
information regarding: capital expenditures/consistency with budget, contract awards,
investment implementation progress, financial statements/audits); (iii) procurement
(timeliness, efficiency and in accordance with regulations); (iv) safeguards (planning and
implementation procedures) and (v) response to complaints; (2) Sustainability, including: (i)
asset inventory in place, asset management including O&M plans established annually and
implemented; (ii) where required, financial recovery plans (FRPs) prepared and being
implemented; (iii) own source revenue collection enhancement plans prepared and being
implemented; and (iv) preparation and implementation of capacity building plans; and (3)
Management addressing: investment implementation, financial accounting practices and
satisfactory audits.

8.     The total unconditional capital grants for municipal infrastructure amount to US$ 5.7
per capita/year. Key investment activities under the Program are presented in Annex 5 (and
include road construction, rehabilitation and upgrading, urban drainage, sewerage and other



                                                4
environmental improvements, solid waste collection and street cleaning, parks and some
recreation facilities, and markets) and Annex 1 sets out a detailed description of the Program.

9.      Local Government Contribution (US$129 million). In parallel with the above capital
grants, the government’s 2014-2019 PIC envisages increasing levels of LG contributions
towards investments in municipal infrastructure. The Government recognizes that reforming
the own source revenue system will take time as it involves major policy changes, and is
therefore focusing on opportunities for improving local revenue collection rates within existing
tax and fee regimes.

10.     Municipal Investment Loans (US$259 million): In addition, LGs capable of borrowing
will have access to the CPSCL credit line as a potential funding source to implement their PICs.
The Loans from the CPSCL serve to maximize leverage on resources available to LGs for
investing in municipal infrastructure. In parallel, the government is introducing reforms under
the Decree and in the CPSCL lending guidelines in order to ensure rigorous lending practices
that establish a balance for LGs between maximizing their borrowings and improving their
financial viability, as well as ensuring the stability of the CPSCL.

Subprogram 2: Access to municipal basic infrastructure in disadvantaged neighborhoods
(US$150 million)
11.    Under this subprogram, the government will provide targeted/conditional grants
directed towards investments that represent national policy priorities (in this case, for the new
PIC period, to improve access to municipal services in disadvantaged neighborhoods).

12.     Activities under the subprogram will include consultancy services (including feasibility
and engineering studies, and support to implementation services) and civil works for the
provision of basic infrastructure such as roads and paving, street lighting, sewerage
extension/connection to the public network, and storm water drainage in selected
disadvantaged neighborhoods located in 114 municipalities.

13.     Tunisia has been implementing, since 1992, national programs targeting the upgrading
of disadvantaged neighborhoods with the provision of basic municipal infrastructure (PNRQP).
However, most urban upgrading sub-projects were identified and prioritized by the center and
implemented by the Agence de Rehabilitation et de Renovation Urbaine (ARRU,), a dedicated
national agency. The LGs were merely consulted but had to co-finance up to 30% of the total
cost outnof their own resources.

14.    The new approach will introduce reforms that address, in particular: (i) full ownership
and responsibility of LGs in preparing and implementing the related investments as part of their
municipal investment programs; (ii) credible consultative and participatory approaches for
neighborhood identification/selection and for neighborhood determination of priority
investment needs; (iii) 100% grant funded in order to avoid exerting additional financial stress
on LGs responding to centrally determined priorities; and (iv) provision of just in time support
to LG to implement sub-projects and concurrently deepen their capacity to prepare more
complex investment programs.

15.    The conditional grant allocation over the program period amounts to USD 142 million or
an average of about USD 1 million per LG which represents around 284 US$/beneficiary (1420
US$/HH).




                                               5
Subprogram 3: Capacity support for improved LG institutional development and
accountability (US$10 million)
16.    The government’s program upgrades the system of capacity support for LGs in order for
them to achieve improved institutional performance targets. The capacity support program
would contribute to the LGs ability to achieve the standards required under the performance
assessment system to help them access their full entitlement to capital grants.


PforR Program (Program)

17.     The Program (described in detail in Annex 1) will support those elements of the
government program that focus on capital grants for municipal infrastructure delivery and
related institutional and capacity building. It will be implemented through the 2014-2019
period and will finance activities in the same geographical areas (the Program Area) covered by
the Government Program: all 264 municipalities (LGs), plus any new ones that may be
constituted during Program implementation.

18.   Table 1 below presents the Program (gray shaded cells) vis-à-vis the Government
program.


                Table 1: Government’s program and PforR Program Scope

Subprogram 1                      Subprogram 2                       Subprogram 3
Municipal        infrastructure Improving     access     to Capacity     support  for
delivery                        municipal infrastructure in improved LG institutional
                                disadvantaged               development          and
                                neighborhoods               accountability
TND 887       million   (US$591 TND 225           million   (US$150 TND 15 million (US$10 million)
million)                        million)
Capital     Block           Conditional Capital Grants
                        Grants                                       Capacity-building       and
TND 305 million (US$203     TND 225 million (US$150                  technical support TND 15
million)                    million)                                 million (US$10 million)
                            Grant allocation to LGs for
Formula-based grant allocation
                                                                     Demand-based             capacity
                            specified investments in line
to LGs subject to their meeting
                                                                     support to be provided to LGs
annual Minimum Mandatory    with      national    priorities
                                                                     on a just-in-time basis.
Conditions     (MMCs)       (currently
                           and               for       local
                            infrastructure
achieving satisfactory annual                             in
performance scores.         disadvantaged neighborhoods),
                            subject to their meeting a
LG             Contribution
                            Minimum              Mandatory
TND 193 million (estimate)
                            Condition (MMC) grant access
LGs Contribution to the
                            requirement.
investments from their net
savings.

Municipal investment loans
TND 389 million (estimate)
Investment loans to LGs from
CPSCL.


                                              6
19.      The development objective of the Program is: (i) to strengthen Local Governments’
institutional performance to be better able to deliver municipal infrastructure, and (ii) to
improve access to services in targeted disadvantaged neighborhoods.

20.      Based on the need identified during the preparation of the proposed program and to
provide targeted selectivity for Bank support, the Program encompasses three primary
activities: (a) performance-based capital grants for municipal infrastructure delivery; (b)
targeted capital grant for improving access to basic municipal service in disadvantaged
neighborhoods; and (c) capacity support for improved LG institutional development.

   A. Capital Block Grants for Municipal Infrastructure

21.      The grants would be performance-based to incentivize LGs to achieve improved levels of
institutional capacity in key areas of their municipal functions. The target would be for 60% of
LGs to achieve threshold scores (levels to be determined during finalization of the performance
assessment manual) or more on their performance evaluation by the fifth year of the Program.
To achieve the targeted outcomes, the Program provides resources under the PBG sub-window
for investments in local infrastructure services, with funding levels modulated by each LG’s
ability to meet annual performance standards applicable to unconditional grants as measured
by annual Minimum Mandatory Conditions (MMCs) and Performance Assessments (PAs)
undertaken according to agreed criteria.

22.     Under the Program, 264 municipalities will receive performance-based grants from the
State, transferred through the CPSCL (the administering authority) to support priority
investments in urban infrastructure that have been identified by the LGs and reflected in their
participatory 5-year and annual municipal investment plans. The municipalities will be
responsible for planning and implementing sub-projects financed with performance-based
grant funds, and grant funds will be reflected in the revenues and expenditures of their annual
budgets.

23.      Performance-based grants will be allocated to the municipalities according to a
transparent and predictable formula. These allocations are weighted by LG population and fiscal
potential (80/20), subject to the application of an adjustment factor to ensure that each
municipality will receive at least the equivalent of the envelope received during the previous
PIC. These allocations provide an average annual allocation of USD5.7 per capita over the
period of the Program (roughly consistent with levels under the previous PIC, although serving
a slightly larger population universe).

24.    These allocations are for planning purposes and the actual annual disbursement of
funds will be made on the basis of: (i) each LG meeting the MMCs; and (ii) each LG’s
performance meeting minimum standards as measured against a set of criteria. Details
regarding MMCs and PAs are included in Annex 1.

   B. Targeted Capital Grants for Improving Access to Basic Municipal Service in
      Disadvantaged Neighborhoods

25.     Resources under the conditional grant sub-window for investments in local
infrastructure services in targeted disadvantaged neighborhoods, with funding levels


                                               7
modulated by the participating LGs’ ability to meet MMCs applicable to conditional grants that
comprise the basic grant access element of the performance assessment system.

26.      The conditional/targeted capital grant system represents a vehicle for the government
to address policy priorities. Currently, government priority is focused on upgrading service
levels in disadvantaged neighborhoods. A total of TDN 225 million has been allocated under the
conditional grant for the PIC 2014-2019 period for this purpose. Due to resource constraints
and the uneven distribution of disadvantaged neighborhoods across LGs in the country, a
regional consultation process (involving elected officials, city representatives, civil society,
deconcentrated agencies) was undertaken to pre-identify neighborhoods and LGs that would
qualify to receive these grant funds during the FY2014-2019 cycle. LGs currently covered by
ongoing urban upgrading programs are not targeted by the Program.

27.      As a result of this regional consultation/selection process, 144 LGs comprising 229
neighborhoods have been pre-identified, and a preliminary estimate of infrastructure
requirements, boundaries, number of households and costs has been established. To update
these estimates and confirm their viability and scope, each participating LG will prepare a pre-
feasibility study that will include participation of the affected communities, and will take into
account the services to be improved, the size of the population and the level of poverty
(requiring a brief survey), the levels and construction standards to be applied, the boundary of
the selected neighborhoods, preliminary cost estimates, and the timeline for preparing and
implementing the investments. Subject to the findings of the pre-feasibility studies, the LG
councils will consider and, if approved, include the proposed investments within the framework
of their annual investment plans and budgets.

28.    The application of the performance system to the conditional grant is limited to the
MMCs and then only on a one-time basis for the year when the construction of the approved
upgrading plans is projected to commence.

   C. Capacity support for improved LG institutional development and accountability

29.     The capacity support program would contribute to the LGs ability to achieve the
standards required under the performance assessment system in order for them to access their
full entitlement to the capital grants. As Program Manager, the CPSCL in close coordination
with the CFAD, will organize information, training and ‘hands-on’ technical assistance to
municipalities. These activities will focus on the key support required to assist municipalities to
achieve MMCs and performance criteria, and thus contribute to the achievement of the Program
Development Objective.

30.     Given the likely heterogeneous demand from municipalities, capacity and technical
support will be provided based on an annual Capacity Development Plan, prepared by each LG,
to address needs identified during a specific capacity needs assessment that was carried out
during Program preparation. The four broad areas identified as requiring capacity building
support at the city level include: (i) municipal participatory investment prioritization and
planning; (ii) own source revenue enhancement; (iii) project quality, including procurement
and environmental and social management; (iv) asset management systems and mechanisms
for operations and maintenance; and (v) financial management systems and practices

31.    The program will also support the introduction of several initiatives which will
strengthen government’s decentralization, participatory governance and transparency agenda

                                                8
as established under the new Constitution. These initiatives include the design and launch of a
new e-Platform (Portail des Collectivités Locales) which will make budget, procurement and
audit information for all LGs as well as the results of LG performance assessments, accessible to
the public. Progressively, the Portail will also host LGs’ information on Participatory Planning
and Participatory Budgeting processes.

B. Program Strategic Relevance
National Context

32.    Tunisia is currently going through a transitional phase of democratic and political
reform. In January 2011, the wave of protests that ended the 23-year rule of President Zine El
Abidine Ben Ali, ushered in a new political, social and economic era. The revolution was fueled
by widespread anger and frustration over lack of social and political inclusion, governance and
corruption, mounting unemployment and the rising cost of living. Since then, Tunisia
successfully held its first democratic elections for a National Constituent Assembly in October
2011.

33.     Tunisia’s political transition gained new momentum in early 2014, with the resolution of
political deadlock, the adoption of a new Constitution and the appointment of a new
government. The national dialogue platform, brokered by key civil society organizations, played
a crucial role in gaining the participation of all major political parties. This resulted in the
adoption of a consensus roadmap leading to general elections, planned for the end of 2014.
Additionally, local elections (municipal and regional) are expected to be organized in 2015. The
strategic direction that the new government embarked upon focuses on restoring and
maintaining security, while laying the groundwork for a stronger economic recovery, as key to
successfully completing the democratic transition.

34.     After a short-lived rebound in 2012, increasing political and social instability
during 2013, as well as a difficult external environment, have led to a slowdown in
economic growth. Rebounding from the contraction of 1.9% of GDP in 2011, the economy
grew by 3.6% in 2012, somewhat above expectations. For 2013, growth has been estimated to
have slowed down to 2.6%, as agricultural production and the oil and gas sector have declined
markedly, while manufacturing stagnated. Unemployment continued to decline to 15.3% at the
end of 2013, from 16.7% one year earlier, but still well above the pre-revolution level of 13%.
Post-revolutionary governments have pursued expansionary fiscal and monetary policies until
2013 in an effort to support economic recovery and employment. In 2013, the deficit had
reached 6%. A tightening of monetary as well as more moderate commodity prices have
allowed for a slowdown in consumer price inflation, which slowed to 5.5% in February 2014,
after reaching 6.3% in 2013.

35.     Although poverty has been nearly halved in Tunisia between 2000 and 2010 and
the country performed well in terms of a range of social indicators, regional disparities
saw poverty rates in excess of 30% in some parts of the country, and high unemployment
has been a major driver of the 2011 revolution, particularly amongst youth, who failed to reap
the benefits of relatively buoyant growth. With respect to gender equality and women’s rights,
while Tunisia is one of the more advanced countries in the region, underutilization of skilled
women in the labor market remains a concern, and addressing women’s rights more generally
represents a key governance issue. In the short-term, government’s main challenge is to ensure
social peace and security as a prerequisite for restoring economic activity and putting the
economy back onto a growth trajectory. The government is also seeking to establish an
enabling environment for structural reforms that, among other objectives, would reduce

                                               9
unemployment and regional disparities, address governance, and improve living conditions
throughout the country.

36.       Today, Tunisian policymakers are rethinking the relationship between central
and local governments (LGs), and have taken concrete steps towards a more
decentralized system. Since the January 2011 Revolution, Tunisia has signaled its intent to
bring cities into the heart of the local development process, making them proactive players in
planning, implementing and delivering municipal infrastructure and services. There is
widespread recognition that LGs, with their elected municipal councils and mayors, must be
more than “passive spectators? in urban development. Moreover, there is a general consensus
that, if they are to play a greater role, LGs need to become more transparent and accountable to
local citizens.

37.     The New Constitution promulgated on Jan 27, 2014, includes clear commitments
to decentralization and proposes fully devolved and empowered LGs with autonomy for
executing their mandates of providing local services according to transparent principles of
participation by, and accountability to, their citizens. The changes mandated by the Constitution
regarding local governance are transformational, as they effectively reverse the highly
centralized previous structure, whereby central oversight and approval (“tutelle?) was
exercised on all facets of local government accountability, decision-making, and capital works
and service delivery-related investments. The Constitution recognizes the decentralization
processes as the fundamental basis for the organization and distribution of power in Tunisia,
and as an essential step to achieve a more efficient administration closer to its citizens. The first
article dedicated to LGs states that "local power is based on decentralization" (Chapter VII,
Article 131). It further states that LGs (particularly municipalities and regional governments)
are chosen by universal, free and transparent vote, and will have their own legal personality,
together with administrative and financial independence.

Strategic Relevance

38.     In order to introduce policies that firmly ground voice and accountability into the
governance structure of the country, in response to the Revolution of 2011 and the provisions of
the new Constitution, transformational changes to the operating framework of local
government are required, and the Program is designed to support key reforms necessary to
restructure the institutional and fiscal framework to more effectively address the
decentralization provisions contained in the Constitution. The reforms pose several challenges
to the existing structures of local government, most notably, in light of the greater municipal
autonomy mandated in the Constitution, the need to: strengthen the LGs to be better able to
perform their essential functions of citizen consultation and accountable service delivery
independently of central intervention; revamp the existing oversight system (tutelle) from one
of central government controls, clearances and approvals for local investment decision-making,
to one of central support, capacity strengthening and policy reform for local governments to be
better able to undertake their mandates; and address several key provisions of current
regulatory requirements in the operation of local governments, particularly regarding the fiscal
architecture of inter-governmental transfers, that have proven counter-productive and have
fostered outcomes contrary to those intended by the policies in place.

39.     The Program design consequently has high strategic relevance for Tunisia’s
development. It is calibrated to introduce the reforms in a manner recognizing: (a) that the
transition to an effectively functioning decentralization system of fully-devolved local
government will take time, (b) that builds on existing systems, taking advantage of existing
strengths, but (c) introduces the changes to the fiscal architecture and regulatory framework

                                                 10
necessary to directly translate the Constitutional mandate into practice in areas that offer
prospects for early wins and establish the core elements of viable and accountable local
governance. The restructuring therefore is carefully sequenced to focus on those actions that,
on the one hand will have transformative consequences, and introduce sustainable systems and
practices, while on the other hand are phased in according to graduated reforms that are
practical and can be implemented in the short term to have immediate impact on addressing
key provisions under the Constitution.

40.     Analysis of existing regulatory systems and procedures, and institutional
structures suggests that reforms to the capital grant will introduce significant advances
towards accountable local governance and better capacitated local governments,
constituting an effective first phase to the broader decentralization agenda established
under the Constitution. The Program therefore will operate within the existing fiscal
architecture by restructuring the existing capital grant window for transferring resources to
municipalities from a system that is regulated by centrally determined and opaque allocation
procedures and investment priorities, into a window regulated by a system of resource
transfers made according to: (a) a formula based unconditional capital grant system for uses
determined fully at the discretion of the LGs, with disbursements subject to annual LG
performance assessments; and (b) a conditional grant system managed by the LGs but for
investment purposes deemed to be national policy priorities.

41.     The formula based unconditional grant system is designed to address the following
issues considered central to meeting the mandate of the new Constitution: (a) allocative equity,
objectivity, and transparency; (b) greater voice for citizens in the operational and service
delivery responsibilities of their local governments through: (i) citizen consultation by local
governments in the use of the discretionary grant funds, and (ii) increased accountability of the
local governments to their citizens through timely access to relevant information about local
government performance; (c) effective incentives, through grant access requirements, that
encourage LGs to perform better along key parameters essential to enhancing their
accountability to their citizens and strengthening their planning, fiduciary and operating
capabilities; and (d) measuring the performance of the LGs in meeting the grant access
requirements through an annual, ex post, independent assessment system, rather than the
current ex ante tutelle system.

42.     In order to capture these reforms, Program preparation and implementation supports
the revision and operationalization of Decree 97-1135 that governs and regulates the fiscal
system for LG in the country. It also is designed to underpin and function within the
government’s well-established PIC system of resource transfers and LG service delivery. The
Program also conforms with the World Banks’ Country Interim Strategy Note ( ISN) for Tunisia
for 2013-2014. The ISN spells out a set of three broad areas for Bank engagement and, within
those areas, a number of driving objectives (DOs) that the Bank will pursue. The proposed
operation is fully aligned with the ISN’s second area of engagement: promoting social and
economic inclusion. Within this second area, the operation addresses DO 5, improving access to
basic services for under-served communities. About half a million people or 8% of the urban
population living in disadvantaged neighborhoods are targeted through the proposed program.
The proposed operation is also generally in line with the ISN’s third area of engagement:
strengthening governance through voice, transparency and accountability. The operation’s
focus on local governance institutions, decentralization, and significantly strengthening
participatory democracy at Local Government level directly supports this.




                                               11
C. Technical soundness

43.     The Program development objective is to improve institutional performance of
LGs in the context of the reform initiatives introduced by the government as a vehicle
towards establishing fully decentralized local government. The Program is designed to
meet this objective and is technically sound, drawing on international best practice and
integrating it with the specific circumstances of the Tunisian reform initiative. In particular,
consistent with the government’s policy of phasing its program of decentralization reform, the
Program utilizes fiscal instruments to effectuate the initial round of reforms in the following
manner:

44.    The Program conforms to principles core to operating an effective fiscal
decentralization framework, including:

          Linking the transfer of grant resources to improvements in LG performance in those
           areas of LG operations considered as the most important functions for strengthening
           their institutional capabilities. These linkages, when supported by appropriate access
           to technical assistance measures, have demonstrated the effectiveness of using
           financial incentives to leverage increased LG institutional capacity.             The
           unconditional grant under the Program is structured around this principle of
           performance-based allocation of grant funds, and is designed to be phased in, in
           order to take account of local circumstances;

          Operating within the existing fiscal architecture, regulatory regimes, and institutional
           systems; under the Program the current grant window will be restructured into two
           sub-windows, one unconditional, the other conditional, each with clear operating
           procedures; the regulatory framework for operating the grants remains governed by
           Decree 97-1135, but substantially restructured to align with the reforms; and the
           institutional arrangements such as the PIC cycle and the role of the CPSCL in
           managing the transfer process, with their well-established systems and capabilities,
           are maintained, adjusted to take account of processes that operate on ex post rather
           than ex ante oversight, but with all the other well-established and effective
           procedures such as fund flows and procurement practices intact.

45.    The Program is built around two design elements that draw on international best
practice, but are tailored to the policy reform environment in Tunisia:


          All 264 entities that are formally designated as municipalities (LGs) in Tunisia will
           participate in the Program. The justification for this broadly inclusive approach is
           derived from the assessment that clearly demonstrates: (i) absorptive capacity of
           the LGs, (ii) management and administrative capacity of the Caisse, (iii) soundness
           of the primary planning vehicle (the PIC), and (iv) the robustness of key operating
           systems such as procurement practices. In addition, the size of the resource
           transfers will remain consistent with past allocation levels. Consequently, the delta
           will not be managing major grant increases, but adjusting to the reforms which,
           most notably, are: the change in responsibility and accountability for selecting and
           implementing investment choices, and improving essential operating capabilities.
           To this end, the performance assessment system will be introduced incrementally,
           and the capacity support system will be substantially expanded and deepened;

          The size of the unconditional capital grant has to be sufficient to incentivize LGs to
           seek access to it, and therefore be motivated to improve their performance. While the

                                               12
           size of the grants will only increase within the normal range that has characterized
           prior PIC increases, the incentives lie in three areas: (i) they are the primary capital
           development funds available to most LGs, and they are in the form of unconditional
           grants; (ii) they will now be available as entirely discretionary funds to the LGs, and
           their use will be fully determined by the LGs; (iii) the effectiveness of their use (and
           the ability of the LG to continue to access them) will be based on measurement of the
           LGs’ performance by an independent agency, with the results made available to the
           citizens of each LG; and (iv) these funds are sufficient to allow for significant levels
           of investment in pressing local infrastructure priorities that fall within the functional
           mandates of the LGs;

46.    The design directly addresses key features of the existing system that either embed
the tutelle system, or over time have had increasingly perverse effects (and all these
features are incorporated into the revised Decree).

          The system for allocating grants has not been transparent. Under the Program, a
           formula has been introduced that is based on considerations of distributive equity
           (population has been used for this), and redistributive considerations as measured
           by fiscal capacity – a proxy for the strength of the economic base (poverty, social
           indicators, and unequal access to services were all considered, but data was poor).
           Data for the formula are derived from two independent sources – National Bureau of
           Statistics and the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MoEF) - ,and are both
           measurable and objective. The formula assigns 80% to population and 20% to fiscal
           capacity;

          Grant access requirements under the previous version of the Decree that linked the use
           of grant funds to requirement to utilize loan funds in predetermined ratios have led to
           serious levels of fiscal stress in nearly half the LGs. Under the reforms, these linkages
           have been terminated and the use of grant funds is subject only to council decisions
           on their investment priorities (Annex 2 describes the financial status of the LGs);

          The prior linkage of grants to loans led to the well-endowed LGs being increasingly
           favored as measured by the disproportionate per capita share of the grants they
           were able to garner, exacerbating regional disparities. The delinking, combined with
           the allocation formula addresses this issue directly, while still allowing the better-off
           LGs access to the loan funds to the maximum extent of their capacity to borrow;

          The grant system undermined accountability of LGs to their citizens. With opaque
           allocation criteria and decisions on investment priorities taken at the center, there
           has been little basis for the LGs to engage with their citizens, and no basis for the
           citizens to hold their councilors accountable, except on the margin for operating and
           maintaining existing assets. In addition there was no effective system for measuring
           LG performance, and no means of providing citizens with useful and timely
           information on their LGs’ operations. Under the reforms, the objective and
           predictable flow of funds, and the unfettered responsibility of the LGs to determine
           the use of the funds creates the space for consultation and accountability to be
           introduced and for social contracts to be built between LGs and their citizens. The
           introduction of performance standards for LGs, together with systems for ensuring
           timely citizen access to information on their LG’s performance, are also provided for
           in the Decree.

          There has been no system for assessing and monitoring LG performance. Under the
           Program, a system of performance requirements linked to grant access is being


                                                13
           introduced. The system will be phased and will start in year 1 with a set of
           minimum mandatory conditions (MMCs) that will be augmented in the third year by
           an annual independent performance assessment undertaken by the Controller-
           General of Public Services (CGSP). The findings will be published at the time of their
           completion each year and will be applied to regulate the level of disbursement of
           the grant funds to each LG according to their performance scores (to be detailed in
           the Performance Assessment Manual).

47.      The Program creates a grant sub-window to channel funds on a systematic basis to
government priority initiatives. Currently government runs a program that funds the
provision of basic infrastructure service in disadvantaged neighborhoods. This program is
operated by ARRU, which functions relatively independently of LGs. In addition, there are no
clear guidelines on the process for targeting beneficiary LGs and selecting neighborhoods in any
given year. The Program creates a conditional grant sub-window as a means of assisting the
government to better align the upgrading program with its decentralization policy by
systematizing the process whereby the LGs assume responsibility for defining and
implementing investments in disadvantaged neighborhoods (the LGs that have qualified to
receive funds under the Program are listed in Annex 6). The immediate impact of this change
under the Program is that the process of consultation with affected communities is enhanced
and the level of ex post scrutiny in introduced by ensuring that key elements of the performance
system are applied to the use of funds under this window. Over time, the new window will also
give the government greater opportunity to introduce clear rules and guidelines to determine
which LG proposals qualify the LGs to receive funds under the conditional grant window.
International experience has shown that conditional grants that function according to clear
eligibility criteria, and are within the framework of the government’s policy objectives but
operated under the responsibility of the LGs offer investment efficiency gains, enhance LG
effectiveness and accountability, and contribute to establishing effective social contracts
between the LGs and their citizens.

48.      The strategy under the Program of using the linkage of LG access to grant funds to
leverage improvements in their institutional performance is underpinned by providing
targeted capacity enhancement measures. On the one hand, the uneven capacity of the LGs
has the potential to undermine the effectiveness of the performance-based incentive system. On
the other hand, linking the access of funds to performance serves as a powerful means of
leveraging in LG utilization of capacity support systems. The Program has responded to this by
providing for two areas of support. One is to strengthen existing curricula and training
programs of CFAD, (for both elected officials and staff). The other is to establish cadres of
technical experts in each of the CPSCL’s regional offices with resources to contract in skills on a
just-in-time basis to respond to on-the-job capacity support to LGs dealing with issues of
planning, budgeting, financial management, revenue generation, asset management,
environmental and social safeguards, and procurement issues. This approach has been selected
for two reasons. First, because international experience has shown that approaches which offer
this type of demand-responsive, timely assistance, addressing real-time needs, and which do so
within the context of the day-to-day operations of the LGs, have proven particularly effective.
And second, because the program will be managed through the CPSCL’s six regional offices that
have solid capacity and well established working relationships with the LGs within their
regions.

49.      Extensive discussions have been held with key stakeholders involved in the
decentralization agenda and the development program, including the policy agencies and
CPSCL, the primary implementing agency. In addition, the Program has been discussed with
officials from a number of LGs and with the Federation Nationale des Villes Tunisiennes, the


                                                14
formal organization representing LG in Tunisia, as well as in meetings held with different LGs
during the preparation of the Program.

D. Institutional Arrangements

    50. Taking into account the fiscal nature of the reforms introduced under the Program, the
    MoEF is responsible for the Program and consequently the activities under the Program are
    financed directly by the MoEF through its annual budget. The MoEF will be responsible for
    Program implementation and for all transfer of funds under the Program. This will include
    ensuring that Program resources are budgeted for and disbursed within the Program
    expenditure framework according to existing state budget procedures.

    51. An Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) was established on August 5, 2013, to oversee
    coordination of the Program, and is chaired by the Minister in charge of Local Governments
    within the Ministry of Interior (MoI)1. The IMC meets bi-annually (plus exceptionally as
    needed), providing strategic leadership and general direction for overall implementation of the
    Program. It is supported by the DGCPL, which will serve as the Secretariat to the IMC. The IMC
    is responsible for sectoral coordination and for providing strategic leadership and general
    direction for the overall implementation of the Program.

    52. The CPSCL is mandated under the Decree and according to the Law no. 37 dated May 14,
    1975, to administer the capital grant transfers to the LGs. The process of the Capital Grant
    transfers will be detailed in the Program Operations Manual. The CPSCL will be responsible for
    coordination of day-to-day implementation of the Program and will facilitate the timely
    completion of inter-dependent functions to be performed by the several supporting agencies.
    Its responsibilities and functions in this regard, as well as those of the supporting agencies and
    the LGs will be detailed in the Program Operations Manual.

    53. As the agency designated to coordinate day to day Program implementation, the CPSCL
    will ensure adequate reporting through: (i) day-to-day monitoring of implementation progress
    of the Program; (ii) Program reporting, including the annual midyear report and Program
    Progress Report; and (iii) preparing the Program Financial Statements, compiling them from
    municipal financial reporting, as well as from the financial reporting of the other supporting
    agencies.

    54. The other national entities who will have guiding and supporting roles in the Program
    include: the Court of Auditors (Cour des Comptes), especially for the annual program audits
    and the annual external audit of municipalities; the Public Procurement Oversight Committee
    (Haute Instance de la Commande Publique, HICOP) which provides overall technical guidance on
    public procurement and monitors the compliance of procurement standards and practices; the
    Market Monitoring Committee (Comité de Suivi et d’Enquete sur les Marchés, COSEM) which
    receives pleas relating to public procurement and takes follow up action; the Controller
    General of Public Services (Contrôleur Général des Services Publics, CGSP) or any designated
    independent entity acceptable to the Bank which will be in charge of the annual and
    independent PA of the LGs; and the National Authority for Fighting Corruption (Instance
    Nationale de Lutte contre la Corruption) which will be responsible for the investigation of
    complaints, if any, on fraud and corruption relating to the Program.


1Membership of the IMC includes representatives from the following ministries and Governmental
agencies: (i) Interior, (iii) Economy and Finance, (iv) Regional Development, (v) CPSCL, (vi) CFAD, (FNVT)
and (vii) ARRU.

                                                   15
55. At the local level, LGs will plan and implement investments financed under the Program,
building on the well-established systems and procedures developed during the last 20 years
with support from the three previous Bank-funded Municipal Development Projects. As these
LGs are the project owners for individual investment projects, funding from the grants will be
reflected in the revenues and expenditures of the LG annual budgets. The LG will prepare the
annual municipal investment plan for the Program, consolidated with the annual budget plan
of the LG. The annual budget is discussed and approved by the municipal council and the
annual municipal investment plan and the annual budget will be disclosed after adoption. The
LG will be responsible for approval of feasibility studies and basic designs, detailed designs and
cost estimates and procurement plans.

56. The LGs will ensure that their technical and administrative departments are adequately
staffed and resourced and will outsource the supervision of their sub-project implementation
to private or public entities when needed. Financial management, procurement and
environmental and social management activities will be undertaken by LGs in accordance with
enhanced Government procurement rules and procedures, including the preparation of: (i)
annual investment plans; (ii) consultancy services terms of reference; (iii) feasibility studies,
including necessary social and environmental impact assessments; (iv) detailed designs and
cost estimates; (v) tender documents; and (vi) the annual procurement plans. LGs will also be
responsible for: (i) all procurement actions including advertising, bid evaluation and award of
contracts; (ii) contract administration and management; (iii) technical supervision; (iv)
verification of contractor’s claims for payment, and issuing payment instructions to the
municipal treasury (Receveur municipal); (v) monitoring and proper reporting of physical
progress of investments; and (vi) ensuring assets are entered in the asset register of the LG on
commissioning.

57.    Municipalities require a wide range of expertise to successfully carry out their
mandates. An analysis of staffing carried out as part of Program preparation reveals that most
municipalities have the necessary staff, but all LGs are expected to have the necessary support
from DGCPL, CFAD and CPSCL and consulting firms, as LGs that do not meet the minimum
mandatory condition will not be able to access Program funds.

58.     The CPSCL will be directly responsible, through its regional offices, for the execution of
the technical assistance (just-in-time support) activities of the capacity-building program (as
described above). The CFAD will be in charge of classroom-based training and the workshops
to be held to familiarize the LGs and the central agencies with the Program activities and
objectives. CFAD will be also in charge of developing and delivering additional training
programs that target gaps in areas of LG responsibility that affect their performance and that
may be identified during Program implementation, particularly those that emerge through the
performance assessment system. The capacity support roles of CPSCL, CFAD, and the other
agencies playing associated functions are summarized in Table 2 below.

Results Monitoring and Evaluation

59.    The Results Framework (Annex 3) provides the basis on which the CPSCL, in close
coordination with the LGs and supporting agencies, will appropriately measure and report on
progress.

60.    The CPSCL will prepare Program progress reports annually, as outlined in the Resuts
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework elaboriated in the Program Operations Manual (POM).
The report will include consolidated financial statements that will cover all Program activities,
expenditures and sources of funds, implementation status, progress in achieving the DLIs,

                                               16
   result indictors, and evidence of compliance with requirements of the Program Action Plan. The
   POM will include the format and details of reporting.

                 Table 2: Capacity-Building Arrangements under the Program

  Area of                          Description                        Supporting              Timing
  Support                                                              agencies

Formal LG Formal training programs addressing the CFAD                                Formal       system
Training  functioning of decentralization systems and the                             already operational
          operational responsibilities of LGs, for both
          elected officials and staff;
Technical        Program of on-the job, just-in-time assistance Caisse       with     Offers opportunity
Assistance       provided to LGs on a demand-driven basis. assistance          of     of quick impact and
to LGs           Designed around principle of “learning by doing? CFAD and DGCPL      “early wins?. Should
                 and structured to provide expertise in key areas                     be fully operational
                 of LG need (finance, technical/engineering;                          in time for start of
                 social/citizen      participation/accountability;                    2015.
                 fiduciary)
Targeted               Systematization of LG financial auditing of      Cour Des           2015
Initiatives to          LGs                                               Comptes
Strengthen             Introduction and operationalization of           CGSP or            2016
LG System               Performance Assessment (PA) System                CGF
                       Introduction of E-Portal to improve access       DGCPL              2015
                        to information to enhance LG
                        accountability to citizens, and to
                        strengthen DGCPL oversight (M&E)
                       Nationwide workshops to introduce and
                        familiarize LG system with Program and           CFAD               2014
                        PA system
                       Targeted training for LGs (procurement,          CFAD               2015
                        safeguards, other – as needed)

   Independent Verification

   61.     An Independent Verification Agent (IVA) will be appointed. The IVA role is to provide
   independent confirmation of the results reported by the LG and the CPSCL to the Bank. This
   includes verification of performance of the Program with regard to the Program disbursement-
   linked indicators (DLIs), the extent to which the Program DLIs have been achieved, as well as
   the preparation of a Program Results Verification Report. A consulting firm will carry out such
   independent verification of results in accordance with the verification protocol.


   E. Description and Assessment of Program Expenditure Framework

   62.     Review of the current system of financing municipal infrastructure systems:
   Infrastructure delivery in municipalities is currently financed by the Central Government
   through a combination of budget financing, loans from the CPSCL and own source revenues of
   municipalities. The central budget financing of local service delivery is provided through four
   channels viz:


                                                   17
    (i)     Capital investment grants distributed through the CPSCL.
    (ii)    Recurrent grants provided for meeting current expenditure distributed through the
            Common Fund for LG (Fonds Commun, FCCL).
    (iii)   Current or investment grants channeled through specific programs (often towards
            regional councils) to support sector policies defined by sector ministries. Grants are
            then reflected in the sector ministry’s budget.
    (iv)    Indirect support, often in kind, when central government manages tasks normally
            under the responsibility of local governments.

63.     The capital investment plans of Municipalities are funded out of the Government of
Tunisia’s Capital Budget (Titre II) and appear in the national budget under the budget head for
the Ministry of Interior as transfers to the CPSCL (Titre II, line 2.12). Municipal investments take
place primarily within the framework of the following three programs or windows: (i)
investments supported under the five-year PIC, a form of grant that has some flexibility in the
type of investments it supports and in the degree of choice the LGs can exercise; (ii) similar
investments supported outside the five-year plan (hors-PIC); and (iii) investments supported
under the national program for the rehabilitation of disadvantaged neighborhoods (PNRQP),
and currently managed by ARRU. There is a fourth category that provides funds for other types
of investments not covered under the other programs, such as regional landfills.

64.     The PIC has been operated for over thirty years in Tunisia and follows a central planning
model whereby resources are agreed in principle by the MoEF for a five-year investment cycle
and are locked in through investment plans prepared for each LG. While the LGs are consulted
at the beginning of the cycle on their priorities, final decisions are taken though an inter-
ministerial process, managed by the CPSCL, that largely excludes further input by the LGs, with
final decisions rarely conforming to LG proposals. At the beginning of each FY the government
contribution for the forthcoming year is formally approved in the budget. Municipalities
prepare five year investment plans and submit them to the MoEF/MoI for approval. The five
year plans comprise a list of capital investment projects that the municipality hopes to
implement during the coming five years. Every year municipalities prepare an annual plan
comprising a list of projects chosen from the five year plan and submits them for funding from
the PIC allocation. A Financing Committee comprising representatives from the Ministries of
Finance, Interior, Development and Planning as well as the representative of CPSCL approves
the proposals for funding and allocates the capital grants for each of the projects so approved.
Table 3 examines the PIC component of the capital budget over the past two PIC cycles,
disaggregated into the three main sources of investment funds (own source revenues - OSRs,
loans and grants), comparing them to the PIC cycle just commencing (2014-2019). The table
also compares allocations with actual expenditures.

65.     The PIC establishes a rigid framework that does not permit changes to the plan once it
has been confirmed. Consequently, the hors-PIC window has arisen as a means of allowing for
some investments to be funded as exceptions to the PIC, and these have to be approved on a
case by case basis. The lack of flexibility in the PIC limits the LGs’ ability to respond to changing
circumstances and priorities, and has particular consequences for the existing status of the LG
councils which comprise nominated councilors with little local credibility. Local elections
planned for 2015/16 will severely challenge fixed investment plans.


2                                            See                                          link
http://www.finances.gov.tn/index.php?option=com_jdownloads&Itemid=712&view=finish&cid=537&cat
id=1&lang=fr p. 15 of the document

                                                 18
   Table 3: Comparison of PIC allocations over three PIC cycles (2002 to 2019)3

   Funding      PIC 2002-2006             PIC 2007-2011             PIC  2014-
   Source                                                           2019
                TDN Million               TDN Million
                                                                    TDN Million
                Projected     Utilized    Projected     Utilized    Projected
a) OSRs         170.8         124.2       179.1         121.0       193.0
b) Loans        302.4         257.5       306.0         260.5       389.0
c) Grants       209.2         214.6       261.1         267.0       305.0
d) Total        682.4         596.3       746.2         648.5       887.0


   66.    The Capital grants under the PIC are part of the financing mix of municipal capital
   investment plans that include their own source revenues as well as loans issued by the CPSCL.
   This mix is framed by Decree 97-1135, according to the nature of the investment project to be
   funded. The usual mix is (for small public works which represent the vast majority of projects)
   37% loans, 33% grants and 30% self-financing, but feasibility/engineering studies are funded
   only through grants, while other types of investments have a different mix. Loans from the
   CPSCL have an interest rate between 6 and 8.5% and are reimbursable between 7 to 15 years,
   with the first installment due the second year.

   67.      Table 4 presents a summary of municipal budgets over the 2002-2012 period. Nation-
   wide sector specific programs such as the PNRQ, implemented by ARRU, have also required LGs
   to utilize loan funds as part of their financing plan (see Table 5).

   68.      Municipal budgets and levels of investment in municipal infrastructure are
   modest for a country with Tunisia’s degree of economic activity and stage of urbanization. Over
   the period of 2002 to 2012 LG budgets have remained small despite the extent to which the
   country is urbanized. Aggregate municipal budgets are estimated at around Tnd 814 million in
   2012, accounting for 1.2% of GDP and 3.6% of national revenues. Municipal revenues have
   grown at an annual rate of 6.4% over the 2002-2012 period. Adjusted for inflation and
   population growth, this translates into modest growth in municipal revenues of 1% per capita
   per year in real terms. Similarly, capital expenditures as well as expenditures for Operations &
   Maintenance have shown a declining trend while operating expenditures (mainly for meeting
   staff costs) have shown an increasing trend (see the chart below) .




   3Data provided by the CPSCL; data show a small discrepancy in the Caisse loan amounts between Tables
   4 and 5 (about 3%)

                                                   19
Table 4: Aggregate Municipal Budgets 2002-2012
 Year                   02    03   04     05   06                  07      08     09          10        11    12
Recurrent     revenues
/T1                       309       324     351       374   409    427     458        479      536      561   641
OSR                       223       234     258       279   312    322     346        360      404      268   370
FCCL                      86        90          92     95   98     105     112        119      131      145   176
Exceptional transfers     0         0           0      0     0     0       0           0           0    148    95
Recurrent
Expenditure / T1          258       272     289       306   332    350     376        403      428      460   502
Capital resources / T2    160       137     166       166   154    159     170        235      246      218   228
Capital Expenditures
/ T2                      154       130     166       160   149    141     132        188      194      140   129
Investments               129       98      135       126   115    101     89         144      146       87    59
Capital
Reimbursement             25        32          31     34   34     40      43          45      48        54    60




Table 5: Capital Grant financing for Municipal investments : 2002-2012
           2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010                                                2011   2012
PIC         42.1   30.4    85.2          56.1        36.1   31.7    31.2        64.6        109.8      31.8   25.0
Hors-
            21.4   9.1        9.1         5.2        6.6    3.7     11.2        13.3        25.3       13.5   7.5
PIC
PNRQP       6.2    7.2     20.5          25.4        11.2   12.3    13.7        35.1        39.6       10.3   13.9
Others      0.0    0.0        0.0         0.7        2.0    1.7     0.4         0.5         12.3       2.3    3.5
Total       69.7   46.7    114.8         87.3        56.0   49.4    56.5    113.5           187.0      57.8   49.8




                                                     20
80%


70%
                                                                   Opex/Total exp
60%
                                                                   Capex/Total exp

50%                                                                Debt Service/Total exp


40%


30%


20%


10%


  0%




69.     Utilization of the loan facility, notwithstanding the maximum grant per investment
provision, has remained constant and about 12% less than projected. Similarly OSRs have
remained relatively constant and about 30% lower than projected. The proposed capital grant
component of the PIC for 2014 to 2019 of Tdn 305 million is equivalent to approximately
US$200 million, or about $5.7 per capita per annum, which represents a slight increase in real
terms at rates similar to previous cycles after accounting for inflation and population growth.
The grants were fully utilized in both PIC periods. When the OSRs and loans are included, the
average annual per capita expenditure for the past two PIC cycles, taking into account
population growth and inflation, is roughly equal, at about $12, as compared to the projected
expenditures for 2014-2019 of $16 per capita per annum, which anticipates significant
increases in OSRs and loans, an assumption that does not reflect past expenditure patterns.

70.      The Program is introducing a critical shift in the financing and expenditure model for
capital grants. Currently the municipalities are forced to adopt a financing mix comprising
capital grants (PIC allocations), loans provided by the CPSCL and a pre-specified share of own
revenue contribution. As a result municipalities are able to access grant funds only after they
have availed themselves of loans which have resulted in many municipalities having taken on
debt when they did not require such loans or could not afford them. An adverse consequence of
this model has been that municipalities with weak revenue and tax base and often with
significant demands for urban services are not able to access grant funds as they are already
severely indebted. The Program aims to reform this model by delinking the capital grants from
loans and in this regard the Government has already started the process of reform by issuing a
Ministerial Decree on the preparation of participatory budgets by LGs, and by agreeing to a
major restructuring of Decree 97-1135 that, inter alia, will clearly delink the capital grant
allocation from debt financing. Accordingly, allocation and disbursement of capital grants will
be made of a simple set of criteria that incentivizes municipal performance rather than their
ability to access and sustain loans. In addition, a significant aspect of the reform of the capital


                                                21
grant system will be the replacement of the existing system of ex-ante review and clearance of
project proposals with an ex-poste review of Program implementation and results which will be
elaborated in the Program Operations Manual. This is expected to expedite the approval,
allocation and disbursement of the capital grants annually. Further, in order to ensure suitable
flexibility in the system, and to take cognizance of the re-introduction of LG elections, the prior
model of a fixed 5-year PIC will be replaced with a rolling program whereby the 5-year PIC
would be adjusted annually to reflect changing ground realities, and/or shifts in priorities. This
provision would also obviate the need for the hors-PIC funding system.

71.     As part of the annual allocation process for capital grants, municipalities will be
required to satisfy the MMCs, upon which they will be allotted their eligible annual capital grant
allocations. The annual allocation of the unconditional capital grants (horizontal) will be based
on a formula that will be communicated to the municipalities well in advance. The allocation for
the conditional Capital Grants will be based on the municipalities satisfying one or more MMCs
in addition to the MMCs for the unconditional grants (a process elaborated in the POM). Those
municipalities that satisfy the MMCs will receive their eligible grant allocations from CPSCL at
the start of the financial year. The CPSCL transfers the necessary funds to the account at the
Postal Service (CCP) maintained by the accountant of the local government (receveur), who will
in turn make payments based on payment invoices issued by the municipality.

72.      The expenditure framework assessment has revealed that the MoEF makes adequate
budget allocations every year as a matter of course for meeting the financing requirements of
the annual plans. However in the current system, municipalities do not receive any advance
information on the annual allocations, nor do they know the list of specific projects that will be
allotted funding. This makes municipal budgeting a guessing game and results in inefficient and
unaccountable allocation of budgetary resources. The Program reforms this model by requiring
that MoEF provide information on indicative Capital Grant allocations in advance (by July 15) to
municipalities, enabling them to prepare realistic and more strategic annual plans and budgets.
At the same time, the previous system of allocation of capital grants based on a project basis and
following a series of ex-ante review and control processes, had also resulted in significant delays
in project implementation cycles, leading to delays in the utilization of budget allocations and
the consequent accumulation of budget resources in the hands of the implementing entities.
Recognizing this, the MoEF has relaxed its annual fiscal year rule for transfers to municipalities
and as a result municipalities are not required to return unspent budget allocations (relating to
capital grants) at the close of the fiscal year. With the reform of the capital grant allocation
process, this issue is expected to be resolved with a more efficient financial planning and budget
execution system in place. The Program design, in consultation with the relevant Government
counterparts, will put in place adequate safeguards (primarily through the performance
assessment system) that will prevent the accumulation of unspent balances at the municipal
level, thereby mitigating fiduciary risks.

73.     Another issue regarding the Program Expenditure Framework relates to the difficulty in
obtaining a clear picture of the various fiscal and financial flows to local governments from the
existing budget documentation for a variety of reasons. First, the specific booklet for the CPSCL
is not public and is held by the government’s representative at the Caisse (administrateur).
Second, a number of financing flows are directly on the budget of line ministries and it is not
clear whether they are for operating or investment expenses, and whether there are certain
conditions attached to their use. Further, they are not processed through the CPSCL, but
directly within the Treasury TSA, and are not consolidated in terms of reporting. To address this
issue and to bring about greater transparency in local governance, the DGCPL is designing an “E-
Portal? that will be introduced under the Program and operated by DGCPL, and that will provide


                                                22
comprehensive data on the spatial, demographic, financial, and service delivery aspects of the
LGs.

74.     The sustainability of the investments being made by the LGs through the capital grants
will depend on the ability of the municipalities to improve the mobilization of their own
revenues as well as on the ability of both the government and the LGs to restructure the
municipal lending program. The LGs face an increasingly serious problem of growing municipal
debt, driven largely by the requirement that they borrow from the CPSCL to finance their capital
investment program according to the ratios described above. Consequently, although the LGs
appear to have relatively stable net operating surpluses at around 9% of recurrent revenues,
the extent of the problem is hidden by repeated rescheduling of the debt under the direction of
MoEF, and by supplements provided through exceptional transfers to cover increasing
recurrent costs, including debt obligations to the CPSCL for infrastructure investment loans (the
exceptional transfers are now regularized through the newly created Fond de Cooperacion –
FDC). Current LG arrears on CPSCL loans are illustrative. Over 120 LGs are in arrears of 90
days or more, and of these 80 LGs owe amounts in excess of Tdn 250,000. Over 30 LGs are
considered chronically indebted and unable to retire their debts. In addition to the financial
implications of the debt, the response to dealing with it to date has included: relaxing the loan to
grant ratios; introducing new operating grant transfer instruments; and providing exceptional
transfers. Furthermore, those LGs capable of raising larger amounts of OSRs and of servicing
larger loans have increasingly commanded a larger share of grant allocations on a per capita
basis. All of these responses blur the clarity of the grant system and open it up to increasingly
ad hoc functional arrangements.

75.    Discussions with the MoEF and MoI have revealed that the Government is conscious of
the serious debt overhang over municipalities and is desirous of reforming the municipal
lending system to make it more sustainable. Currently Agence Francais de Developpment (AFD)
is conducting a study to advise the CPSCL on the redesign of their lending policies and appraisal
methods, with the objective of transforming CPSCL into a financial intermediary that will
operate in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable to financial institutions.
Though there is an ongoing program for debt rescheduling for the seriously indebted
municipalities, the Program will work with DGCPL and CPSCL to put in place a financial
performance recovery plan (FPRP) to enable municipalities to undertake prudent debt
management strategies and will provide necessary incentives for their speedy implementation.
The effective implementation of the FPRPs will be incorporated into the performance
assessment system. The Program will also incentivize municipalities to improve own source
revenue mobilization by including this as a key performance area under the performance
measurement system. In addition, efforts are underway to carry out a PEFA assessment of local
governments that is expected to enhance the Public Financial Management framework of
municipalities.

76.     The proposed Program will be included in the annual budget of the Government under
the budget allocation head for MoI. Indicative allocations for capital grants will be included in
the Five Year Plans and will be communicated to the municipalities in advance of the
preparation of the annual plans and budgets. The annual capital grant allocations will be
included in the government’s annual Investment Budget and will appear in the MoI’s budget as
transfers to the CPSCL (Titre II, line 2.14). There will be specific budget lines that will provide


4   See link

http://www.finances.gov.tn/index.php?option=com_jdownloads&Itemid=712&view=finish&cid=537&cat
id=1&lang=fr p. 15 of the document

                                                23
for each of the elements of the Program. The budget lines will also specify the rules for the
utilization of the Program funds. As part of the reform to the existing system of capital grant
allocations, the MoEF will issue a separate arrête (Government order) that will define the access
conditions, as well as operating rules for the capital grants. The budget allocations for Program
elements will be transferred in a single tranche annually, no later than February 1, from the
Treasury Current Account at the Central Bank (BCT) to CPSCL, which will act as the Program
Manager for the capital grant program. CPSCL will in turn transfer the full amount of the grant
funds to the LGs’ accounts held in the Treasury on their behalf, as well as to other Program
implementing entities in accordance with the Program operating rules as detailed in the POM.


F. Description and Assessment of Program Results Framework and
   M&E

77.    The Program will be monitored and evaluated through the use of a number of M&E tools
throughout implementation, including regular reports from the LGs to the CPSCL,, the LGs’
annual statements of conformity with the MMCs, the Annual Performance Assessments (PAs) as
undertaken by the CGSP, and the Midterm Review (all the procedures and formats for
undertaking the assessments and/or reporting will be detailed in the POM and its annexes,
incuding the manual for the PA system).

78.     Under current systems, the CPSCL has maintained up-to-date, real time monitoring of
physical works in all LGs. Under the Program, an E-Portal is being established to monitor LG
operations across a number of parameters, and the CPSCL will now feed this data into the E-
Portal once it has become operational (end of year 1 of the Program). To-date, reliable basic
financial information on revenues and expenditures of LGs has been uneven. Under the
Program, the MMCs proscribe timely preparation of final accounts for all LGs, and the CPSCL
will also upload this revenue and expenditure information from the final accounts into the E-
Portal from the end of the first year.

79.     The primary source of essential information, and the major M&E tools to verify the
performance of the LGs are the annual MMCs and the results of the PAs (which will also be
entered into the E-Portal). The PA will be carried out in line with the PA Manual, which will be
finalized and adopted by the end of 2015, with its content and quality acceptable to the Bank.
The manual will provide clear definitions for each indicator, as well as comprehensive guidance
on the scoring. Adjustments, which might need to be made to the performance indicators and
scoring, will be done during a dry run of the system in 2016. Future adjustments will be made
as needed in the light of experience. and all these sources will be captured by the CPSCL in
preparing its annual Program progress report. The data from the assessments will be uploaded
onto the E-Portal, together with the revenue and expenditure and physical works progress, and
will be used both for preparing annual consolidated reports by the CPSCL, as well as for tracking
progress against projected results.

80.     Progress towards the PDO will be measured through a set of simple and measurable
indicators, utilizing the data on the E-Portal; most of them will be linked to disbursements. The
Results Framework for the Program has three key results areas that are closely inter-related.
Each results area is reflected in one or more associated Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs),
Program Actions and planned capacity support, as well as to monitoring, evaluation, and
verification activities in the Program. This provides a coordinated incentive for LGs to improve
their institutional capacity to perform their essential functions. The Results Framework is


                                               24
provided in Annex 3, and the DLIs are summarized in Table 6 below. The results and the DLIs,
and their associated results chains, are described as follows:

81.     Result Area 1: Capital Grant System Reformed: The targeted outcomes of the
Program in this Intermediate Results area are: (a) Decree 97-1135 is amended; (b) the LGs are
given timely confirmation of their capital grant allocation for the forthcoming year, so that they
can utilize it effectively in finalizing their municipal investment plans and their capital budgets,
and the funds are transferred in a timely manner to their accounts for application to the funding
of their budgeted investments; and (c) the eligible LGs meet the required MMCs in order to
qualify for disbursement of their grant entitlement. The targeted outcomes in this result area
are addressed by DLIs 1, 2 and 3. DLI 1 stipulates that the Reformed Capital Grant system is
fully operational. DLI 2 stipulates dates for final confirmation of each LG’s annual grant
allocation (December 1) and for the release of funds to the LGs (February 1). The adoption of
the Decree is pivotal as it comprises a series of clauses that regulate all the elements of reform
that the Program seeks to support (the adoption of an objective allocation formula; the timely
release of the annual allocations; the provision that determination of the use of grant funds is
solely at the discretion fo the LG; that the LG should demonstrate effective participatory
investment planning; the delinking of the grants from the loans; the phased introduction of the
performance assessment system; and the requirement that the assessment be undertaken by an
independent agency and that its findings be made public in a timely manner). DLI 3 addresses
the other outcome of this Intermediate Result by stipulating annual targets for the minimum
number of LGs satisfying the MMCs.

82.     Results Area 2: LG institutional performance improved to deliver municipal
infrastructure and services: The targeted outcomes in this results area are: (a) the LG
performance assessment system established and fully operational; (b) that the LGs are
implementing their Annual Investment Plans on schedule; (c) that capacity support to the LGs is
provided according to their annual capacity support plans; and (d) that information on the grant
transfer that each LG receives and on the results of the LG’s Performance Assessment are
publicly accessible. The DLIs address these outcomes as follows: DLI 4 sets out annual
benchmarks to be achieved for phasing in and making operational the performance assessment
system ; DLI 5 stipulates the percentage of LGs achieving annually rising minimum levels of
expenditures on capital works specified in the LGs’ investment plans; DLI 6 takes account of the
number of LGs that have implemented their annual capacity development plans; and DLI 8
addresses the outcomes sought as follows: by the second year it requires that the E-portal be up
and running, and being populated with relevant data; and for years three through five it scales
up the number of LGs for which financial audits have been completed to 80% by 2018.

83.     Results Area 3: Improved access to basic municipal infrastructure in
disadvantaged neighborhoods: The expected outcome under this results area is improved
access to basic municipal infrastructure in disadvantaged neighborhoods within the 114
targeted municipalities. DLI 7 requires that the Investment Plans by the targeted LGs for
investment in the selected disadvantaged neighborhoods are executed according to schedule,
and provides annual targets to be met measured in percentage works started and percentage
works completed, with 100% of construction in all targeted neighborhoods completed by the
final year.




                                                25
G. Disbursement Linked Indicators

84.     The DLIs, elaborated above, have been selected to reflect critical elements of
performance required to achieve the PDOs as well as the intermediate outcomes, as reflected in
the results areas above.

Table 2: Disbursement Linked Indicators


                                                                             Estimated disbursement
 Disbursement Linked Indicator
                                                                             amounts (US$ million)
 DLI 1: The Borrower has replaced Decree No 97-1135 and restructured its
                                                                                        30
 capital grant system accordingly.
 DLI 2: Timely communication to LGs of the indicative Capital Block Grants              20
 (CBGs) allocation and timely transfer of CBGs to eligible LGs by the
 Borrower.

 DLI 3: Acceptable percentage of LGs have met the MMCs and received                     30
 CBGs.

 DLI 4: The Borrower has designed and implemented an independent LG                     90
 performance assessment (PA) system and required percentage of LGs have
 met the threshold PA scores.
 DLI 5: Required percentage of LGs have executed their Annual Investment
                                                                                        45
 Plans on schedule in terms of expenditures.
 DLI 6: Required percentage of LGs have received capacity-building
                                                                                        25
 support in accordance with their annual capacity development plan.
 DLI 7: Targeted number of people living in targeted disadvantaged
                                                                                        40
 neighborhoods have benefited from improved municipal infrastructure.

 DLI 8: Transparency and access to information have been improved.                      20

 Total                                                                                  300




85.      The Program Results Framework and DLIs represent a consistent results chain across
all levels of government and create a complementary set of incentives necessary to achieve the
PDO. At the Program level, each set of DLIs provides an essential complement to the others. For
example, institutional strengthening is a critical requirement for both infrastructure delivery
and sustainability, and must be supported by an enabling policy environment. The selection of
specific DLIs reflects the assessment of critical challenges facing local governments and national
government that are considered to be essential to the achievement of Program results.
Moreover, dedicated local management capacity is essential to effective local planning and sub-
project execution, while national oversight is essential to strengthening local accountability as
measured through the annual evaluation and assessment process.

86.      The disbursement amounts associated with the DLIs are weighted to reflect these
mutually reinforcing relationships between better use of public money, improved local
institutional performance and accountability, increased municipal infrastructure investment,
effective asset management, and access to fiscal transfer and LG performance information.


                                                 26
87.     The elaboration of the DLIs, the DLI verification protocols and the basis for the
calculation of disbursements are provided in Annex 4.



H. Program Economic Evaluation

88.     The following economic analysis contains several elements. It provides an analysis of
the development impact of the Program through economic return, alternative project, risk, and
fiscal sustainability analyses of this project. It outlines measures to facilitate continued
economic analysis of the project, provides a rationale for public sector provision and financing,
and explains World Bank value-added.

Development Impact
89.     The expected development impacts of the Program are improvements in: the
infrastructure and services provided by local Governments (LGs) in Tunisia for all of their
residents; LG capability to deliver infrastructure and services; and the relationship between
Tunisians and their Government. Despite gains in access to infrastructure and basic services in
Tunisia over the past two decades, large disparities remain in access to basic services
administered by LGs (namely public sanitation networks and local roads). Approximately 25
percent of Tunisians are disconnected from a public sanitation network with substantial
differences in access within and across LGs.5 Poor sanitation network connections can lead to
higher incidences of illnesses such as diarrhea compromising the health of relevant populations
and their financial resources due to the costs associated with these illnesses. In 2004, a study
estimated that the annual costs associated with diarrheal incidence in Tunisia were between 11
and 56 million TND.6 Citizen discontent with services under the mandate of LGs was indicated
in a recent survey conducted by the Bank on Tunisian citizen perceptions of Government
provision of services. Poor local road networks are associated with constrained access to
markets. The January 2011 Revolution highlighted the grievances of marginalized populations
in Tunisia and the large-scale impact neglecting those grievances can have on development and
prosperity across the country; as such, the dual goals of helping marginalized Tunisians attain a
minimum standard of quality of life and improving the relationship between citizens and
Government are urgent priorities for the Government. More detailed economic analyses of the
project are provided below.

Economic Rate of Return
90.     The measurement of economic rates of return (ERRs) for LG strengthening programs is
not straightforward for several reasons. Reform of the inter-governmental capital grant system
is designed to empower LGs and their citizens, hence the specific investment projects that will
be financed through the grant(s) supported through this Program are unknown at this stage.
Furthermore, the projects that can be undertaken by LGs with the support of this Program –
particularly local roads, drainage network connections, and street lighting – are small-scale with
many of the benefits non-rigorously quantifiable. The Government has not mandated economic
analyses for these types of projects in the past, hence no data exists that could be used to
quantify the benefits of similar projects in Tunisia. Rate of return analysis is even more difficult
to do in a rigorous and credible manner for institutional development strengthening activities.

5For instance, only 7% of homes in Tunis have no connection to the public sewerage system while 88% of homes in Sidi Bouzid do
not have access to public sanitation service (WB 2013).




                                                             27
91.     Nevertheless, there is evidence of positive returns for some similar Local Government
support projects that have been supported by the World Bank in other countries. In Uganda, an
assessment of the first Local Government Development Program (LGDP1) found that the ERR of
the small infrastructure projects provided through LGs was above 12 percent.7 A similar project
in the Philippines – the Local Government Finance and Development Project – yielded an ERR of
35 percent.8 Although the context and the exact bundle of investment projects vary, these
findings indicate that if well-designed and implemented, this Program could generate positive
economic returns. It is proposed that feasibility studies for any investments estimated to cost
more than US$1.0 million undertaken by the LGs under the Program will require ERRs to be
included and this will be captured as part of the annual PAs. It is also proposed that a program
for undertaking social and economic impact analyses of selected LGs, designed to provide
indicative data on qualitative outcomes, would be undertaken during the course of Program
implementation.

Productive Efficiency
92.      The proposed reform of the inter-governmental capital grant transfer system and the
institutional development strengthening activities are expected to increase the productive
efficiency of LGs. Productive efficiency has been achieved in settings where citizens were better
able to hold LGs to account, where fewer tiers of Government were involved in service delivery
and the tier providing the services had better knowledge of local costs.9 World Bank studies
have found that in many cases, infrastructure delivered in decentralized contexts was of higher
quality and was completed at lower cost than in more centralized settings, and that results-
based approaches to municipal development achieved more sustained impacts.10 For instance,
the cost effectiveness of local roads produced in the Uganda LGDP-I project was in the range of
32.6 - 38.9 percent of the total investment.11 Furthermore, the greater scope for decision-
making, technical support to enhance learning by doing, and accountability loops introduced
through this project are expected to help increase the organizational performance of LGs.

Allocative efficiency
    93. Greater discretion12 over the use of their resources is expected to improve the allocative
    efficiency of LG infrastructure and service provision. International experience demonstrates
    that LGs are capable of better allocating resources according to citizen preferences than central
    Governments when they have adequate discretion over the use of resources and when citizens
    can monitor local Government performance.13

Alternative Project Considerations
94.     Several alternatives could have been pursued in place of the proposed Program. One
option would have been for the Government to continue with business as usual. Under this
scenario, the deterioration of the provision of LG services and infrastructure, and the financial
health of LGs was likely to continue. Alternatively, the Government could have pursued an
emergency project to provide basic infrastructure and services through central authorities
rather than through LGs. This measure could have been justified on the grounds of the urgent
need to address these basic needs of citizens and alleviate social tensions associated with the

7 World Bank ICR 2008
8 World Bank ICR 2009
9 Kahkonen and Lanyi 2001
10 Martinez-Vasquez 2011, IEG 2008, and UNCDF 2008.
11 World Bank ICR 2008
12 Combined with greater citizen participation and enhanced accountability mechanisms.
13 For example, local budgets better matched citizen priorities after further decentralization in Uganda & the Philippines (Martinez-

Vasquez 2011).



                                                                28
2011 Revolution. However, it would have further undermined LG authority. It also would have
foregone a critical opportunity to foster accountability mechanisms between citizens and the
Government. Other program design parameters could have been altered, and several such
considerations were made during Program preparation, but the proposed design reflects a
consensus regarding the design that promoted the greatest development impact given existing
constraints.

 Rationale for Public Sector Provision and Financing

95.    There is a strong rationale for public financing of the activities supported under the
Program. Specifically, the rationale for public sector provision and financing is that: (i) the
investments are local public goods; and (ii) no negative substitution effects are anticipated.

96.     Most of the Program investments are in public goods. The municipal investments eligible
for support under the unconditional and conditional grants are mostly local public goods, and
therefore likely to be undersupplied by the market. These include municipal roads, street
lighting, drainage, water supply and sanitation, solid waste management, and local social and
economic infrastructure. The provision of these goods is under the responsibility of LGs as per
the 2014 Constitution, in keeping with commitment to achieve a more efficient and closer
administration to citizens.

97.     No negative substitution effects. The Program focuses on improving the efficiency of
transfers for infrastructure investment and capacity of LGs to select and implement projects. It
is therefore not expected to lead to any substitution effects on infrastructure investment. The
projects will continue to be selected through guidelines for preparation and evaluation of
subprojects outlined in the Program operations manual, 14 although LGs will be given full
responsibility and autonomy for the selection, preparation and execution of local investments
supported by the grants. The allocation and implementation of funds is therefore expected to
improve with the project, and is not expected to have any new negative substitution effects.

World Bank Value-Added
98.     The World Bank adds value to the Program through financing, relevant and operational
expertise, and by its ability to help leverage additional resources.

99.     The institution has extensive experience supporting inter-governmental fiscal transfer
system reforms, programs to strengthen LG capabilities, and programs to increase access to
municipal services and infrastructure in Tunisia and around the world. The World Bank has
supported consecutive municipal development programs in Tunisia since 1992. More broadly,
the World Bank has supported decentralization efforts in more than 89 countries in the world
since the 1990s, including in Morocco, Jordan and West Bank and Gaza in the Middle East.15 An
IEG assessment of a subset of World Bank decentralization operations found that the impact of
many of these operations was weak in the 1990s but improved considerably in the 2000s.16
This improvement may be attributable in part to World Bank staff disseminating lessons
learned as appropriate to other projects over time. These lessons range from the importance of
pairing certain reforms to the necessity of having effective performance monitoring systems in
place and in use. Such lessons have been reviewed and have informed the World Bank’s
engagement with Tunisia on this Program.




15   IEG 2007
16   IEG 2008

                                              29
100.    Furthermore, the World Bank can help relevant parties in the Government leverage
support for its LG development program as it undertakes this set of reforms in a politically
challenging environment. Reform of the distribution of national wealth, and of formal linkages
and practices that change the relationship between different levels of Government and between
Government and society are by definition challenging to accomplish. The current socio-political
context provides both an impetus and a constraint to the successful introduction and
implementation of such reforms. The involvement of a relatively neutral actor – the World Bank
– in helping facilitate the national dialogue and deliberations needed to define and introduce
these reforms can help accelerate and improve the outcomes of these efforts. Furthermore, the
Bank’s commitment to this reform program has helped attract additional development partners
to support selected aspects of the reform program.


I. Technical risk rating
101.     Although the CPSCL, in charge of day-to-day management of the Program, has significant
experience implementing similar municipal investment programs with World Bank support, and has
operated in concert with all the LGs to be supported under the Program, the overall risk rating is high
due to country circumstances, the fiduciary implications of shifting from an ex ante to an ex post
system of oversight; and the emphasis on improved performance by the 264 LG stakeholders for
undertaking functions that currently represent their weakest areas of capability. The shift from a
tutelle system to one of decentralized authority and accountability is transformational, and in a
country in political transition represents a high level of risk.




                                                  30
                         Annex 1: Detailed Program Description
    I.      The Government Program

1. Recognizing that decentralization is a longer term process, the Government has proposed a
phased approach to LG reform, taking into account the importance of showing results on the ground
now. The Government is therefore introducing a near-term program comprising key elements that:
(i) can be immediately and practically introduced; (ii) lay the groundwork and have the maximum
impact possible for introducing key reforms embedded in the decentralization objectives of the
Constitution; (iii) focus on strengthening the capability of LGs to be better able to deliver local
municipal services, and to do so in a manner that is fully accountable to their citizens; (iv) address
disparities between LGs and regions in local service levels; and (v) at a minimum sustain planned
levels of investment in local municipal services while creating the platform for future scaling up.

2. Specifically, the Government has recognized that the restructuring of the capital grant system for
transferring investment resources to LGs, governed by Decree 97-1135, can be undertaken early on
and offers significant opportunities to establish greater accountability between LGs and their
citizens, as well as concurrently building the institutional capacity of the LGs to better deliver local
services. The revision of the Decree is pivotal to effective operation of the LG capital grant system,
and lies at the heart of the reforms necessary to address the issues identified above and respond to the
decentralization mandate of the constitution. The changes to the decree that are necessary to
underpin the first phase of the Government’s decentralization reforms include:


   Separating the access of LGs to capital grants from the requirement to borrow and to
    mobilize own source revenues, thus removing one of the key drivers of growing municipal
    fiscal stress, as well as leveling the playing field so that the fiscally stronger LGs don’t gain
    disproportionate shares of the grant;
   Ensuring transparency in the capital grant allocation system and enhancing accountability
    between LGs and their citizens by introducing formula-based annual transfers that are
    constructed around objective, measurable criteria, and that ensure predictability of fund
    flows in order to enhance efficient planning by the LGs;
   Providing timely indicative annual allocations to the LGs to facilitate their ability to
    undertake participative municipal investment planning and efficient use of resources;
   Progressively introducing an independent, annual performance assessment system to
    strengthen LGs’ institutional capacities for better service delivery and to facilitate greater
    citizen access to information;
   Publishing the findings of the performance assessment in a timely manner; and
   Removing ex ante central controls over capital grant planning and utilization, thus enabling
    use of capital grants to be determined at the discretion of LGs.

3. In this context, the Government program consists of delivering municipal infrastructure services
in an accountable and responsive manner through a mix of grants, own source revenues and loans, as
well as institutional strengthening of the 264 municipalities for the period 2014-2019. Through this
program, the Government intends to shift from a purely “infrastructure delivery? approach to a
greater focus on LG performance and accountability. To this end, the Government’s program aims
at: (i) strengthening LG institutional capabilities; (ii) transforming their relationship with their
citizens through measures that are designed to foster transparency, participation and accountability;
and (iii) improving the municipal infrastructure delivery with special attention to disadvantaged
communities.




                                                  31
4. The Government program consists of three sub-programs, namely:


    Subprogram 1: Municipal infrastructure delivery;
    Subprogram 2: Improving access to municipal infrastructure in disadvantaged
     neighborhoods;
    Subprogram 3: Capacity support for improved LG institutional development and
     accountability.

Subprogram 1: Municipal infrastructure delivery (US$591 million)

5. Consistent with past practice under the PIC, the subprogram involves the preparation of five-year
investment plans for each LG to deliver municipal infrastructure. Activities under the subprogram
will include consultancy services (including feasibility and engineering studies, and implementation
support), and civil works directly linked to LGs core mandates such as roads and paving,
construction, rehabilitation and upgrading, street lighting, sewerage extension/connection to public
network, storm water drainage, solid waste collection, parks and some recreation facilities, markets,
and other environmental improvements.

6. The financing framework for the activities under this subprogram includes three sources of
finance: (i) LG contribution; (ii) capital grants from central Government; and (iii) investment loans
provided by the CPSCL. These sources of finance are discussed in the following paragraphs.

7. Capital Block Grants for Municipal Infrastructure Delivery (US$203 million). The capital
block grants will be allocated on the basis of a formula, with their use determined solely at the
discretion of each LG (without any ex ante controls) and validated through a participatory planning
approach that contributes to determining investment priorities. Final investment decisions on the use
of the grant funds will be reflected in the LG’s five-year (PIC) and annual investment plans, and are
limited to municipal infrastructure works and equipment that fall within the functional mandates of
the LGs. The funds will be distributed to the LGs by the CPSCL, which will administer the grants
on behalf of the state. The LGs will be responsible for planning and implementing sub-projects
financed by the unconditional capital grants, and the grant funds will be reflected in the revenues and
expenditures of the LG annual budgets, with the corresponding assets being incorporated into their
asset registers. Sub-project implementation will be undertaken by LGs with the support, if needed, of
deconcentrated public agencies and/or private entities.

8. The unconditional capital grant will be accessed by all 264 LGs in Tunisia, as well as any new
municipalities that may be constituted during implementation of the program. The funding will be
spread over five years, ending in 2019, with the annual distribution of the 2014-2019 five-year
budget envelope phased according to an assessment of the likely expenditure profile based on
experience of prior PIC expenditure patterns. Based on these principles, Table 1.1 provides an
example of a distribution profile over the five-year plan period that could be used to determine
annual allocations of the grant funds to the LGs.


    Table 1.1: Example of an Annual Distribution of the Unconditional Grant over the
                           Five-Year Program Cycle (US$221)
         2015             2016                 2017                2018                 2019
    %       US$      %         US$        %        US$        %         US$        %        US$
    10      22.1     15       33.15       25      55.25       25       55.25       25      55.25




                                                 32
9. Using a distribution schedule along the lines of the principles suggested in the table, and applying
to it, for each LG, the allocation formula that is being established under the new Decree (see para 31
below), will then determine the indicative annual amount of the grant that each LG will be entitled to
receive over the five-year period, subject to it satisfying the performance requirements every year.
The allocation formula is to be calculated using the following criteria: 80% is determined by
population based on data provided by the National Institute of Statistics; 20% is determined by the
fiscal capacity of each LG according to its maximum potential for revenue generation from local taxes
and fees, based on data and analysis provided by MoEF.

10. The unconditional capital grants will operate according to the following principles:


    a) a PIC whereby each LG is allocated an indicative envelope of resources available to it for
       capital investments over a five year period, to be transferred annually at the beginning
       of each CY;
    b) the allocation formula is to be made public, as are the annual allocations to each LG;
    c) the allocation formula is built around objective, measurable criteria that also include
       equalization considerations;
    d) use of the funds is discretionary to the receiving LG and is not subject to ex ante review
       by central agencies;
    e) access to the funds, which can be integrated with other untied LG revenues at the local
       level, is not tied to other parallel fiscal or financial instruments;
    f) LG performance is assessed annually, ex post, by an independent evaluator, whose
       findings are made public and are presented comparatively across all LGs; and
    g) application of performance standards to determine eligibility to receive the grant funds,
       and that comprise two parts: minimum mandatory criteria (MMCs) based on selected
       existing legislation and/or regulation (see para 32); and an annual, independent
       performance assessment that takes into account broader considerations including key
       aspects of the following three areas: governance, sustainability and management (see
       para 38).

 11. The total unconditional capital grants for municipal infrastructure amount to US$5.7 per
 capita/year. Key investment activities of the program include road construction, rehabilitation and
 upgrading, street lighting, urban drainage/sewerage and other environmental improvements, solid
 waste collection and street cleaning, parks and some recreation facilities, markets and
 slaughterhouses.

 12. Local Government Contribution (US$129 million). In parallel with the above capital grants,
 the Government’s 2014-2019 PIC envisages significant increases in the level of LG contributions to
 investment in municipal infrastructure. The Government recognizes that reforming the own source
 revenue system will take time as it involves major policy changes, and is therefore focusing on
 opportunities for improving local revenue collection rates within existing tax and fee regimes.

 13. Municipal Investment Loans (US$259 million): In addition, LGs capable of borrowing will
 have access to the CPSCL credit line as a potential funding source to implement their municipal
 investment plans. The loans from the CPSCL serve to maximize leverage of resources available to
 LGs for investing in municipal infrastructure. In parallel, the Government is introducing reforms
 under the Decree and in the CPSCL lending guidelines in order to establish a stable balance between
 maximizing borrowings by the LGs and maintaining their financial viability, as well s the stability of
 the CPSCL.




                                                  33
Subprogram 2: Access to municipal infrastructure in disadvantaged neighborhoods
(US$150 million)

14. Under this subprogram, the Government will provide targeted/conditional grants directed
towards investments that represent national policy priorities (in this case, for the new PIC period, to
improve access to municipal services in disadvantaged neighborhoods).

15. Due to resource constraints and the uneven distribution of disadvantaged neighborhoods across
LGs in the country, a regional consultation process (involving elected officials from the National
Constituent Assembly, representatives from regional and local Governments, civil society, and
deconcentrated agencies) was undertaken to pre-identify neighborhoods and municipalities that
would qualify to receive these grant funds during the CY2014-2019 cycle. Municipalities currently
covered by ongoing urban upgrading programs are not targeted by the Program. As a result of these
consultations, 144 LGs have been identified.

16. Activities under the subprogram will include consultancy services (including feasibility and
engineering studies, and support to implementation services) and civil works for the provision of
basic infrastructure such as roads and paving, street lighting, sewerage extension/connection to the
public network, and storm water drainage in 229 selected, disadvantaged neighborhoods located in
the 144 LGs.

17. Since 1992 Tunisia has been implementing national programs targeting the upgrading of
disadvantaged neighborhoods with the provision of basic municipal infrastructure (PNRQP).
However, most of the urban upgrading sub-projects were identified and prioritized by the center and
implemented by the Agence de Rehabilitation et de Renovation Urbaine (ARRU), a dedicated
national agency. LGs were merely consulted but had to co-finance up to 30 percent of the total cost.

18. The new approach will introduce major changes to past practices, including: (i) full ownership
by, and responsibility of, LGs for preparing and implementing the investments in disadvantaged
neighborhoods as part of their municipal investment programs; (ii) substantive consultative and
participatory approaches for neighborhood identification/prioritization and for determining
neighborhood priority investment needs; (iii) highly subsidized financing aligned with the financial
capacity of LGs in order to avoid further exacerbating municipal finance stress in accessing capital
grants; and (iv) provision of just in time support to LG to implement sub-projects and develop
greater capacity from the implementation experience.

19. The conditional grant allocation over the program period amounts to US$ 142 million or an
average of about US$ 1 million per LG which represents around US$284/beneficiary
(US$1420/household).

Subprogram 3: Capacity support for improved LG institutional development and
accountability (US$10 million)

20. The Government’s program upgrades the system of capacity support for LGs in order for them to
achieve improved institutional performance targets. The capacity support program would contribute
to the LGs ability to achieve the standards required under the performance assessment system to help
them access their full entitlement to capital grants. Under this subprogram, LGs receive capacity
development and technical support to prepare and implement their plans via training programs
offered by CFAD and technical assistance from regional offices of the CPSCL and line agencies of
central Government, as well as through local consultancy services.

21. An allocation of US$10 million will be committed through the national budget for the financing
of this subprogram. Half of this amount is earmarked for technical assistance through framework
contracts to be signed at the level of each regional office of the CPSCL for the provision of on

                                                 34
 demand technical assistance to LGs. This program being demand-based, the Government envisages
 the commitment of additional resources if assessed necessary during the Program’s Mid -Term
 Review.

 22. The Government program is summarized below in Table 1.2, with the outlined area of activities
 targeted for inclusion under the PforR Program.



                23. Table 1.2: Government’s program and PforR Program scope

 Subprogram 1                        Subprogram 2                        Subprogram 3
 Municipal        infrastructure Improving     access     to Capacity     support  for
 delivery                        municipal infrastructure in improved LG institutional
                                 disadvantaged               development          and
                                 neighborhoods               accountability
 TND 887 million (USD 591 TND 225 million (US$ 150 TND 15 million (US$ 10 million)
 million)                 million)

 Unconditional Capital GrantsConditional Capital Grants                  Capacity      building   and
 TND 305 million (US$ 203    TND 225 million (US$150                     technical support TND 15
 million)                    million)                                    million (US$ 10 million)
                             Grant allocation to LGs for
 Formula-based grant allocation
                                                                         Demand-based            capacity
                             specified investments in line
 to LGs subject to their meeting
                                                                         support to be provided to LGs
 annual Minimum Mandatory    with      national    priorities
                                                                         on a just-in-time basis
 Conditions     (MMCs)       (currently
                            and               for       local
                             infrastructure
 achieving satisfactory annual                             in
 performance scores          disadvantaged neighborhoods),
                             subject to their meeting a
 LGs            Contribution
                             Minimum              Mandatory
 TND 193 million (estimate)
                             Condition (MMC) grant access
 LGs Contribution to the
                             requirement
 investments from their net
 savings

 Municipal investment loans
 TND 389 million (estimate)
 Investment loans to LGs from
 CPSCL


II      Program PforR: the Program

 24. Development Objective: The objectives of the Program are: (i) to strengthen Local
 Governments’ performance to deliver municipal infrastructure, and (ii) to improve access to services
 in targeted disadvantaged neighborhoods.

 25. The Program will support most of the Government program activities with focus on capital
 grants for municipal infrastructure delivery and the institutional and capacity building elements:

 26. Duration: Program implementation period is from 2014 to 2019.



                                                 35
27. Geographic scope. The Program will finance activities in the same geographical areas (the
Program Area) covered by the Government: all 264 municipalities (LGs), plus any new ones that
may be constituted during Program implementation.

28. Sub-programs to be supported. Based on the need identified during the preparation of the
Government program and for increased selectivity of Bank support, the Program encompasses three
primary activities: (a) capital block grants for municipal infrastructure delivery; (b) targeted capital
grant for improving access to municipal infrastructure in disadvantaged neighborhoods; and (c)
capacity support for improved LG institutional development.

A      Capital Block Grants for Municipal Infrastructure

29. The capital block grants would be performance-based to incentivize LGs to achieve improved
standards of institutional performance in key areas of their municipal functions. The target would be
for 60 percent of LGs to achieve threshold scores (levels to be determined during preparation of the
performance assessment manual) or more on their performance evaluation for the fifth year of the
Program. To achieve the targeted outcomes, the Program provides resources under the unconditional
grant sub-window for investments in local infrastructure services, with funding levels modulated by
each LG’s ability to meet annual performance standards applicable to unconditional grants as
measured by annual Minimum Mandatory Conditions (MMCs) and Performance Assessments (PAs)
undertaken according to agreed criteria.

30. Under the Program, all 264 LGs will receive capital block grants from the Government to
support priority investments in urban infrastructure that have been identified and reflected in their
participatory five year and annual LG investment plans. The LGs will be responsible for planning
and implementing sub-projects financed with capital block grant funds, and grant funds will be
reflected in the revenues and expenditures of their annual budgets.

31. Capital block grants will be allocated to the LGs according to a transparent and predictable
formula. These allocations are weighted by LG population and fiscal potential (80/20), subject to the
application of an adjustment factor to ensure that each municipality will receive at least the
equivalent of the envelope received during the previous PIC. These allocations provide an average
annual allocation of US$5.7 per capita over the period of the Program, representing roughly a similar
level of investment compared to the current PIC (adjusted for population growth and inflation).

32. These allocations are for planning purposes and the actual annual disbursement of funds will be
made on the basis of verification of: (i) annually meeting the Minimum Mandatory Conditions
(MMCs); and (ii) each LG’s performance as measured against a set of criteria. Specifically, the
performance system consists of two levels of review, one comprising the MMCs, which will be
applied to determining each LG’s access to grant funds in 2015 and every year thereafter under the
Program, the other an annual Performance Assessment (PA) process which will be applied to
determining the level of individual LG access to grant funds in 2017 for budget year 2018, and every
year thereafter.

Minimum Mandatory Conditions (MMCs)

33. The performance criteria to be met to satisfy the MMCs are derived from essential, minimum
legal and regulatory provisions and also include core fiduciary requirements to assure satisfactory ex
post oversight, as well as establish the basis for some of the performance standards to be included in
the Performance Assessments (PAs). To this end the criteria comprising the MMCs include the
following:




                                                  36
      The municipal budget for the forthcoming year has been adopted by the Municipal
       Council by December 31;
      The annual financial statement of the LG for the previous year has been submitted to the
       Cour des Comptes for audit no later than May 31 of the current year;
      The annual municipal investment plan for the forthcoming year was produced according
       to satisfactory participatory procedures;
      The LG’s Procurement Plan for the forthcoming year has been uploaded onto the
       National Procurement website by December 31; and
      The Municipal Council has approved and the mayor has signed a Memorandum of
       Understanding with the Government through the CPSCL that will spell out the roles and
       responsibilities for both.

34. A LG that is unable to satisfy all the MMCs is held to be ineligible to receive any grant resources
for the forthcoming year. However, the funds remain assigned to the LG’s account and are
reapportioned to it over the remaining years of the Program. In the event the LG fails to qualify for
two years running, the funds due it in the forthcoming year are returned to the pool of funds to be
used for allocation to all the LGs.


Annual Performance Assessment

35. An annual and independent Performance Assessment (PA) will be progressively introduced with
effective implementation for the 264 LGs during the third year of the Program. During the first two
years, the Program will support the detailed design of the PA Manual, the preparation and
organization of information and awareness events targeting LGs and supporting agencies; and the
implementation in 2016 of a dry run. The operation of the performance system will be refined and
adjusted as necessary during the preparation of the PA manual and to take account of the experience
gained through the dry run, but will remain consistent with the principles described above. Once
fully operational (in 2017 to influence disbursements to LGs in 2018), the PAs will be implemented
annually, and will be managed by an independent agency – the General Controller of Public Services
(Contrôleur Général des Services Publics, CGSP).

36. Once the PAs have been phased in in 2017 (for application to the 2018 grant allocation), both
elements of the performance system (the MMCs and the PAs) will be applied. Thus, from year 2018
onwards, each LG, on satisfying the MMCs, will receive a disbursement of 40 percent of the funds
available to them as determined by the allocation formula. Those LGs obtaining a threshold score
(the threshold level is to be determined during preparationof the performance assessment manual) on
their PAs will receive the remaining 60 percent of their allocation. For LGs unable to achieve the
requisite score, the remaining share of their allocation for that year will be combined with the
remaining funds they have been indicatively allocated under the five-year envelope and will be
apportioned as per Table 1.3 for allocation in subsequent years. In the event a LG fails to meet the
70 percent score in two successive years, the funds for the forthcoming year will be reallocated for
the remainder of the PIC period amongst all the LGs.

37. The PA exercise will start on May 1 of each year and be completed (including all reports
required to present findings and recommendations) by August 31. The findings of the PA would
then be applied in time for the disbursements of grant funds in CY 2018 and all subsequent fiscal
years. The differential phasing in of the MMCs and the PAs over four years, and the different
weightings assigned between the MMCs and the PAs will have significant impacts in determining
annual disbursement levels. Table 1.3 demonstrates the proportionate share of the annual
disbursement that is determined by satisfying the MMC requirements and the proportionate share
governed by the PA outcome, and sets out the disbursement profile based on 100 percent compliance
of all LGs with the MMCs and the PAs.



                                                 37
Table 1.3: Annual Unconditional Grants Disbursement Mediated by the MMCs and the PAs


       CY             2015              2016                 2017            2018            2019
    US$ Total         22.1              33.15                44.2           60.775          60.775
     %/US$        %       US$      %        US$          %      US$     %       US$     %        US$
     MMCs        100     22.1     100      33.15     100        44.2    40     24.31    40      24.31
      PAs         0          0      0           0        0          0   60     36.465   60     36.465



38. The PA component of the performance system will be detailed in a Performance
Assessment Manual that will be finalized and approved by June 30, 2015 and will be made fully
operational in 2017 for determining disbursements for 2018. The objectives, contents and
procedures of the PA manual will be introduced to the LGs through a series of regional workshops
during the remainder of 2015. It will then be tested in 2016, in the form of a full-scale “dry run?, and
the results will be published to enable the LGs to determine their performance and, using capacity
support offered under the Program, prepare an Action Plan to address areas where improvements are
required. Concurrently, the process and content of the PA as operated under the dry run will be
evaluated by an independent study commissioned by the CGSP and the PA manual will be adjusted
to take account of the findings of the study.

39. The PA will address the following areas of LG competence:

       Governance, comprising consideration of: (i) participatory planning and budgeting; (ii)
        transparency in LG operations (access to information regarding: capital
        expenditures/consistency with budget, contract awards, investment implementation
        progress, financial statements/audits); (iii) procurement (timeliness, efficiency and in
        accordance with regulations); (iv) safeguards (planning and implementation
        procedures) and (v) response to complaints;
       Sustainability, including: (i) asset inventory in place, asset management including O&M
        plans established annually and implemented; (ii) where required, Financial Recovery
        Plans (FRPs) prepared and being implemented; (iii) own source revenue collection
        enhancement plans prepared and being implemented; and (iv) preparation and
        implementation of capacity building plans; and
       Management addressing: investment implementation; financial management practices
        and satisfactory audits.

B.    Conditional Capital Grants for Improving Access to Municipal Infrastructure in
Disadvantaged Neighborhoods

40. The conditional grant sub-window provides resources for investments in local infrastructure
services in targeted disadvantaged neighborhoods, with funding levels modulated by the participating
LGs’ ability to meet MMCs applicable to conditional grants that comprise the basic grant access
element of the performance assessment system.




                                                    38
 41. This conditional capital grant represent a vehicle for the Government to address policy priorities.
 Currently Government priority is focused on upgrading service levels in disadvantaged
 neighborhoods. A total of TDN225 million has been allocated under conditional grants for the PIC
 2014-2019 period for this purpose. Due to resource constraints and the uneven distribution of
 disadvantaged neighborhoods across LGs in the country, a regional consultation process (involving
 elected officials, city representatives, civil society, deconcentrated agencies) was undertaken to pre-
 identify neighborhoods and LGs that would qualify to receive these grant funds during the CY2014-
 2019 cycle. LGs currently covered by ongoing urban upgrading programs are not targeted by the
 Program.

 42. As a result of this regional consultation/selection process, 144 LGs comprising 229
 neighborhoods have been pre-identified, and a preliminary estimate of the infrastructure
 requirements boundaries, number of households and costs has been established. To update these
 estimates and confirm their viability and scope, each participating LG will prepare a pre-feasibility
 study that will include participation of the affected communities, and will take into account the
 services to be improved, the size of the population and the level of poverty (requiring a brief survey),
 the levels and construction standards to be applied, the boundary of the selected neighborhoods,
 preliminary cost estimates, and the timeline for preparing and implementing the investments.
 Subject to the findings of the pre-feasibility studies, the LG councils will consider and, if approved,
 include the proposed investments within the framework of their annual plans and budgets.

 43. The application of the performance system to the conditional grants is limited to the MMCs and
 then only on a one-time basis for the year when the construction of the approved upgrading plans is
 projected to commence. The same above MMCs for the unconditional apply the conditional grants.
 However, they are applied differentially. For the unconditional grants, it is an annual requirement
 and each LG has to meet the MMCs relevant for the forthcoming year in order to access any of the
 unconditional grant funds. Under the conditional grants, it is applied on a neighborhood-by-
 neighborhood basis for each targeted LG, and is a one-time requirement to access the conditional
 grants for that neighborhood. The MMCs relevant for the year in which the conditional grants are
 being sought are applied, but subject to the following additional provision: the completion of a pre-
 feasibility study (according to a format included in the Program Operations Manual) by each
 participating LG, and its approval by the LG council.

C.      Capacity support for improved LG institutional development and accountability

 44. The Government’s approach to capacity building in the LG sector is to address needs of the LGs,
 themselves, as well as key elements of the institutional framework, including operating systems,
 within which the LGs function. Higher levels of Government have a critical role to play in creating
 an enabling environment for municipalities, through providing sound regulatory frameworks,
 capacity support, and regular and effective appraisal and oversight.

 45. The capacity support would contribute to the LGs ability to achieve the standards required under
 the performance assessment system in order for them to access their full entitlement to the capital
 grants. It will focus on the key support required to assist municipalities to achieve MMCs and
 performance criteria, and thus contribute to the achievement of the Program Development Objective.

 46. Given the heterogeneous demand from municipalities, capacity and technical support will be
 provided based on an annual LG Capacity Development Plan (LGCDP) that will be prepared by each
 LG to address its needs. A preliminary capacity needs assessment was carried out during Program
 preparation and four broad areas were identified as requiring capacity building support at the city
 level including: (i) municipal investment prioritization and planning, including citizen participation
 and oversight; (ii) financial management including own source revenue enhancement; (iii) project
 quality, including procurement and environmental and social management; and (iv) asset
 management systems and mechanisms for operations and maintenance. The LGCDPs will be


                                                   39
supported through formal training provided by CFAD, and will include targeted courses that will be
developed and introduced by CFAD as the need presents itself over the course of Program
implementation. In addition the LGCDPs will be supported by a system of “just-in-time? technical
assistance to assist the LGs in developing the capacity to handle those key functions that are
considered core to the effective operation of sound local Government, and which will be central to
the PA system. These LGCDPs will include the LG’s estimates of its needs for such technical
assistance, but the “just-in-time? system will also be designed to respond quickly to demands as they
arise, even if not anticipated in the LG’s LGCDP.

47. In addition to operating its current LG/decentralization training programs, CFAD will: (i)
undertake a country-wide program to ensure that the councilors and the senior technical staff of all
the LGs are fully familiarized with the principles and operating procedures of the new grant system
under the Program, and of the capacity support assistance available to them; and (ii) develop and
deliver additional training programs that target gaps in areas of LG responsibility that affect their
performance and that may be identified during Program implementation, particularly those that
emerge through the performance assessment system.

48. The just-in-time program will be managed by the 6 regional offices of the CPSCL, supported
with consultancy contracts with firms that would be structured around the principle of providing
expertise as needed, and that would be staffed with the requisite expertise to cover participatory
planning, budgeting and accountability systems; financial management; technical aspects of
planning, project preparation and implementation; procurement; asset management; and
environmental management and social safeguards. The LGCPDs prepared by each LG would serve
as the basis for determining the scope of the contracts and for logistical planning purposes.

49. The Program will also support the introduction of several initiatives that will focus on those
central institutions and systems that have significant roles in the effective operation of LG in Tunisia,
and which will strengthen the Government’s decentralization, participatory governance and
transparency agenda as established under the new Constitution. This will include support for: (i) the
design and launch of a new e-Portal (Portail des Collectivités Locales) which will make budget,
procurement and audit information for all LGs as well as the results of LG performance assessments
accessible to the public (and progressively, the E-Portal will also host LGs’ information on
Participatory Planning and Participatory Budgeting processes), (ii) the expansion of the Court of
Auditors (Cour des Comptes)’ annual LG financial auditing function to increase annual coverage so
that by the end of the Program 80 percent of financial accounts legally received by the Court of
Auditors (Cour des Comptes) from the LGs are being audited annually; (iii) the introduction and
operationalization of the annual PA, to be undertaken by the Contrôleur Général des Services
Publics (CGSP); and (iv) the delivery of a series of nation-wide workshops by CFAD with assistance
from DGCPL and CPSCL to introduce and familiarize the LG system (LGs, relevant institutions and
Government agencies, and the general public) with the Program and PA process. Table 1.4
summarizes the capacity building arrangements under the Program.




                                                  40
                   Table 1.4: Capacity Building Arrangements under the Program


  Area of                          Description                           Responsibility              Timing
  Support

Formal LG Formal training programs addressing the CFAD                                       Formal       system
Training  functioning of decentralization systems and the                                    already operational
          operational responsibilities of LGs, for both
          elected officials and staff;
Technical        Program of on-the job, just-in-time assistance Caisse       with            Offers opportunity
Assistance       provided to LGs on a demand-driven basis. assistance          of            of quick impact and
to LGs           Designed around principle of “learning by doing? CFAD and DGCPL             “early wins?. Should
                 and structured to provide expertise in key areas                            be fully operational
                 of LG need (finance, technical/engineering;                                 in time for start of
                 social/citizen      participation/accountability;                           2015.
                 fiduciary)
Targeted               Systematization of LG financial auditing of            Cour Des            2015
Initiatives to          LGs                                                     Comptes
Strengthen             Introduction and operationalization of                 CGSP or             2016
LG System               Performance Assessment (PA) System                      CGF
                       Introduction of E-Portal to improve access
                        to information to enhance LG
                                                                               DGCPL               2015
                        accountability to citizens, and to
                        strengthen DGCPL oversight (M&E)
                       Nation-wide workshops to introduce and                 CFAD                2014
                        familiarize LG system with Program and
                        PA system
                       Targeted training for LGs (proc,
                        safeguards, other – as needed)                         CFAD                2015



    50. Consistent with the Government’s decentralization agenda focusing on governance and
    transparency, the Program will also support the introduction of participatory planning and
    budgeting.

    51. Participatory Planning. The Program will support the introduction of participatory planning in
    all 264 LGs beginning in the first year. The participatory planning approach will strengthen citizens’
    engagement with their municipal councils on capital investments and enhance local accountability
    and transparency. The approach introduces requirements that LGs present the proposed five-year
    and annual investment plans and associated budgets to residents in public Town Halls for discussion
    and input. LGs are required to obtain resident validation of the proposed Plan, or of a modified form
    of the plan, in the town hall meeting. The validated form of the plan will then be publicly
    disseminated in a variety of media. Capacity building and just-in-time support will be provided to
    LGs in preparing for and implementing the participatory planning process, including, importantly, on
    participatory planning, communications strategies, organization of public Town Hall meetings, and
    mediation.

    52. Participatory Budgeting. Participatory budgeting works to increase citizens’ engagement with
    their Governments and introduces them to the principles of public decision-making and budgeting.
    The Program will support the design and adoption of a participatory budgeting initiative beginning

                                                     41
the first year of the Program, at which point LGs may choose to introduce the approach. Given many
LGs’ interest in strengthening citizens’ engagement, it is anticipated that a fair number will adopt
participatory planning in the early years of the Program. As of year 4, however, the performance
criteria will reward adoption of participatory budgeting. The participatory budgeting initiative will
provide a strong incentive for residents to engage with their LGs since it permits them to directly
decide how to spend a portion of the capital grant. LGs adopting participatory budgeting will be
required to earmark five percent of their annual allocated capital investment grant for small-scale
infrastructure projects proposed by residents and local civil society groups. All residents will be
eligible to develop project proposals following pre-established guidelines and proposal templates.
The guidelines will make it clear that proposals supporting gender-sensitive community
infrastructure will receive additional weighting. All proposals complying with the guidelines will
qualify to be presented at in an open public assembly where attendees will cast votes for their
selected project proposals. Proposals receiving the most votes will be selected for implementation,
up to the five percent budget envelope. The LG is responsible for implementing the selected
proposals.

53. Access to Information. The Program will support the design and launch of a new E-Portal
(Portail des Collectivites Locales) which will make budget, procurement and audit information for
all LGs accessible to the public. Progressively, the E-Portal will also host LGs’ information on
participatory planning and participatory budgeting processes.

Program beneficiaries

54. The primary beneficiaries are the 264 LGs and their seven million urban citizens (or 2/3 of the
country’s total population). They will benefit from enhanced inter-governmental fiscal transfers and
from demand driven institutional and capacity development activities which will strengthen their
ability to deliver municipal infrastructure and services efficiently and consistent with their citizens’
priorities. They will also benefit from initiatives to build knowledge and capacity of municipal
council members and municipal staff on participatory governance initiatives which will underpin
broader efforts to strengthen municipal efficiency and build a social contract between citizens and
their LG. The participation of local communities including, importantly, women and youth, in
planning development activities managed by the LG will ensure that vulnerable groups’ needs are
addressed, further fostering ownership and contributing to long term sustainability.

55. The secondary beneficiaries are people living in 229 underserviced/disadvantaged
neighborhoods (more than 500,000 inhabitants in 144 targeted LGs). The main benefits will come
from improved access to municipal services, overall improved municipal management and direct
involvement of the population in setting investment priorities, and hence in improving their living
conditions. Investments activities financed with project funds will benefit this entire target group
either directly or indirectly, including through creation of temporary employment which is likely to
benefit youth particularly.

Program financing

56. The total outlay of Program and the Government indicative allocations among the three Program
elements are presented in Table 1.5 below. The IBRD loan of US$ 300 million represent about 83
percent of the total cost of the Program (US$363 million).




                                                  42
                                      Table 1.5: Program Elements


                                                               Amount          Amount
                                                            (TND Million)   (US$ Million)17
 Capital Grant for Municipal Infrastructure Delivery                305          203
 Capital    Grant      for   improving    municipal
 infrastructure in disadvantaged neighborhoods                      225          150


 Capacity support for improved LG institutional
                                                                    15            10
 development
 Total Program Financing                                            545          363




17   Exchange rate: 1USD = 1.50 TND

                                                  43
          Annex 2 : Financial Status of Local Governments in Tunisia18
1.      The average size of the 264 municipalities (local governments - - LGs) comprises about
30,000 people. However the distribution of this population between large and small LGs is
highly uneven, with 65% (171) LGs on average each housing less than 20,000 inhabitants, and
accounting for 20% of the total LG population (1.4 million people). At the other end of the
population distribution spectrum, 11 LGs (4% of the total number of LGs) accommodate 30% of
the urban population (2.1 million people). This distinction has significance for the management
of the urban economies, while also emphasizing the importance of the mid-size LGs, which
accommodate half the urban population. Table 2.1 summarizes the population distribution
across the LGs in Tunisia.


Table 2.1: Distribution of Communes by Category According to the Number of People (2012)




2.      While the distribution of population across the different LG sizes represents an
important factor in determining development policies for Tunisia and for addressing the
development needs of individual LGs, the LG sector more generally faces several critical
financial challenges.


A. The LG Sector is Severely Under-Resourced in Tunisia


3.     Currently LG in Tunisia is severely under-funded. This is demonstrated in Table 2.2,
which examines the declining trend in local revenues as a share of GDP, and as a share of the
national budget.
Table 2.2: Trend in LG Revenue Generation as a Share of GDP and the National Budget




18Extract from draft report on Tunisia PPP in Municipal Services prepared by Nodalis and funded by Islamic
Development Bank

                                                   44
Source: Author's calculations based on data from the Ministry of Interior (DGCPL) and the MoEF

4.      When total revenues for LG in Tunisia are compared to total LG revenue streams
available in other countries of different economic strength (GDP) and at different levels of
urbanization, the contrast is even more stark, as shown in Table 2.3.


Table 2.3: Tot LG Revenues in Tunisia compared to Morocco, Turkey and EU.




5.      Even countries that are far less urbanized, as well as having broader functional
assignment are better resourced than Tunisia. For example, Senegal, which has a GDP only one
third the size of Tunisia at purchasing power parity, has significantly greater service delivery
responsibilities, enjoys an average tax level which is 70% that of Tunisia

                                                          45
6.      The Program response to resource constraints. Taking these constraints into account,
the Program design recognizes that current economic pressures require a modulated approach
to reforming policies affecting the share of fiscal resources assigned to the LG sector, despite
strong pressure for improved local services. Consequently, the Program provides for: (i) the
establishment of the fiscal architecture that will facilitate scaling up of resource flows to LG as
national fiscal capacity strengthens and as LG performance improves; (ii) the maintenance of
historic levels of investment in local services so that service standards are sustained during the
economic transition, and reasonable levels of local demand can be addressed; and (iii) the
introduction of capacity building systems and LG performance measurement programs that will
demonstrate enhanced capabilities of LGs to assume greater service delivery reponsibilities.
B. LG Revenue Management is Weak

7.     As indicated in Table 2.4 below, local revenue generation rose slowly between 2005 and
2010, fell dramatically in 2011 following the revolution, and began recovering in 2012.
However, annual increases have occurred in nominal terms only, with real levels actually falling
or remaining static.
            Table 2.4: Trend in LG Revenues (2005-2012)




            Source: Based on data from the Ministry of the Interior (DGCPL)



8.      When the revenue sources are unpacked, it becomes evident that virtually all revenue
instruments have remained flat even in nominal terms. In particular, property taxes, normally
the most buoyant revenue source, has remained relatively unchanged over the past 7 years, as
have all other sources with the exception of institutional taxes, which in turn reflects continuing
heavy reliance on public sector funds. Table 2.5 sets out the trends in revenue generation by
sub-category, both in terms of own sources and public subsidies.




                                                        46
            Table 2.5: Trend in LG Revenue Generation (2006-2012)

             (in millions TND)                    2006         2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012

             own resources

               Tax on buildings                   53,5         28,2    32,9    36,2    39,4    19,9    30,0

               Tax on undeveloped land            12,4         8,5     10,8    13,6    14,9    11,6    13,7

               Institutional tax                  68,1         85,7    88,7    93,5    111,1   93,0    136,7

               Hotel tax                          18,1         22,4    21,4    19,7    22,1    12,0    15,2

               Market products                    50,0         52,4    58,3    60,0    62,0    36,9    43,9

               Electricity surcharge              26,8         30,0    26,9    25,5    27,1    18,2    24,2
                              19
               Other income                       79,8         96,5    106,5   111,1   127,7   90,1    96,4

             Total own resources                  308,7        323,7   345,5   359,6   404,3   281,7   360,1

             Public Subsidies

               Common fund                        100,6        103,6   112,2   119,3   131,4   144,3   176,3

               Off grants                                                                      147,0   95,0

               Total public subsidy               100,6        103,6   112,2   119,3   131,4   291,3   271,3

             Total Resources                      409,3        427,3   457,7   478,9   535,8   573,0   631,4

            Source : Based on data from the Ministry of the Interior (DGCPL)



9.      The capacity of LGs to generate local revenues varies widely between LGs better
situated (coastal or those enjoying more advantageous economic circumstances) and those with
weak economic bases. To some extent this variation is also reflected in city size, though in
general, the smallest and largest cities generate the greatest per capita incomes. Public sector
subsidy increases for LG recurrent expenditures have remained modest, consistent with the
pattern of increases in total OSRs. However, the transfer of subsidies for recurrent costs to LGs
has been fairly progressive, with the smallest/weakest LGs (those under 15,000 inhabitants)
receiving significantly greater per capita allocations, ranging between TND 55 and TND 110
depending on size, and the larger LGs receiving on average about TND 40 per inhabitant. Table
2.6 summarizes these trends. Table 2.6 also reflects a spike in increased allocations of public
subsidies to offset the impact of the events in 2011 and their aftermath in 2012.




19“Other income? include non-fixed income generated by commercial activities (slaughterhouses,
concessions contracts, rental income), festivities, and cultural events

                                                          47
Table 2.6 : Recurrent Revenues per Inhabitant by Categories of LGs Defined by Population Size (2011)




Source: Based on DGCPL and INS data



10.     Following the revolution the government also introduced policy changes requiring all
LGs to absorb part time workers into their permanent staffing establishment. The impact of
these changes on LG finances is evident in Table 2.7, with over 110% of locally generated
revenues being absorbed by the new salary structure, as compared to the already excessive
levels of nearly 60%


             Table 2.7: Impact of Payroll on LG Revenues




11.    The structure of LG expenditures, set out in Figure 2.1, demonstrates the extent to which
investment spending (about 19% of total revenues) is crowded out by recurrent expenditures
(over 70% of total revenues), and the significant share of recurrent costs that is represented by
the new staffing policy.

                                                    48
            Figure 2.1: Structure of LG Expenditures (average 2008-2010)




            Source: Based on data from the Ministry of the Interior (DGCPL)


12.     The Program response to weak revenue management. During Program preparation,
it was recognized that local revenue management comprised many “moving parts?, most of
which, in order to make the fundamental changes necessary, involved broader tax reform which
touched on difficult policy considerations. It was therefore concluded, since the Program is
focusing on reforms to the inter-governmental fiscal architecture, that the strategy dealing with
LG revenues would be more modest, and would address two areas: (i) through the fiscal
reforms, transfer the ownership for investment decision-making to the LGs, with substantive
citizen participation in the process, and subject LG performance to independent annual audits
that would be made public, with the objective of creating greater LG accountability and hence
establishing durable social contract between LG officials and their electorates. Experience has
shown that well functioning social contracts provide the basis for greater willingness to pay for
services through the various tax and fee instruments available to LGs; and (ii) under the
performance assessment system, include provisions to ensure that enhanced local revenue
collection by LGs would be taken into account, in order to incentivize LGs to improve their fiscal
capacity.


C. LG Investment Resources are Severely Constrained


13.    The trend in funding available for investment in municipal infrastructure by LGs has
been severely eroded over the past decade. The erosion is linked in part to the additional
operating burdens that have been placed on LGs (eg central government staffing policies for
LGs). The net effect of these additional recurrent expenditure obligations on the pattern of LG
expenditures is reflected in Table 2.8 where total expenditures per inhabitant has grown from

                                                        49
TND 91 in 2006 to TND 117 in 2012 (a nearly 30% increase), while expenditures on investment
per capita have remained virtually static at TND 29 over the same period, even as public
subsidies have increased significantly.


            Table 2.8: Evolution of Expenditure Ratios and Public Subsidy per Capita




14.     In addition, prevailing investment policies have been based on assumptions that have
not proven themselves in practice. Most notably has been the provision in the past three PICs
(and is evident in the forthcoming PIC) for significant increases in the share of OSRs and loans
that would comprise the total investment resource package. Table 2.9 provides the
composition of the PICs (OSRs, loans and grants), and compares targeted sources of funds with
actual utilization of funding sources, demonstrating that the OSRs and loans have remained flat
in nominal terms over a ten-year period, even as grants have increased.




                                               50
   Table 2.9: Comparison of PIC allocations over three PIC cycles (2002 to 2019)20

   Funding       PIC 2002-2006                PIC 2007-2011                 PIC  2014-
   Source                                                                   2019
                 TDN Million                  TDN Million
                                                                            TDN Million
                 Projected      Utilized      Projected       Utilized      Projected
e) OSRs          170.8          124.2         179.1           121.0         193.0
f) Loans         302.4          257.5         306.0           260.5         389.0
g) Grants        209.2          214.6         261.1           267.0         305.0
h) Total         682.4          596.3         746.2           648.5         887.0




   15.     Despite the increase in grant funds for capital investments by LGs in basic infrastructure
   within their mandate, the increases have not kept pace with inflationary pressures. Table 2.10
   compares the nominal increases with the real increases, demonstrating a substantial erosion of
   the ability of the LGs to keep pace with demand, exacerbated not only by inflation, but also by
   the relatively rapidly growing urban population. As a result, investment levels for the 2007-
   2011 PIC period were significantly less than those for the 1992-1996 PIC cycle.


               Table 2.10: Evolution of the CIP Envelope in Nominal and Constant Prices




                   Source: Based on data from the Ministry of the Interior (DGCPL) and the MoEF




   20Data provided by the CPSCL; data show a small discrepancy in the Caisse loan amounts between Tables
   4 and 5 (about 3%)

                                                         51
16.      The Program response to constrained investment resources. The Program has
tackled this issue as follows: (i) it has stabilized the decline and set investment expenditures for
the 2014-2019 PIC at similar levels in real terms to the preceding (2012-20140            PIC period
which itself saw a substantial increase over 2007-2011. The Program did not seek to increase
the level of funding beyond this for the following reasons, all of which are designed to create the
platform for significant scaling up of local capital resources for LG investment levels: (i) the
national fiscus is under significant stress, limiting the availability of budgetary resources; (ii)
the Program has introduced significant reforms which will require major changes in
institutional responsibilities and practices; and (iii) LG capacity - - a major focus of the Program
- - has to be substantially enhanced to ensure the requisite levels of absorptive capacity to
manage higher investment levels (and the related operating and maintenance requirements).


D. Increasingly Unsustainable LG Debt.


17.     As a consequence of previous policies, access to grant funds was tied to requirements
for LGs to enter into loans - - the objective being to use public funds to leverage greater LG
investment in municipal services. Table 2.11 summarizes the profile of LG investments,
distinguishing loans from grants.




     Table 2.11: CPSCL Grants and Loans to Local Municipalities




Source: CPSCL Accounts

18.     The policy had many beneficial impacts, but over time has begun to introduce perverse
effects that now offset the early benefits. Most notable has been rising LG debt totaling an
estimated TND 136 million in 2011. The average municipal debt rate, expressed as a ratio of
outstanding debt to income equity, is around 50% and, expressed as a proportion of current
income (including transfers of state funds), is 24%. Eighteen LGs have debt ratios exceeding
100% (average ratio of 129%) corresponding to a debt ratio envelope of TND 26.5 million.
Twenty-five LGs have debt ratios between 75% and 100% with a total debt of TND 21.7 million.
Figure 2.2 summarizes the distribution of debt by LG groupings.




                                                52
                 Figure 2.2: Distribution of Communal Categories According to their Debt




                 Source: Based on data from the DGCPL. The debt ratio is the ratio of debt to total revenue



19.    The level of LG debt raises questions of the future financial status of CPSCL, unless
lending practices are changed, both o the side of policies that try to crowd in borrowing by
kinking grant access to borrowing, and from the perspective of CPSCL rigor in managing its
lending practices. Table 2.12 indicates the exposure of CPSCL to arrears which have increased
to about TND 86.1 million with the default rate having risen to close to 24%.
                 Table 2.12: Evolution of CPSCL Arrears




Source: CPSCL Accounts




                                                                        53
20.     The Program response to rising LG debt. The focus on the Program on reforming the
LG fiscal architecture as it affects capital grants has included three features intended to directly
address debt management by LGs: (i) the former regulatory framework tying loans to grants has
been restructured so that grant access is independent of loans; (ii) indebted LGs are required to
prepare financial performance improvement plans; and (iii) CPSCL is introducing more rigorous
lending practices as part the preparation of an updated business plan.




                                                54
                                                             Annex 3: Results Framework Matrix

                                           Tunisia Urban Development and Local Governance Program – Results Framework
                                                                                                                                          Respo-
                                                                                                                                          nsibilit
                                 Unit of
                                             Base                                                                      Freq-               y for
                    Core


Indicator                        Measur              2014      2015        2016       2017      2018                            Method
                           DLI

                                             -line                                                          2019       uency               Data
                                   e
                                                                                                                                          Collecti
                                                                                                                                            -on

             The objectives of the Program are: (i) to strengthen Local Governments’ performance to deliver municipal infrastructure, and (ii) to
             improve access to services in targeted disadvantaged neighborhoods.
             PDO Level Results Indicators
Percentage LGs
that achieve at
least 70% score                                                                                                                           CPSCL,
                     ?     ☒       %          0      N/A        N/A         N/A        50         60         70       Annual   PA
in their annual                                                                                                                           CGSP
performance
assessment 21
People living in
targeted
disadvantaged                                                                                                                  LG
areas benefiting                                                                                                               Progress   LG,
from improved        ?     ?     Number       0        0         0          00      150,000     300,000   500,000     Annual   Reports    CPSCL
municipal
infrastructure                                                                                                                 PPR
(disaggregated
by gender)
Number of Direct     ☒     ?     Number       0        0     7,000,000              7,000,000             7,000,000   Annual   LG
                                                                         7,000,00                                                         LG,
Beneficiaries of                                                                                                               Progress

   21   Performance areas include: Governance, sustainability and management.

                                                                            I-55
which       50%                                                         0                   7,000,000                         Reports        CPSCL
women
                                                                                                                              PPR
           Intermediate Results Indicators
           Result Area 1: Capital Grant System reformed
Capital     grant                                                                                                             Amended
system                                                                                                                        Decree
restructured                                                                                                                  published
                    ?   ☒    Yes/No     No      Yes        N/A         N/A        N/A         N/A         N/A        Once                    MoI
through       the                                                                                                             in       the
amendment of                                                                                                                  Official
Decree 97-1135                                                                                                                Gazette
Timely
publication    of
indicative                                                                                                                    E-portal
                                                                                                                                             DGCPL,
unconditional       ?   ☒    Yes/No     No       No         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Annual   and/or
                                                                                                                                             CPSCL
capital     grant                                                                                                             website
allocation    for
each LG
LGs that satisfy
Minimum
                                                                                                                              Independe      CPSCL,
Mandatory
                               %                                                                                              nt             Verifica
Conditions          ?   ☒               0       N/A         60         70          80          90          90        Annual
                                                                                                                              verificatio    tion
(MMCs)      and
                                                                                                                              n report       Entity
receive capital
grants
           Results Area 2: LG institutional performance improved to deliver municipal infrastructures and services
Independent LG
performance
assessment                                                                                                                    Program
system              ?   ☒    Yes/No    None      No         No         No          Yes         Yes        Yes        Annual   performan       CPSCL
introduced and                                                                                                                ce report
threshold targets
met.


                                                                       I-56
 LGs that have
executed   their
Annual                                                                                                 Program
Investment Plans    ?   ☒      %        35       N/A            40   50     60    70    80    Annual   performan   CPSCL
on schedule in                                                                                         ce report
terms         of
expenditures
LGs that received
Capacity
Building Support
                                                                                                       Program
in    accordance                                                                                                   CPSCL,
                    ?   ☒    Number      0       N/A            50   60     70    80    80    Annual   performan
with their annual                                                                                                  CFAD
                                                                                                       ce report
capacity
development
plan
Information on
fiscal   transfer
and           LG
performance is
publicly
accessible          ?   ?    Yes/No    None      No         No       No     Yes   Yes   Yes   Annual   E-portal    DGCPL




           Results Area 3: Access to municipal infrastructure
           in targeted disadvantaged areas improved
LGs         that
implement their                                                                                        Program
investment                                                                                                         LG,
                    ?   ?      %         0        0             0    30     60    80    100   Annual   performan
plans        for                                                                                                   CPSCL
                                                                                                       ce report
targeted
disadvantaged


                                                                     I-57
neighborhoods
according     to
schedule
People in urban
areas provided
with access to
all-season roads
                                                                                                                Program
within a 500                                                                                                                LG,
                     ☒     ?    Number       0         -          -           -            -   -   -   Annual   performan
meter      range                                                                                                            CPSCL
                                                                                                                ce report
under the
program22


People in urban
areas provided
with access to                                                                                                  Program
                                                                                                                            LG,
regular    solid     ☒     ?    Number       0         -          -           -            -   -   -   Annual   performan
                                                                                                                            CPSCL
waste collection                                                                                                ce report
under        the
program




   22   Targets to be established once the neighborhood upgrading programs are selected.

                                                                             I-58
                 Annex 4: Disbursement Linked Indicators, Verification Protocols, and Disbursement Arrangements


Table 4.1: Disbursement Linked Indicators
                        Total     As % of                                Timeline for DLI achievement
                         DLI       Total
                      Allocatio   Financi     DLI
        DLI
                          n         ng      Baseline                                                           2019
                                                       2014     2015         2016            2017       2018
                      (Million    Amoun
                        US$)         t
Reform of the Capital Grant System
DLI 1
The Government
has       replaced
Decree No 97-
1135           and                                     Yes       N/A          N/A             N/A       N/A
                                                                                                               N/A
restructured    its      30        10%      None
capital      grant
system
accordingly
Allocated amount                                                                                                  0
                                                        30           0         0               0         0
for DLI 1
DLI 2
Timely
communication to
LGs      of     the
indicative Capital       20        6.7%     None       N/A       Yes          Yes             Yes       Yes    Yes
Block       Grants
(CBGs) allocation
and          timely
transfer of CBGs
to eligible LGs by

                                                              I-59
the Government




Allocated amount                              4
                   0          4   4   4   4
for DLI 2




                       I-60
Strengthened Local Government Institutional Performance and Municipal Infrastructure Delivery

DLI 3
Acceptable
percentage of LGs                                     N/A           60%             70%            80%           90%        90%
have met the
MMCs          and     30       10%        0
received CBGs

Allocated amount
                                                       0                6            6               6             6
for DLI 3                                                                                                                    6
DLI 4
The Government
has designed and                                               Performance
implemented an                                                  Assessment
                                                                                                 50% of LGs
independent LG                                                    Manual                                       60% of LGs
                                                                                 Performance       achieve
performance                                                     adopted by                                       achieve
                      90       30%       None         N/A                        Assessment     threshold PA
assessment (PA)                                                Circular of the                                  threshold
                                                                                   Dry Run          scores                  N/A
system        and                                                Minister of                                    PA scores
required                                                          Interior
percentage of LGs
have met the
threshold      PA
scores
Allocated amount                                                                                                             0
                                                       0             20              20             25            25
for DLI 4
DLI 5
Required
percentage of LGs
have     executed     45       15%       None         N/A           40%             50%            60%           70%        80%
their      Annual
Investment Plans
on schedule in
terms          of

                                                                 I-61
     expenditures
     Allocated amount                                                                                                                      10
                                                             0               5             10               10               10
     for DLI 5

i)   DLI 6
     Required
     percentage of LGs
     have     received
     capacity building                                      N/A           50%             60%              70%              80%           N/A
     support        in
                           25      8.3%       None
     accordance with
     their      annual
     capacity
     development plan
                                                                                                                                            0
j)   Allocated amount                                        0               5              5               10               5
     for DLI 6




     Improved access to municipal infrastructure in disadvantaged neighborhoods
                                                      Disbursement from the Bank for DLI 7 will be calculated based on milestones reached on
                                                      individual sub-projects. The schedule for achieving milestones and corresponding disbursement
     DLI 7                                            below are indicative only.
     Targeted number                                                                                     Works           Works
     of people living in                                                                                Contracts       Contracts
     targeted                                                       Works
                                                                                         Works        tendered are    tendered are
     disadvantaged                                                  contracts
                           40      13.3%      0%                                       Contracts      covering 85%      covering
     neighborhoods                                                  tendered are
                                                                                     tendered are      of targeted      100% of
     have     benefited                               N/A           covering 20%
                                                                                     covering 50%      population       targeted
     from     improved                                              of the target                                                       Works
                                                                                      of targeted                      population
     municipal                                                      population
                                                                                      population                                       Contracts
     infrastructure                                                                                      Works                         covering
                                                                                                        Contracts        Works         100% of
                                                                                                      covering 30%      Contracts      targeted


                                                                      I-62
                                                                                        of targeted        covering        population
                                                                                        population          60% of            are
                                                                                             are           targeted        completed
                                                                                        completed         population
                                                                                                              are
                                                                                                          completed
   Allocated amount
                                                0         1.6             2.4               12.4              10.8               12.8
   for DLI 7
   Strengthening of Local Government Systems
                                                                                                           At      least
                                                                     At least 60%      At least 70%
                                                                                                         80% of LG
                                                                     of LG annual      of LG annual                        N/A
                                                                                                         annual
                                                                     financial         financial
                                                                                                         financial
                                                                     accounts          accounts
k) DLI 8                                             E-portal                                            accounts
                                                                     legally           legally
   Transparency and                                  hosted by the                                       legally
                                                                     received     by   received by
   access        to                            N/A   DGCPL                                               received by
                                                                     the Cour des      the Cour des
   information          20       6.7%                designed and                                        the Cour des
                                                                     Comptes are       Comptes are
   improved                                          operational                                         Comptes are
                                                                     audited      by   audited      by
                                                                                                         audited by
                                                                     September 30      September 30
                                                                                                         September
                                                                     of      current   of      current
                                                                                                         30 of current
                                                                     year              year
                                                                                                         year
   Allocated amount                                                                                                               0
                                                0         10               3                 3                 4
   for DLI 8




                                                       I-63
Table 4.2: DLI Verification Protocol

                                                                           Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                                                              Scalabilit
         DLI                       Definition/                    y          Data
                                                                                       Verificatio
                           Description of achievement                      source /                                     Procedure
                                                              (Yes/No)                  n Entity
                                                                            agency

                         By     Program      effectiveness,
                         Decree 97-1135 amended to
DLI 1                    reflect the core elements of the
                         capital grant reform incl.
The      Government      introduction of the formula
has replaced Decree                                                                    Bank with     Submission to the Bank of approved decree
                         based      allocation;      timely
No 97-1135 and                                                   No         MoEF        support      reflecting the core elements of the CGS reform and
                         publication and transfer of
restructured       its                                                                 from IVA      its publication on the Official Gazette.
                         annual allocation; use of capital
capital grant system     grant at the discretion of LG,
accordingly              progressive implementation of
                         annual and independent LG
                         performance assessment

                                                                                                     From Program year 2, the CPSCL will notify the
                                                                                                     Bank of the date and means of publication of the
DLI2                                                                                                 annual allocation and will submit the
Timely                                                                                               documentation relative to the disbursements.
                         From Program year 2 onwards,
communication to
LGs of the indicative    Annual allocation of CBGs
                                                                                       Bank with
                         published no later than Dec 1 of                                            Verification by the Bank with support from the
Capital Block Grants                                             No         CPSCL       support
(CBGs)     allocation    the    preceding     year   and                                             IVA that the annual allocation is consistent with
                                                                                       from IVA
                         disbursed no later than Feb 1 of                                            the provisions of the decree, that the indicative
and timely transfer
                         the current year                                                            annual allocation of capital block grants has been
of CBGs to eligible
LGs      by       the                                                                                timely communicated to LGs to use the
Government                                                                                           information for the preparation of their annual
                                                                                                     investment plan, and that the disbursements have
                                                                                                     been completed by the target date to eligible LGs.

DLI 3                    Annual targets are defined in           Yes                                 Each year, the LGs will communicate to the CPSCL
                                                                           LGs and     Bank with
                         terms of percentage of LGs                                                  the documentation relative to the satisfaction of

                                                                           I-64
Acceptable             meeting the MMCs.                      CPSCL /     support    MCC.
percentage of LGs                                               PA       from IVA
                       The Annual targets are :
have met the MMCs
and received CBGs      CY 2015 : 60% of LGs                                          In the first and the second year of the Program,
                                                                                     the CPSCL will review the documentation and
                       CY 2016 : 70% of LGs
                                                                                     determine the compliance of each municipal
                       CY 2017 : 80 % of LGs                                         investment plan with the provision of the
                                                                                     Ministerial Decree. Starting from the third year,
                       CY 2018 : 90% of LGs
                                                                                     this review will be fully integrated to the annual
                       CY 2019 : 90% of LGs                                          performance assessment of LGs to be carried out
                                                                                     by the independent entity. The assessment report
                                                                                     and supporting documentation will be made
                                                                                     available by the CPSCL for the Bank with support
                                                                                     from the IVA to carry out a sample audit.
DLI 4
                       In CY 2015: The PA system is
The     Government     developed and the PA manual is
has designed and       adopted by MoI                                                The entity in charge of PA will provide to the
implemented       an                                                                 Bank through the CPSCL the supporting
                       In CY 2016: the PA system is                      Bank with
independent       LG                                          CPSCL /                documentation relative to the achievement of
                       tested and implemented.          Yes               support
performance                                                     PA                   targets for CY 2015, and 2016, and the
assessment     (PA)    In CY2017 50% of LGs achieve                      from IVA
                                                                                     Performance assessment reports for CY 2017 and
system and required    threshold PA scores                                           2018
percentage of LGs
                       In CY 2018: 60% of LGs achieve
have     met     the
                       threshold PA scores
threshold PA scores
                       Percentage of LGs which have
DLI 5                  executed at least 70% of the                                  Each year, the LGs will prepare a progress report
Required               expenditures involved in their                                on the execution of their investment budget. The
percentage of LGs      annual investment plan.                           Bank with   CPSCL will compile the progress reports in a
have executed their    The annual targets are           Yes   CPSCL/PA    support    consolidated progress report for the same year.
Annual Investment                                                        from IVA
                       CY 2015 : 40 % of LGs                                         The Bank with support from the IVA will verify
Plans on schedule in
                                                                                     the achievement of the target through sample
terms             of   CY 2016 : 50 % of LGs                                         audits.
expenditures
                       CY 2017 : 60 % of LGs


                                                              I-65
                       CY 2018 : 70 % of LGs
                       CY 2019 : 80 % of LGs


                                                                                       Starting from CY 2015, each LG prepares and
                                                                                       executes with the support of the CPSCL and CFAD
                       Annual targets are defined in                                   an Annual Capacity Development Plan (ACDP)
DLI 6                  terms of percentage of LGs                                      covering the same areas covered under the PA.
                       which     have    preparedand                                   Each LG transmits its final ACDP to the CPSCL by
Required
                       substantially executed      a                                   February 15th of the current year.
percentage of LGs
                       Capacity Development Plan.
have       received                                               LG /     Bank with
                                                                                       Each LG submits to the CPSCL a progress report
capacity   building    The Annual targets are :            Yes   CPSCL /    support
                                                                                       on the execution of its ACDP by February 1st of the
support          in                                               CFAD     from IVA
                       CY 2015 : 50% of LGs                                            following                                     year.
accordance     with
                                                                                       The CPSCL will submit a consolidated report on
their        annual    CY 2016 : 60% of LGs
capacity                                                                               the implementation of the LGs’ ACDPs for the
                       CY 2017 : 70 % of LGs                                           previous year to the IVA by March 15th of each
development plan
                       CY 2018 : 80% of LGs                                            year.
                                                                                       The Bank with support from the IVA will verify
                                                                                       the achievement of the target.

                                                                                       Each year, the LGs will prepare a physical
                                                                                       progress report on investments funded as part of
DLI 7                                                                                  the Program. In addition, the LGs will make
                                                                                       available to the CPSCL all documentation relative
Targeted number of
                                                                                       to each subproject’s compliance with the
people living in       This is defined as the percentage
                                                                           Bank with   Program’s provision on (i) sub-project’s eligibility,
targeted               of the target population for
                                                           Yes    CPSCL     support    (ii) feasibility studies, (iii) procurement, (iv)
disadvantaged          which works contracts have
                                                                           from IVA    environmental and social management, and (v)
neighborhoods have     been signed and completed.
                                                                                       inclusion of the assets created in the LG municipal
benefited       from
                                                                                       asset management system.
improved municipal
infrastructure.                                                                        The CPSCL will review the documentation and
                                                                                       determine the compliance of each municipal
                                                                                       investment.


                                                                 I-66
                                                                                    The CPSCL will submit to the Bank a consolidated
                                                                                    report on progress and compliance of the
                                                                                    investment      sub-projects     in     targeted
                                                                                    neighborhoods.
                                                                                    The assessment        report and    supporting
                                                                                    documentation will be made available by the
                                                                                    CPSCL for the Bank with support from the IVA to
                                                                                    carry out a sample audit.
                                                                                    In CY 2015, the DGPCL will submit the final
                                                                                    approved design of the E-Portal and a progress
                     In CY 2015, the E-portal is                                    report on its operationalization to the Bank
                     designed and operational.                                      through the CPSCL. The Bank with support from
                                                                                    the IVA will verify the achievement of the
DLI 8
                                                                                    corresponding targets.
                                                             DGPCL &    Bank with
Transparency   and   From CY 2016, annual targets in   Yes   Cour des    support
access          to   terms of timely completion (by
information                                                  Comptes    from IVA    For CY 2016, 2017, and 2018, the Bank with
                     Sep 30 of the current year) of
improved             audits    of    the   financial                                support from the IVA will refer to the audit
                     statements received from the                                   reports published by the Cour des Comptes and
                     LGs are met.                                                   will verify the achievement of the corresponding
                                                                                    targets.




                                                             I-67
Table 4.3: Bank Disbursement


                                  Of which Financing                       Minimum DLI     Maximum DLI
                        Bank         available for                           value to be      value(s)
                      financing                        Deadline for         achieved to    expected to be   Determination of Financing Amount
        DLI           allocated                            DLI                 trigger      achieved for    to be disbursed against achieved and
                                   Prior
                        to the              Advances   Achievement1        disbursements       Bank                 verified DLI value(s) 4
                                  results
                         DLI                                                  of Bank      disbursements
                                                                            Financing 2      purposes 3
DLI 1
The Government                                                                                              Yes/No.
has      replaced
Decree No 97-                                          Program
1135          and        30         30         -                                N/A             N/A
                                                       effectiveness                                        This is a prior result and
restructured its                                                                                            disbursement will take place upon
capital     grant                                                                                           program effectiveness.
system
accordingly

DLI 2                                                                                                       Yes/No.

Timely                                                 July 15 of each
communication to                                       year        for                                      The sub indicator for each year must
LGs      of     the                                    communication                                        be verified in full for the
indicative Capital                                     of       annual                                      disbursement to occur.
Block       Grants       20         0          0       allocation.              N/A             N/A
(CBGs) allocation
                                                       March 1st of
and          timely                                                                                         If the target is not met for a given
                                                       each year for
transfer of CBGs                                                                                            year, the undisbursed amount will be
                                                       grant transfer
to eligible LGs by                                                                                          redistributed equally in the projected
the Government                                                                                              disbursement of next years.
DLI 3                                                                                      CY 2015 : 60 %   The achievement of this DLI will be
Acceptable                                             December 31st                                        assessed every year for each LG on a
                         30         0                                           30%
                                                       of each year.                                        Pass/Fail basis. Disbursement from
percentage of LGs
                                                                                           CY 2016 : 70 %
have met the                                                                                                the Bank will proportionate to the


                                                                         I-68
MMCs          and                                                                       number of LG achieving the DLI.
received CBGs                                                          CY 2017 : 80 %   D=A*(C/T)/G
                                                                                        Where:
                                                                       CY 2018 : 90 %
                                                                                        D= annual disbursement
                                                                                        A= annual allocation
                                                                       CY 2019 : 90 %
                                                                                        C= number of LGs compliant
                                                                                        T= total number of LGs
                                                                                        G= annual goal in percentage
                                                                                        (*)= multiplied
                                                                                        (/)= divided
                                                                                        (>)= greater than
                                                                                        (<)= lesser than


                                                                                        If C/T < 0.3, D = 0
                                                                                        If C/T > G, D=A
                                                                                        If the target is not met for a given
                                                                                        year, the undisbursed amount will be
                                                                                        redistributed equally in the projected
                                                                                        disbursement of the following years.
DLI 4                                                                   N/A for the     Amount allocated for CY2015, and
                                                                        first three     2016 targets will be disbursed on a
The Government                                     N/A for the first
                                                                           years        yes/No basis.
has designed and                                     three year.
implemented an                   December 31st                                          The sub indicator for each year must
                    90   0   0                                                          be verified in full for the
independent LG                   of each year.
performance                                         For CY 2017                         disbursement to occur.
assessment (PA)                                    and 2018: 15%                        If the target is not met for a given
system       and                                                       CY 2017: 50%     year, the undisbursed amount will be
required                                                                                disbursed in the next years, when the

                                                 I-69
percentage of LGs                        target is met.
have met the
                           CY2018: 60%
threshold      PA
scores                                   For CY 2017 and 2018 disbursement
                                         from the Bank will be determined by
                                         the number of LG achieving the
                                         threshold PA score as a result of their
                                         Annual Performance Assessment.


                                         D=A*(C/T)/G
                                         Where:
                                         D= annual disbursement
                                         A= annual allocation
                                         C= number of LGs compliant
                                         T= total number of LGs
                                         G= annual goal in percentage
                                         (*)= multiplied
                                         (/)= divided
                                         (>)= greater than
                                         (<)= lesser than


                                         If C/T < 0.5, D = 0
                                         If C/T > G, D=A


                                         If the target is not met for a given
                                         year, the undisbursed amount will be
                                         redistributed equally in the projected
                                         disbursement of next years


                    I-70
                                                                                Achievement of the DLI objective of at
                                                                                least 70% implementation of the
                                                                                annual investment plan will be
                                                                                assessed on a Yes/No basis for each
                                                                                LG and disbursement will be
                                                                                proportional to the percentage of LGs
                                                                                passing against the annual target.


                                                                                D=A*(C/T)/G
                                                                                Where:
                                                               CY 2015 : 40 %
                                                                                D= annual disbursement
DLI 5
                                                                                A= annual allocation
Required                                                       CY 2016 : 50 %
                                                                                C= number of LGs compliant
percentage of LGs
have                              December 31st                                 T= total number of LGs
                    45   0   30                          15%   CY 2017 : 60 %
implemented                       of each year.                                 G= annual goal in percentage
their      annual
                                                                                (*)= multiplied
investment plans                                               CY 2018 : 70 %
on schedule                                                                     (/)= divided

                                                               CY 2019 : 80 %   (>)= greater than
                                                                                (<)= lesser than


                                                                                If C/T < 0.15, D = 0
                                                                                If C/T > G, D=A


                                                                                If the target is not met for a given
                                                                                year, the undisbursed amount will be
                                                                                redistributed equally in the projected
                                                                                disbursement of next years.



                                                  I-71
                                                                                       For Program years 2, 3, 4, and 5
                                                                                       targets, the achievement of this DLI
                                                                                       will be assessed every year for each
                                                                                       LG on a Yes/No basis.
                                                                                       The DLI will be achieved for each LG
                                                                                       if 70% of the capacity building plan
                                                                                       has been completed.
                                                                                       Disbursement from the Bank will
                                                                                       proportionate to the % of LG
                                                                                       achieving the DLI.
                                                                                       D=A*C/T
l)   DLI 6                                                                             Where:
                                                                      CY 2015 : 50 %
     Required
                                                                                       D= annual disbursement
     percentage of LGs
     have     received                                                CY 2016 : 60 %   A= annual allocation
     capacity building                December    31st                                 C= number of LGs compliant
                         25   0   0                             15%
     support        in                of each year.
     accordance with                                                  CY 2017 : 70 %   T= total number of LGs
     their      annual                                                                 G= annual goal in percentage
     capacity                                                         CY 2018 : 80 %   (*)= multiplied
     development plan
                                                                                       (/)= divided
                                                                                       (>)= greater than
                                                                                       (<)= lesser than


                                                                                       If C/T < 0.15, D = 0
                                                                                       If C/T > yearly target, D=A


                                                                                       If the target is not met for a given
                                                                                       year, the undisbursed amount will be
                                                                                       redistributed equally in the projected

                                                         I-72
                                                                                  disbursement of next years.


                                                                                  Disbursement from the Bank will be
                                                                                  calculated based on milestones
                                                                                  reached on individual sub-projects.


                                                                                  D=Ps*0.2*U+Pc*0.8*U
                                                                                  Where:
                                                                                  D= total disbursement
                                                                                  Ps=    Sum   of   population in
                                                                                  disadvantaged neighborhoods for
m) DLI 7                                                                          which the contracts have been
   Targeted number                                                                tendered
   of people living in                                                            Pc=    Sum   of   population in
   targeted                                                                       disadvantaged neighborhoods for
   disadvantaged                       December 31st                              which the works have been
                         40   0   30                          >20,000   500,000
   neighborhoods                       of each year.                              completed
   have     benefited
                                                                                  U= A/Pt
   from     improved
   municipal                                                                      A= total allocation
   infrastructure                                                                 Pt= total target population      in
                                                                                  disadvantaged neighborhoods
                                                                                  (*)= multiplied
                                                                                  (/)= divided
                                                                                  (>)= greater than
                                                                                  (<)= lesser than


                                                                                  If (Ps*0.2)+(Pc*0.8)<20,000,
                                                                                  D=0


                                                       I-73
                                                                              If (Ps*0.2)+(Pc*0.8)> Pt, D=A.
                                                                              Disbursement for CY 2015 allocation
                                                                              on a Yes/No basis.


                                                                              Disbursements for CY 2016, 2017,
                                                                              and 2018
                                                                              D=A*(K/T)/G
                                                                              Where:
                                                                              D = Annual disbursement
                                                                              A= Annual allocation
                                                                              K = Number of annual Audits
                                                             CY 2016 : 60 %   completed by Sep 30 of each year
DLI8:
Transparency and                                                              T = Total Number of LG financial
access        to                December 31st                                 statement legally submitted by LG to
                   20   0   0                          30%   CY 2017 : 70 %
information                     of each year.                                 the Cour des Comptes
improved                                                                      G = Annual goal (expressed in
                                                             CY 2018 : 80 %
                                                                              percentage of audits completed)
                                                                              (*)= multiplied
                                                                              (/)= divided
                                                                              (>)= greater than
                                                                              (<)= lesser than


                                                                              If K/T < 0.3, D = 0
                                                                              If K/T > G, D=A


                                                                              If the target is not met for a given

                                                I-74
       year, the undisbursed amount will be
       redistributed equally in the projected
       disbursement of next years.




I-75
           Annex 5 : Local Government Mandated Functional Assignments

Investments which fall within the LG mandates and which are listed by the CPSCL as eligible LG
functions are summarized in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: List of functions which fall within the mandate of local governments

Investment category             Examples of projects

Economic Facilities         n) Municipal markets; commercial centers and shops, parking,
                               slaughterhouses; for profit Recreational parks
Community Facilities        o) Community facilities including sports facilities (sports fields, sports
                               centers, swimming pools, youth centers, kindergarden), Cultural
                               and recreational facilities (library, movie theater, theater, gallery,
                               museum, zoo).
Basic Infrastructure        p) Roads and sidewalks, street lighting, storm water drainage, potable
                               water, sanitation (wastewater), maintenance of basic infrastructure
Planning and housing            Servicing of vacant land for economic activities, housing, and
                                rehabilitation of neighborhoods.
Vehicles and equipment          Vehicles and equipment for road maintenance, vehicles and
                                equipment for public transportation, vehicles and equipment for
                                household waste collection, computer equipment.
Administrative      buildings   Town halls, municipal buildings
and equipment
Environment-oriented            Improvements to green spaces, sanitation, recreational parks.
projects
Land acquisition                Land acquisition, buildings.


The following investments are eligible for funding under the Program:
      small or medium scale civil works such as road and drainage construction, rehabilitation and
       upgrading, and paving;
      street lighting;
      extension/connectivity to public sanitation network;
      storm water drainage;
      solid waste collection;
      park maintenance and establishment of recreation facilities;
      community markets;
      other environmental improvements.




                                                76
Annex 6: Local Governments eligible to receive funds under the Conditional Grant


Targeted Local Governments and Neighborhoods
                                                          Estim.
                                                Number
                                                         Number
                                                   of
Region         Governorate    Municipality                  of
                                                Neighbor
                                                         inhabi-
                                                 hoods
                                                          tants
               Tunis
                              Le Bardo               1      1,230

                              El Kram                1     20,000

                                                     2     21,230
               Total Tunis
               Ariana
                              Ettadhamen             1      7,200

                              Raoued                 2     10,000

                              Raoued                 1      6,000


                                                     1      7,500



                                                     1      2,100


                              Raoued                 1      6,000
                              Kalaat       Al
 Grand Tunis                                         1      4,000
                              Andalous
                              Soukra                 1      2,000

                              Soukra                 1      1,250

                              Soukra                 1       900

                              Soukra                 1      1,000

                              Soukra                 1      1,700

                              Ariana                 1      2,500

                                                  14       52,150
               Total Ariana
               Manouba
                                                     1      1,250
                              Denden
                              Djedaïda               1      3,550

                              Djedaïda               1      3,550

                              Djedaïda               2      2,500



                                                77
                            Oued Ellil          2    2,550

                            Oued Ellil          2    3,250

                            Mornaguia           1    2,150

                            Mornaguia           1    2,150

                            Tebourba            1    1,125

                            Borj El Amri        1     800

                            Douar Hicher        1     750

                            Douar Hicher        1    2,550

                            Douar Hicher        1    2,550

                            Douar Hicher        1    1,100

                            Manouba             1     750

                            Djedaïda            1     750

                                                1     450

                                                1     750

                                                1    2,000

                                                1    3,500

                                                1    1,350

             Total                          24      39,375
             Manouba
             Ben Arous
                            Mornaguia           2    1,275

                            Rades               1    6,000
                            Hammam
                                                1    2,250
                            Chott
                            Hammam Lif          1     450

                            Ez-Zahra            1    2,000

             Total    Ben                       6   11,975
             Arous
             Zaghouan
                            El Fahs             1    1,000

                            El Fahs             1    1,000

                            Zaghouan            1    1,000
North-East
                            Bir Mchergua        1    2,000

                            Ez-Zeriba           2    1,500

                            Ez-Zeriba           1     600


                                           78
                              En-Nadhour              2    2,250

                                                      1    3,000

                                                      1    3,000
              Total
                                                  11      15,350
              Zaghouan
              Nabeul
                              Beni Khiar              1    5,000

                              Somaâ                   2     400

                                                      1    5,000

                              Grombalia               1    1,700

                              Hammamet                1    1,250
                              Menzel
                                                      3   15,000
                              Temime
                              El Mâamoura             1    1,000

                              Kelibia                 1    3,500

                              Korba                   1    5,000

                              Dar Chaabane            1    4,500

                                                      1     750
                              Hammam        El
                                                      1    1,000
                              Guezaz
                              El Haouaria             1    4,000

                                                  16      48,100
              Total Nabeul
              Bizerte
                              Bizerte                 1    3,000
                              Menzel
                                                      1    4,000
                              Bourguiba
                              Mateur                  1    2,500

                              El Alia                 1    1,000

                              Sedjnane                1     300

                              Tinja                   1    2,500

                                                      1    4,000

                                                      1    4,000

                                                      8   21,300
              Total Bizerte
              Monastir
                              Moknine                 2   10,000
Center-East
                              Amiret
                                                      1    2,330
                              Touazra



                                                 79
               Amiret Hojjaj         2    1,550

               Touza                 1    1,200

               Sayada                1    7,500

               Zermadine             1    3,200

                                     1    6,750
               Teboulba
               Ksibt     El
                                     1    1,550
               Mediouni
               Menzel   En-
                                     1    2,000
               Nour
               Sahline
                                     1    4,380
               Môotmar
Total
                                 12      40,460
Monastir
Sousse
               Zaouiet Sousse        1    1,450

               Sidi El Heni          1     300

               Kalâa Kébira          1     600

               Akouda                1    1,650

               Ksibet Thrayet        1     700

                                     1    1,350

               Hergla                1     900

               M'Saken               1    2,850

                                     1    2,500

                                     9   12,300
Total Sousse
Mahdia
                                     1
               Mahdia
               El Bradâa             1    1,500

               Essouassi             1     600

               El Djem               1    1,900
               Ouled
                                     1     640
               Chamekh
               Melloulech            1    1,620

               Ksour Essef           1    1,560

               Hebira                1     320

               Bou Merdes            1     800

               Chorbane              1     700

               Réjiche               1    2,000




                                80
                            Sidi Alouane        1     800

                                            12      12,440
             Total Mahdia
             Sfax
                            Sakiet Ezzit        1    4,900

                            Gremda              1    5,000

                            Skhira              1    6,000

                                                2    5,100
                            El Hencha
                            Kerkennah           2    2,200

                                                7   23,200
             Total Sfax
             Béja
                            Béja                1    2,280

                                                1    1,960


                                                1    5,130


                                                1    5,000


                                                1    5,075


                            Goubellat           1    2,550


                                                6   21,995
             Total Béja
             Jandouba
                            Oued Meliz          1    1,500
North-West

                            Fernana             1     470


                            Tabarka             1    3,200


                               Jendouba         1    2,750


                            Bou Salem           1    2,400


                                                1    1,700


                            Beni M'tir          1     133


             Total                              7   12,153
             Jandouba



                                           81
              Le Kef
                                  Sakiet Sidi
                                                        1    3,850
                                    Youssef

                                        Es-Sers         1    5,250


                                    Dahmani             1    4,250


                                        Djerissa        1    1,800


                                    El Ksour            1    3,450


                               Menzel Salem             1     800


                                                        1    1,200


                                        Touiref         1    1,600


                                                        8   22,200
              Total Le Kef
              Siliana
                              El Aroussa
                                                        1    1,800

                              Er-Rouhia
                                                        1    2,100

                              Gaâfour                   1    1,250


                                                        1    1,250


                              El Krib                   1    3,000


                              Bargou                    1    2,500


                                                        1    3,650


                                                        1    1,500


                                                        8   17,050
              Total Siliana
              Kairouan
                                                        1    6,000
                              Kairouan
Center-West
                              Kairouan                  1    2,200




                                                   82
                                   1     850


                                   1    2,000


                                   1    2,000


                                   1    3,000


                                   1    2,000


                                   1    2,500


                                   1     850


                                   1    2,200
              Nasrallah

              Menzel Mehiri        2    1,200


Total                          12      24,800
Kairouan
Sidi Bouzid
              Sidi Ali Ben
                                   1    1,800
              Aoun

              Mezzouna             1     750


              Meknassy             1    6,000


              Jilma                2    3,500


              Regueb               1    1,000

              Menzel
                                   1    3,750
              Bouzaine

              Ouled Haffouz        1     850


              Bir El Hafey         1    2,820


              Cebalet              1    1,680


                                   1    4,600



                              83
                                                    1    4,500


                                                    1    3,000


                                                    1    6,500


             Total     Sidi                     14      40,750
             Bouzid
             Kasserine
                              Feriana               1    2,100




                              Feriana               2    1,200




                              Foussana              1    4,200


                              Foussana              1     900


                                                    1    2,100


                              Hidra                 2    1,800

                              Majel      Bel
                                                    2    2,100
                              Abbes

                              Telept                1    2,400


                              Sbiba                 2    3,000


             Total                              13      19,800
             Kasserine
             Gafsa
                              Gafsa                 1    8,500

                              El Ksour              1    5,300


                              Metlaoui              1    6,500
South-West

                              Sned                  2    3,800


                              Mdhila                1    1,800




                                               84
                                                 6   25,900
             Total Gafsa
             Tozeur
                            Nefta                2    1,630




                            Tozeur               2   12,500




                            Tameghza             1     285


                            Hamed Jerid          1    1,870


                                                 6   16,285
             Total Tozeur
             Kebili
                            Kebili               1    7,920


                            Jemna                1    2,800


                                                 3    8,447


                            El Golâa             1    3,000


                            Douz                 1   13,000


                                                 7   35,167
             Total Kebili
             Mednine
                            Djerba Houmet
                                                 1    2,225
                            Souk

                                                 1    2,605


                            Zarzis               1    3,000


South-East                  Ben Guerdane         1    7,000


                            Beni Khedache        1     450


                            Djerba Ajim          1    6,500


                                                 6   21,780
             Total Medine


                                            85
Tataouine
              Ghomrassen           1    2,985


              Remada               1    1,450


              Bir Lahmar           1    2,200


              Dhehiba              1    1,480


Total                              4    8,115
Tataouine
Gabes
              Gabes                1    5,500


              Gabes                1    6,200


              Gabes                1     810


              Gabes                1    2,800


              Gabes                1    7,500


              Chenini Nahal        1    1,875


              El Metouia           1    3,000


              Ouedhref             1    2,000


              Ghanouch             1    3,400


              Mareht               1    4,300


                               10      37,385
Total Gabes




                              86
