                                                         89814




         IT SKILLS ASSESSMENT IN
                        ARMENIA




The Global Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) Unit
                                                 The World Bank
                                                       June 2014
Contents
Abbreviations ....................................................................................................................................2
Tables ................................................................................................................................................2
Figures...............................................................................................................................................2
Acknowledgement .............................................................................................................................4
Executive Summary............................................................................................................................5
OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY...................................................................................................................9
     SCOPE OF THE STUDY................................................................................................................................ 9
     METHODOLOGY ...................................................................................................................................... 10
1.      OVERVIEW OF THE IT AND HIGH-TECHNOLOGY SECTOR IN ARMENIA ......................................... 12
     1.1.      INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT .......................................................................................................... 12
     1.2. HISTORICAL DYNAMICS OF THE SECTOR.......................................................................................... 13
     1.2. TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS ......................................................................................................... 15
     1.4. GROWTH POTENTIAL OF THE SECTOR ............................................................................................. 16
2.      DEMAND SIDE ANALYSIS OF SKILLS GAP IN ARMENIAN IT AND HIGH TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY ... 18
     2.1. QUANTITATIVE DEMAND ANALYSIS OF SECTOR COMPANIES ......................................................... 18
     2.2. QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF DEMAND BY SECTOR COMPANIES ....................................................... 22
     2.3. RECRUITMENT AND HR PRACTICES IN IT AND HIGH TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES ........................... 28
3.      SUPPLY SIDE ANALYSIS OF SKILLS GAP IN IT AND HIGH TECHNOLOGY INDUSTIRES...................... 31
     3.1. EDUCATION SYSTEM OVERVIEW IN ARMENIA ................................................................................ 31
     3.2. IT AND ENGINEERING EDUCATION SYSTEM IN ARMENIA ............................................................... 33
     3.3. CASE OF SUCCESSFUL UNIVERSITY-PRIVATE SECTOR COLLABORATION: ........................................ 42
     3.4. VOCATIONAL EDUCATION IN IT AND ENGINEERING SECTORS ........................................................ 44
4. SUMMARY AND HIGH LEVEL RECOMMENDATIONS ....................................................................... 47
     4.1. HIGH-LEVEL SHORT-TERM RECOMMENDATIONS AND KEY POINTS FOR POLICYMAKERS .............. 48
     4.2. HIGH-LEVEL LONG-TERM RECOMMENDATIONS AND KEY POINTS FOR POLICYMAKERS ................ 50
5. APPENDIX .................................................................................................................................... 53
     5.1 COMPANIES SURVEY ......................................................................................................................... 53
     5.2. UNIVERSITY SURVEY......................................................................................................................... 59
     5.3. TRAINING CENTER SURVEY .............................................................................................................. 64
     5.4. LIST OF THE SURVEYED PARTIES ...................................................................................................... 69




                                                                            1
                                          Abbreviations
ANEL: Armenian National Engineering Laboratory
AUA: American University of Armenia
CAGR: Compound Annual Growth Rate
ERA: European Regional Educational Academy
FDI: Foreign Direct Investment
GDP: Gross Domestic Product
IT: Information Technology
NSS RA: National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia
RAU: Russian-Armenian (Slavonic) University
SEUA: State Engineering University of Armenia
UITE: Union of Information Technology Enterprises
WEF: Women’s Economic Forum
YSU: Yerevan State University

                                                Tables
Table 1: Number of IT and Engineering students and graduates in the universities, 2013/2014
Table 2: Student-to-faculty ratio in Armenian universities
Table 3: Average age of the university lecturers, 2014
Table 4: Characteristics and indicators training centers in Armenia
Table 5: Characteristics and KPIs of educational systems initiated by private companies

                                                Figures
Figure 1: Number of companies participated in the survey categorized by type and origin
Figure 2: Number of surveyed companies categorized by size
Figure 3: The number of respondent companies and their total employees categorized by company type
Figure 4: Number of survey participants representing IT education sector
Figure 5: Percentage of population using Internet, 2011
Figure 6: Computer and information services as % of all commercial services exports, 2012
Figure 7: Armenia computer & information services exports
Figure 8: IT industry turnover, labor productivity and number of employees, 2006-2013
Figure 9: the dynamics of the company distribution in IT sector of Armenia
Figure 10: The forecasts of employee absorption potential in IT and Engineering sectors


                                                    2
Figure 11: Total number of demanded IT specialists in surveyed companies categorized by company size
Figure 12: Forecasted % growth of employee number in small, medium and large companies in short-
term and long-term
Figure 13: Number of demanded IT specialists categorized by IT and High-tech sectors
Figure 14: Number of required IT specialists categorized by specialization
Figure 15: Breakdown of short-term "Other" category
Figure 16: Breakdown of long-term "Other" category
Figure 17: Recruitment constraints in IT and Engineering companies
Figure 18: Assessment of skills for graduates in IT and Engineering sectors by companies
Figure 19: Assessment of soft skill importance of job candidates
Figure 20: Share of English-speaking employees in surveyed IT companies
Figure 21: Company preference for different candidate skills and knowledge and other characteristics
Figure 22: The current structure of labor force in the sector by university degrees (survey results versus
Enterprise Incubator Foundation)
Figure 23: Companies' preference for the major or discipline of graduates
Figure 24: Company preference for recruiting from Armenian universities
Figure 25: Recruitment channels in IT and High technology sectors
Figure 26: WEF ranking on the Quality of Educational System, 2013-2014, Score, out of 7
Figure 27: WEF ranking on the Quality of Math and Science Education, 2013-2014, Score, out of 7
Figure 28: Number of IT-related students and graduates
Figure 29: Estimated number of graduates from IT-related faculties, 2013/14-2015/16
Figure 30: Public expenditure on tertiary education as % of GDP, 2011
Figure 31: Number of teaching staff in universities by IT and Engineering specializations, 2013/2014
Figure 32: Student-to-faculty ratio in local and Western Universities, 2014
Figure 33: Main methods of job search by the students (on the left) and their effectiveness (on the right,
measured by receiving a job offer)




                                                    3
Acknowledgement

This report was prepared by Sandra Sargent (Senior Operations Officer) and Saori Imaizumi (ICT
Innovation & Education Consultant) at the Global Information Communication Technologies (ICT) Unit of
the World Bank with EV Consulting based in Yerevan, Armenia. The team would like to thank Bagrat
Yengibaryan (Director, Enterprise Incubator Foundation) and the peer reviewers, including Ulrich
Bartsch (Senior Economist), Feyi Boroffice (Finance and Private Sector Development Specialist),
Siddhartha Raja (ICT Policy Specialist), and Vigen Sargsyan (EXT, Yerevan Office) for guidance and
support provided in the preparation of this report.




                                                      4
Executive Summary
The IT and high-technology sector is one of the fastest growing sectors in the Armenian economy.
Since 2006, the sector, excluding Internet service providers, has grown with a CAGR of 22% reaching a
total output of US$294 million in 2013. The number of companies operating in the sector is ~380, the
number of employees ~8,000. About 13% of the companies operate in the high-technology domain,
while the rest are IT companies.
One of the driving factors of sector growth was its attractiveness for foreign companies to establish
branches in Armenia. The prime competitiveness factor was the availability of relatively cheap and
competitive human resources in Armenia. Currently, Armenia seems to be on the verge of losing this
competitive advantage.
Due to the growing number of IT companies in Armenia, demand for IT specialists will continue to
increase. According to conservative estimates, if the market and productivity continue to grow with an
average rate of 18% and 1% respectively, the absorption potential of additional IT specialists will grow at
a rate of 17% annually and reach ~15,000 by 2017.
The sector is currently undergoing a major transformation: there is an increasing shift from the
outsourcing model to the model of own product development and entrepreneurship in the sector. This
model of growth requires a higher level of knowledge, new skills (such as sales and entrepreneurship
skills), and entrepreneurial knowledge.
The outsourcing model mostly fostered the growth of the sector as well as attracting international
companies and FDI. The model is based on outsourcing activities, which can be sustained because of a
low-cost and high-quality workforce in the global market, which is beneficial to foreign companies. Thus,
the model is built on the basis of cost-competitiveness.
Current sector trends are moving toward a higher value-added entrepreneurship model. The presence
of international companies, which bring sector-specific culture into the country, and the international
startup boom are driving the development of the model among IT and high-tech specialists. These
factors are expected to advance the market toward more value-added activities and overall sector
growth. Therefore, the education sector also needs to adapt quickly and reflect these challenges in
order to sustain IT/high-tech sector competitiveness.
In order to sustain this growth from its traditionally high quality labor force, the country currently faces
the issue of providing a sufficient supply of IT skills. The increasing demand for IT skills is a global trend,
but in Armenia it is more constraining due to the small size of the labor force in the country and an
increase in competition between the local industry and multinationals. At the current point of sector
development this is a complex issue, as the skills gap increases with the positive dynamics and
development of the IT industry. This implies that the skills shortage is increasing in parallel with the
sophistication of the industry.
IT and high-technology companies view the mismatch between the supply of and the demand for a
skilled IT workforce as a key factor that hinders sector growth.


                                                      5
Currently, private sector does not place high value on university degree in their recruitment practices,
indicating the diminishing role and image of higher education in the sector. This particularly applies to
the master’s level degree programs. There can be two plausible explanations why this may be the case:
(i) educational institutions are not producing skills required on the market, (ii) limited sophistication of
the IT market that does not yet require high-end skills obtained from a master’s degree.
Overall, the higher education system in Armenia lacks competitive dynamism and efficiency when it
comes to IT skills. The quest to join the European Higher Education Area compels Armenia to reform.
Armenia is undertaking reforms through the Bologna process in order to join the European Higher
Education Area.
Currently, the number of graduates with IT specializations annually closely coincides with the annual
demand in the overall market, but only 45% of the graduates consider or qualify to be employed in the
sector, thus creating a quantitative workforce imbalance.




                        ~450 graduates                             ~2,000 new specialists demanded




                                         IT and high-technology sector

The number of specialists demonstrates the demand only in the IT and high-technology sector and does
not include non-IT and non-high technology companies, which are also in need of IT specialists. Thus,
the actual demand in the market might be much higher than 2,000 new specialists per year.
In addition, due to the positive and rapid industry dynamics, there is also a qualitative skills gap
conditioned by the following factors:
       Teaching programs are not always meeting private sector needs: the private sector assessment
        for practical and theoretical knowledge of graduates is below average.
       More effective links needed between university and private sector in regard to internships and
        recruitment procedures.
       More professional development opportunities are needed to maintain teaching staff
        qualifications.
       The teaching staff cadre is aging, while the younger generation with hands-on experience has
        little interest in an academic career.
       University programs do not fully emphasize the self-development and self-educational
        capabilities of graduates, essential for the dynamically developing industry.
       There are limited alternatives such as certification programs to formal university degree
        programs.



                                                      6
      There are limited postgraduate requalification training programs for base- and senior-level
       specialists.
   To address these sector issues, short- and long-term recommendations are suggested.
Short-term recommendations:

      A new university curriculum would benefit from the inputs of the private sector to align it with
       the industry needs. For this purpose, it is recommended that special curriculum development
       boards be established and board members be elected from industry specialists and executives.
      It is recommended that policymakers explore the possibility of increasing the quota of students
       in IT-related faculties whose tuition is funded by the Government. Provided there is additional
       budget, a higher free student quota, which is allocated to students based on their entrance
       exam results, will attract more qualified candidates.
      The link between universities and the private sector should be strengthened through
       reinvigorating the role of mandatory internship/apprenticeship programs. The dialogue
       between the parties can be strengthened through creation of a new standard of internship
       programs - apprenticeship, mandatory for students to receive the degree.
      More young professionals from sector should be encouraged to teach in universities through a
       guest lecturer programs.
      The urgent need for entry level and senior level specialists can be satisfied via creation of special
       certification training programs, currently limited in the market.
      Cofinancing schemes for workforce development through creation of training centers can help
       smaller companies to close the skills gap.
      Special cofinancing matching schemes can be developed with the support of the Government to
       promote establishment of special training centers co-shared by the companies.
      Widespread and targeted communication campaigns can be organized to highlight the prospects
       and strong market demand for the engineering profession.
      The quantity of applicants in technical faculties can be stimulated by information campaigns on
       the engineering profession, where the engineering career is presented as being at the core of
       modern economy.


Long-term recommendations:
      The university funding would benefit from a considerable increase as well as diversification
       through research grants and endowment foundations.
      The government approach to supporting skills development need to be focused on
       comprehensive problem solving.
      The number of university-based laboratories, which are established with the help of
       multinationals, should be scaled up. Similar to the establishment of ANEL together with National
       Instruments, USAID, and Government, more laboratories need to be established on university
       premises to strengthen the technical environment for students.


                                                    7
   Creating an alternative program such as certifications and an associate’s degree to prepare
    software programmers in less than four years will help increase the supply of labor in the
    medium term.
   The universities may consider revitalizing their career centers in order to support their
    graduates.
   If Armenia aspires to transition from an outsourcing and development center destination to an
    innovation center functioning under an entrepreneurship model, it would need to integrate
    fundamental research and development practices into its university system. The development of
    innovation and R&D capabilities is easier to inculcate if students are accustomed to performing
    fundamental research from early years of their study.
   High-tech accelerators can become a valuable resource for entrepreneurs.
   As the entrepreneurship model will require more innovative and high-end solutions and product
    development, it will also eventually require a high-level graduate and postgraduate base and
    radically new approaches to education and skill development to move up the innovation value
    chain.




                                              8
OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY
The purpose of the study is to assess the potential gap that exists between the demand and supply of
qualified human resources in the IT and high-technology sector in Armenia. Having sufficient qualified
specialists with the corresponding skill set would have a major impact on the IT/high-technology sector
growth potential in Armenia and can be a core driver of further development. Armenia’s IT/high-
technology sector is facing constraints with recruitment of this talent, which could lead to a loss of
sector competitiveness.
This study collects and analyzes data provided by the private sector on the quality and relevance of the
existing labor force and constraints faced by the industry during recruitment. It also reviews the main
impediments to closing the existing skills gap in the market. This analysis can help policymakers to:

       Examine the impact of the skills gap on the further development of the sector
       Assess the performance of IT education and training systems and workplace demand in the
        context of the IT/high-tech industry
       Identify the critical bottlenecks and reduce deficiencies in the overall ecosystem necessary to
        prepare qualified specialists


SCOPE OF THE STUDY
The study relied on secondary data, statistical data, and primary data collected through a survey and
interviews implemented within the following scope:

       Survey of 30 companies operating in the IT and high-technology sector in Armenia
       Interview with five major higher educational institutions operating in Armenia

       Interview with five main training centers, industry experts, several students, and other
        stakeholders from the IT community in Armenia.
On the demand side, the study is based on the information collected through interviews that assess
employers’ satisfaction level of graduates’ theoretical knowledge and practical skills, their soft skills and
fluency in English, and additional generic capabilities. Valuable inputs from industry experts including
the Union of Information Technology Enterprises (UITE) and Granatus Ventures were also collected and
analyzed in the report.
On the supply side, the survey focused on the main providers of IT education, their programs and
quality of teaching staff, the estimation of the potential quantity of graduates, and the identification of
key quality constraints.
Secondary data is sourced from the National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia (NSS RA) and
the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Armenia.
The report juxtaposes the demand and supply parameters and analyzes the implications on the sector
for the next 3-4 years. Based on the assessment results, high-level recommendations are given to
address the system constraints and support the sector’s growth and competitiveness.


                                                     9
METHODOLOGY
A rapid assessment methodology was applied to collect both quantitative and qualitative data from
companies and education institutions. The target sample for the demand side survey was executives and
HR managers of the companies. It is noteworthy that the sample size of the survey comprises ~13% of
total players in the sector; nevertheless, it reflects the viewpoints of the major players of the field. The
selected sample includes major market players and representatives of companies of various sizes, origin,
activities, and target markets. Figure 1 shows the composition of international and local companies. The
majority of the companies surveyed were local companies.
Figure 1: Number of companies participating in the survey categorized by type and origin




 International      3            4                                               From the 30 companies one was
                                                                                 disqualified. The remaining selection
         Local                             17               5                    comprises     local   companies     and
                                                                                 branches/subsidiaries  of  international
                                      IT        High-tech                        companies.


Source: EV Consulting company survey

As indicated in Figure 2, large, medium, and small companies were included in the sample to build an
objective evaluation of the market trends and balance the outcome of the responses based on different
skills gap issues faced by the different sizes of the companies. While more IT companies were surveyed
than high-technology companies, the number of employees in the high-technology companies exceeded
those in the IT companies.
Figure 2: Number of surveyed companies categorized by size
                                                                             The distribution of companies between large,
      Large (51+ employees)                             7                    medium, and small sizes is based on the
                                                                             number of employees and reflects the
 Medium (11-50 employees)                                        17          average distribution of the industry.

      Small (1-10 employees)                        5



Source: EV Consulting company survey
Figure 3: The number of respondent companies and their total employees categorized by company type



 High-tech              9                                        High-tech                      1,246


         IT                           21                                IT           589


                            IT       High-tech                                             IT   High-tech



                                                                10
Supply side data was collected through interviewing the main representatives of educational systems in
Armenia, such as all major universities which have a considerable role in IT education, along with
training centers and other major parties, including university labs and career centers.


Figure 4: Number of survey participants representing IT education sector


      Universities                                        5

 Training centers                                  4

    Other parties                                         5


Source: EV Consulting company survey

Data collection for the survey took place from 29 March 2014 to 29 April 2014 and included 43
interviews. Depending on the situation of the respondent, the time taken to interview and complete the
questionnaire ranged between 30 to 90 minutes.
All the interviews were conducted face to face by an interviewer on the company, university or other
party premises. The interviewer also administered the corresponding background questionnaires (in
Appendix).
The forecasts are carried out based on the understanding of the existing plans and upcoming initiatives
of major educational establishments providing IT education and companies in the next three years.




                                                              11
      1. OVERVIEW OF THE IT AND HIGH-TECHNOLOGY SECTOR IN
         ARMENIA

1.1.       INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT
Compared internationally and to other neighboring countries, Armenia has a competitive workforce, a
relatively favorable trade environment, and increasing computer and information services exports.
According to the Global Competitiveness Index, Armenia ranked 79th out of 148 countries in 2013-2014
while the Russian Federation ranked 64th.
From the trade perspective, according to OECD’s trade facilitation indicators, Armenia’s trade facilitation
performance is better than the averages of Europe (non-OECD) and Central Asia and lower middle
income countries in the areas of information availability, automation, and internal border agency co-
operation.1 On the other hand, Armenia performs less well on appeal procedures and simplification and
harmonization of documents. Yet, the country surpasses the lower middle-income country average in all
these five areas. Trade facilitation indicators identify potential areas of improvement to bring more
trade impact through improving border procedures, reducing trade costs, boosting trade flows, and
getting greater benefits from international trade.
In terms of education level, Armenia has a higher share of population with university degrees compared
to other countries. The European Training Foundation conducted a comparative study among Georgia,
Armenia, and Morocco in 2012. The results show that compared to Morocco, Georgia and Armenia have
a higher education level due to the Soviet legacy of being a high-tech hub. On average, one-quarter of
the population in Georgia and Armenia has university degrees.2
In the IT industry, Armenia performs better than other neighboring countries in terms of computer and
information services exports, while only around half of the population uses the Internet as of 2011.3
Figure 5: Percentage of population using Internet, 2011


      Georgia                                                                 44
      Ukraine                                                             44
     Armenia                                                             42
      Belarus                                                       40
     Moldova                                                       38
    Azerbaijan                                    24

                 0          10           20            30      40                  50

Source: Armenia ICT Trade Report, July 2013, the World Bank

1
  http://www.oecd.org/tad/facilitation/Armenia_OECD-Trade-Facilitation-Indicators.pdf
2
  http://www.etf.europa.eu/webatt.nsf/0/E811EB8749A0287BC1257C0700318D02/$file/Migration&skills_
Armenia &Georgia&Morocco.pdf
3
  Data is based on the World Bank’s Armenia ICT Trade Report, July 2013.

                                                              12
Figure 6: Computer and information services as % of all commercial services exports, 2012


    Armenia                                                                     8.2%
     Belarus                                                             7.0%
    Moldova                                                       6.2%
     Ukraine                                               5.3%
     Georgia       0.2%
  Azerbaijan      0.1%


Source: Armenia ICT Trade Report, July 2013, the World Bank



Figure 7: Armenia computer & information services exports


                                                             8.4%                 8.2%
                            7.7%      7.9%       7.4%
                6.9%                                                     7.0%
      5.5%

                                                              63                   65
                                        50                                56
                             44                    43
                 33
       22

      2005      2006        2007       2008       2009       2010        2011     2012

                          Computer and information services exports (US$ m)
                         As % of all commercial services


Source: Armenia ICT Trade Report, July 2013, the World Bank



1.2. HISTORICAL DYNAMICS OF THE SECTOR
The IT and high-technology sector is one of the fastest growing sectors in the Armenian economy. The
importance of the sector is growing despite its still small output and workforce size, comprising only
0.6% of the total employed population in Armenia.
Although the Government declared the IT sector to be a priority sector for the economy in 2002, its
support has accelerated recently through institutions such as the IT Development and Support Council,
the Enterprise Incubator Foundation backed by World Bank funding, and others.
The average labor productivity of the sector is about 4-5 times higher than the general average of the
economy. Productivity is growing as well, almost doubling from the level of 2006 (CAGR (Compound
Annual Growth Rate) of 9%). This is a sign of the sector’s maturity.
Since 2006, the sector, excluding Internet service providers, has grown with a CAGR of 22% reaching a
total output of US$294 million in 2013. The sector output accounts for about 3% of the country’s GDP


                                                                     13
(Note: the calculation is based on the total output of the sector divided by GDP, due to the absence of a
corresponding value-added indicator in the Armenian national statistics database). On the other hand,
the labor force share engaged in the sector is only about 0.7% of the country’s total.
Figure 8: IT industry turnover, labor productivity, and number of employees, 2006-2013

 300 ,000
                                                                                294,000
                                                                                                               ~3% of GDP
 250 ,000




 200 ,000




                                                                                                        ~0.7% of total labor force
 150 ,000



                                                                                 7,996

 100 ,000
                4,021


                75,200                                                          36,768
                                                                                                      ~4X higher the average level of
  50,0 00




            18,700
                                                                                                              the economy
       -




                2006         2008       2009        2010      2011       2012    2013

                        Turnover, thsd USD                  Productivity, USD
                        Number of technical employees
Source: EIF, Armenian IT Industry Report, 2006-2013

The number of companies operating in the sector is now about 380 according to EIF estimates. For this
study, the sector is analyzed in two subsectors:

                  IT companies: engaged in software and systems development, web, and mobile programming.
                  High technology companies: engaged in the development of software and hardware to design,
                   build, and utilize engines, machines, and automation structures.
The rough division of the number of companies in each sector shows that the major portion of
companies is mainly IT oriented:

                                             IT companies                                    High tech companies


                                  ~87% of the total number of                           ~13% of the total number of
                                          companies                                             companies


Source: NSS, Armenia

One of the driving factors of sector growth is its attractiveness for foreign companies to establish
branches in Armenia. The prime competitiveness factor is the availability of relatively cheap and
competitive human resources in Armenia. Armenia seems on the verge of losing this competitive
advantage.




                                                                       14
The breakdown of the companies by local and international shows the growing share of international
branches:
Figure 9: The dynamics of company distribution in the IT sector of Armenia




                                                                         Since 2008, the number of IT companies doubled
                                                                         with overall CAGR of 20%. The growth rate of the
                                                                         number of international companies outpaced
                                                                         that of the local companies by 9 percentage
                                                                         points (14% compared to 23% of international
                                                                         companies).




Source: EIF, Armenian IT Industry Report, 2006-2013

The growth in the number of local IT companies is supported by the thriving entrepreneurial spirit in the
sector. According to industry expert analysis, around 20 IT startups were founded each year in the
country since year 2000.
M&A activities intensified in the industry driven by foreign companies, such as Synopsys (with the
acquisition of LEDA Systems, Virage Logic, and Monterey Arset), VMWare (with the acquisition of
Integrien Corporation) etc., seeking talent and a qualified pool of software and hardware engineers.



1.2. TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS
The dynamic growth of the sector is marked by a number of significant developments.
Due to the high demand for IT workers, several training centers and laboratories were established at
universities with the collaborative effort of state, non-profit, private and government sectors. Among
the established training centers are the Microsoft Innovation Center, mLab ECA, and the Armenian-
Indian ICT Excellence Center.
The creation of the Armenian National Engineering Laboratory at the State Engineering University, a
program worth US$6.2 million, is remarkable in its attempt to provide modern engineering tools and
equipment and invigorate the strong engineering potential of Armenia.
The Gyumri Information Technology Center was launched with the objective of housing state-of-art
laboratories, educational centers, and business incubators. Two other techno-parks are planned to be
established. Multinationals such as IBM and Oracle have preliminary agreements with the Government
to establish centers of excellence in Armenia.
The establishment of the first venture capital fund, Granatus Venture Fund I, with the support of the
World Bank and the Government marks a crucial milestone in the formation of a startup ecosystem.


                                                            15
1.4. GROWTH POTENTIAL OF THE SECTOR
The industry has two sources for sustainable strong growth:
     -    Continued interest from international companies and a flow of FDI to the sector. This will
          require the industry to sustain its current competitive advantage of a low-cost and quality
          workforce relative to advanced markets. The current trend is going in the opposite direction,
          due to an increasingly scarce skilled workforce in the sector and rising remuneration levels.

     -    Rising entrepreneurial spirit in the sector and a growing number of startups founded locally. This
          will also mean that the quality of human resources in the sector is key, along with opportunities
          to link to international markets, venture funding, and creating an innovation ecosystem.
IT sector output is generally forecast based on the IT workforce size as the main constraint.
Nevertheless, in order to assess the sector’s human resource absorption potential, the potential growth
of the sector is forecasted (base scenario) based on the sector’s historical performance. The base growth
scenario assumes that continuation of the conservative average output growth trend is about 22% and
average productivity rate is 4%. Pessimistic and optimistic scenarios are projected to include market
volatility.
Figure 10: The forecasts of employee absorption potential in the IT and engineering sector




Source: EV analysis



Due to the growing number of IT companies in Armenia, demand for IT specialists will continue to
increase.



                                                             16
The growth tendencies of local and international companies in the market mean that there will be an
increasing demand for IT specialists in Armenia. According to the base scenario, if the market and
productivity continue to grow with an average rate of 18% and 1% respectively, the absorption potential
for additional IT specialists will grow at a rate of 17% annually and reach ~15,000 by 2017 (see Figure
10). This implies that the annual number of new specialists required in the next 3 years will be ~1,000-
2,000.
The quality of specialists and the level of skills will be of utmost importance. The increasing pressures
on productivity also dictate the need to shift to higher value-added niches for the sector. This requires
new skill sets for the total sector.
The sector is undergoing a major transformation right now: there is an increasing shift from the
outsourcing model to the model of own product development and entrepreneurship in the sector. This
model of growth requires a higher level of knowledge, new skills (such as sales skills), and
entrepreneurial knowledge and behavior.
The outsourcing model fostered the growth of the sector for the most part as well as attracting
international companies and FDI. The model is based on outsourcing activities, which can be sustained
because of a low-cost and high-quality workforce, beneficial to foreign companies. Thus, the model is
built on the basis of cost-competitiveness.
Current sector trends are moving toward a higher value-added entrepreneurship model. The presence
of international companies, which bring sector-specific culture into the country, and the international
startup boom are driving the development of the model among IT and high-tech specialists. These
factors are expected to advance the market toward more value-added activities and overall sector
growth.
The education sector needs to adapt quickly and reflect these challenges in order to sustain sector
competitiveness.
In order to sustain the growth based on the traditionally high quality labor force, the country currently
faces the issue of providing sufficient supply of IT skills. The increasing demand for IT skills is a global
trend, but in Armenia it is more constraining due to the small size of the industry in the country and an
increase in competition between the local industry and multinationals. At the current point of sector
development, this is a complex issue, as the skills gap increases with the positive dynamics and
development of the IT industry. This implies that the skills shortage is increasing in parallel with the
sophistication of the industry.




                                                    17
     2. DEMAND SIDE ANALYSIS OF SKILLS GAP IN ARMENIAN IT AND
        HIGH TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY

2.1. QUANTITATIVE DEMAND ANALYSIS OF SECTOR COMPANIES
IT and high-technology companies view the mismatch between the supply of and the demand
for skilled IT labor as a key factor that hinders the growth of the sector.
There is a qualitative gap between skills needed in IT and high-technology sector companies and those
supplied by the higher education system of the country. This translates into a constant quantitative
need for new employees in the sector.
The survey of the IT and high-technology companies showed the almost permanent need of the
companies for new talent with particular technical knowledge and skill sets. The survey assessed the
short-term (next 3-4 months) and long-term (up to 3 years) needs of the companies.
At the time of the interviews, about 70% of companies had one or more vacant positions and/or were
planning to have one during the next 3-4 months. Only 10% of the companies were not in search for
new talent.
Long-term forecasting of growth trends cannot be accurate due to the volatility of the sector, as well as
the project-based nature of most companies; however, the companies’ rough estimate of future talent
is about 10% growth in employees annually.
Figure 11: Total number of IT specialists wanted in surveyed companies categorized by company size


                                                                  353
     Large companies                                                          The average quantitative need for talent
                                    72
                                                                              expressed by the IT and engineering
                                                  198                         companies showed an aggregate of about
  Medium companies
                               45
                                                                              150 employees in the short term and
                              30                                              about 600 employees in the longer term.
     Small companies
                              30


        Long-term employee demand        Short-term employees wanted


Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 27

According to EIF estimates, the IT and high-technology industry absorption potential is about 2,000
employees annually of which about 300 are not being filled and remain as a gap. This is roughly in
accordance with the survey findings of about 150 current unfilled positions declared by about 10% of
sector companies.
The survey results show that the smaller companies aspire to grow at higher paces, which due to their
low starting base means a smaller number of employees in absolute terms.




                                                                 18
Figure 12: Forecast % growth of employee number in small, medium and large companies in short term and long term



    Large companies                    26%                                           The short-term growth refers to the
                            5%
                                                                                     upcoming period of about 3 months. The
                                                  47%                                longer term growth is for 1-3 year period
 Medium companies
                               11%                                                   time horizon.

    Small companies                                                 81%
                                                                    81%

                Average % growth of employee number in long-term
                Average % growth of employee number in short-term


Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 27

The smaller companies have high growth expectations for both the short-term and the long-term
perspectives. Meanwhile, the medium and large companies stick to the strategy of relatively
conservative growth in the short term and more aggressive recruitment in the long term.
The demand for new talent in the high-technology companies surveyed is higher compared to the IT
companies.
Figure 13: Number of IT specialists in demand categorized by IT and high-tech subsectors


         IT     61                     288

 High-tech        86                      293


              Short-term demand        Long-term demand

Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 27

Software development will remain the most widespread and in-demand specialization in the next
three years
Both in the short- and long-term perspective, software development in C++ and C# remains the highest
in-demand specialization in the IT sector followed by engineers. The demand for software engineers is
also estimated to increase within the next three years at a much higher rate compared with other
specializations.




                                                               19
 Figure 14: Number of required IT specialists categorized by specialization



                      Software engineers                                                                                           264
                                                                    54

   Hardware and automation engineers                                            92
                                                          27

                         Web developers                                  70
                                                     17

                       Mobile developers                                  78
                                                 7

                            QA engineers                       38
                                                 8

                                     Other                  39
                                                           34


                                             Long-term demand                 Short-term demand


Figure 15: Breakdown of short-term "Other" category                       Figure 16: Breakdown of long-term "Other" category


 Technical sales specialists                                                                  3D modellers                               10
                                                          11
                                                                                           UI/UX designers                     7
      Technician-installers                           10                             Hardware technicians                  4
                                                                                 Client support specialists                4
       Control automation…                   6                                       Database developers               3
            UI/UX designers                                                              Game developers               3
                                        4
                                                                                  Virtualization specialists       2
      Database developers        1                                                   IT security specialists       2
                                                                              Image processing specialists     1
   Virtualization specialists    1                                                 Technical HR managers       1
      IT security specialists    1                                                       Project managers      1
                                                                                          Technical writers    1


 Source: EV Consulting company survey
 Number of respondents: 27


   Methodological Note
   As no formal breakdown of specializations exists in the sector, the following main groups of IT and
   engineering specializations were constructed based on industry knowledge and company interviews:
        -    Software development specialists: includes .NET developers, particularly specialized in C++
             and C# programming language family with minor exceptions.
        -    Engineers: the category has the highest variety of narrow specializations due to the specifics
             of the sector. The category includes hardware, electronics and CAD engineers, PCB designers,
             etc.
        -    Web developer specialists: the category consists of mainly Java developers with knowledge of
             web-programming basics such as HTML, PHP, etc.
        -    Mobile developer specialists: the category includes professionals with the knowledge of
             relevant programming languages, such as Java, and the mobile platforms such as iOS, Android.
                                                                         20
The main constraint of recruitment for companies is the lack of qualified candidates in the market.
There is generally a large number of applicants for each job vacancy announced. However, the skill
levels of most candidates are not adequate and do not meet company requirements. According to the
sector companies, a lack of qualified candidates and talent is the main constraint of recruitment. There
is a mismatch in the available supply of candidates and the necessary skills demanded by the companies.
The skill mismatch is mostly qualitative, as the companies mentioned that any job announcement results
in numerous job applicants for the job. The number of job applicants is especially higher for junior
positions. Based on observations from the interviews, one of the first steps to increase the supply of
qualified labor would be increasing the quality of the existing labor pool.
According to several companies, the ratio of job applicants per position and the number of hired
applicants is constantly worsening, due to the increasing demand towards higher skills, in parallel with
the industry dynamics. For the junior positions, this ratio can be as low as 1 hire out of 80-85.
Figure 17: Recruitment constraints in IT and Engineering companies


         Lack of qualified candidates                                25

             High salary expectations                    12

                   Budget limitations               9

            Lack of recruitment staff       2

 Lack of future business opportunity    1


Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 29

The limited supply of qualified labor is inflating salary expectations. The current salaries still remain
competitive for the multinationals. However, given that Armenia is pursuing a product-based rather
than an outsourcing-based model for its development, this poses a constraint to local industry
development and growth of Armenian IT products.
As a consequence of the IT skills gap in the industry, qualified candidates become more in demand,
which results in their salary expectations exceeding their knowledge and skills. In 2012-2013, the
monthly net salary of IT employees varied in the range of US$300-US$3,500. The official level of the
average monthly net remuneration in Armenia for 2013 was about US$290, which is about equal to the
lower level of the average IT sector salary. This indicates that IT/high-tech is a very high value-added
sector, and increasing jobs in the sector will have a positive effect for the economy as a whole.
The company interviews revealed that the upper limit is constantly increasing and in some cases reaches
up to US$4,000-US$4,500, which also exceeds candidates’ knowledge or qualifications and is a result of
the scarcity of qualified specialists.




                                                              21
The migration trend severely impacts the pool of available IT specialists in Armenia.
Currently there is a significant migration outflow from Armenia caused by economic conditions, which in
particular causes a brain drain in the IT and high-technology industry. The majority of the companies
interviewed confirm that retention has recently been dropping due to the high number of emigrating
employees.
Nevertheless, there is a “conditional division? of developers and engineers based on their emigration
patterns:
Impactful, creative, and global career seekers. The careerists represent the category of people who have
the ambition of professional growth as a priority and who do not see enough opportunities in Armenia
with respect to career: the interviewees mentioned that the professional ambition of the specialists
goes beyond salary level. It strives towards higher positions and impact in the global markets, which in
their opinion is not likely to happen in Armenia-based companies. The majority of those departing are
senior and mid-level specialists. Some of the specialists leave their Armenian companies and start a
career by joining local startup companies, but the majority of them find employment outside the
country. There are no precise statistics on the number of migrating IT specialists, but all of the
respondents unanimously perceive that greater percentage graduates is choosing foreign employment
that local.
The locally-established relatively small companies face intensifying competitions in hiring local talent.
Startups and smaller companies face market and revenue growth limitations. These companies require
further startup funding to facilitate their growth and need for new hires, in order to expand in the
market and be able to work on new product development.
Armenia has a very small IT labor force due to the overall small population size; therefore, “poaching? of
skilled labor represents a particular problem. The increasing remuneration levels of the labor market
poses real risks for such startups and small companies, as their abilities to get new quality hires by
providing competitive salary levels is weak.


Small companies also face the issue of lack of designated HR recruitment function in their companies.
Several companies mentioned the issue of lacking specialized recruitment personnel, which hinders
their ability to source necessary talent. The medium to large size companies generally create HR
functions, with the main focus on recruitment and trainings. Some other issues relating to HR functions
of the companies are discussed later in the report.


2.2. QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF DEMAND BY SECTOR COMPANIES
According to the information obtain from the private sector the quality gap of the skills and
availability of IT and high-technology labor can be improved by increasing quality of
graduates from local higher education institutions according to sector companies.


                                                   22
Higher education plays a key role in developing basic skills of graduates. These skills form the basis of
their theoretical and practical knowledge levels. However, local companies regard these skills as mostly
below the expected average and outdated. This relates to both the fundamental technical knowledge
and the more generic soft skills of the graduates.
The interviews were conducted with the respondent companies to rate the skill level of graduates
according to the following four knowledge/skill types:

         Practical knowledge – the level of student’s familiarity with up-to-date technical tools
          (engineering equipment, programming languages, platforms, etc.) to apply acquired theoretical
          knowledge in specific projects
         Theoretical knowledge – technical fundamentals required to shape the algorithmic thinking and
          mathematical mindset of IT professionals, learned through lectures and available literature.
         Soft skills – level of communication and self-expression, as well as the ability to work in a team
         Knowledge of English – the importance of this is underlined by the fact that IT/high-technology
          is a mostly internationalized sector with a high level of interaction with the outside world.

Figure 18: Assessment of skills for graduates in IT and Engineering sectors by companies


    Practical knowledge                         45%                            28%                    17%         7% 3%

 Theoretical knowledge 3%                     31%                             45%                           17%         3%

                 English 3%            17%                      41%                            28%                 10%

               Soft skills    10%             17%                     45%                         14%             14%


                             Poor      Fair    Average   Good     Excellent     Difficult to answer

Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 29

~73% of the respondents think that the practical capabilities of the graduates are far below the
expected level and not satisfactory for employment.
Unanimously, all the respondents mentioned that the majority of graduates lack practical capabilities
even given their relatively high level of theoretical knowledge, due to the absence of practical activities
in the universities. During the survey, it was revealed that only a small portion of graduates (~10%) with
a higher sense of responsibility tend to find internship projects or visit available labs at their own
initiative during their studies, while the rest totally depend on the directions given by the university. The
latter, according to the private sector, has to put more effort in providing practical skills via mandatory
internship programs and lab work.
Underdeveloped practical knowledge and skills mean higher learning and development costs for
employers, further placing downward pressure down on sector competitiveness in the global landscape.

                                                             23
~80% of the respondents consider the level of graduates’ theoretical knowledge to be average or
below expectations, but on a higher level compared with the practical capabilities.
It is notable that some executives with longer managerial experience have slightly different opinions on
the priority and importance of theoretical knowledge. According to some of them, theory matters more
than practice, as practice can be taught during on-the-job training, while the theory, if not taught to the
students in their early university years, will hinder the professional development during the rest of their
career.
Besides the evaluation of theoretical knowledge, some of the respondents state that the ability to self-
educate and grasp new concepts rapidly is of higher importance. This is conditioned by rapid industry
dynamics, which suggests that any theoretical knowledge will be outdated over time, while the ability to
self-educate and grasp new concepts quickly is a prerequisite for the modern IT specialist. Company
executives believe that the skills and know-how to educate oneself should be taught in the university.
From the employer’s point of view, the soft skills and English knowledge of the graduates are on a
more acceptable level compared with their theoretical and practical knowledge.
More generic skills, such as work ethic, teamwork, etc., are a part of larger set of soft skills. The local
higher education system generally does not emphasize the development of such skills in students. The
graduates lack such skills as self-presentation, written or oral communication skills, interview skills, etc.
However, the level of these skills among the graduates is assessed mostly as average and above (by
~70% of respondents).
Figure 19: Assessment of soft skill importance of job candidates


       Very important                                    61%              About 61% of the respondents highlighted the
                                                                          ultimate importance of the soft skills of
 Relatively important                   29%                               interviewed candidates when making a
                                                                          recruitment decision, while 29% stated that they
       Not important            10%
                                                                          can be developed on the job.

Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 28

Due to the availability of up-to-date technical literature mostly online and in English, graduates who
want to grow professionally have to learn the basics of the language. About 80% of the respondents
regard the graduates’ knowledge of the English language as average or good and note that it tends to
improve with professional development.




Figure 20: Share of English-speaking employees in surveyed IT companies
                                                                          Considering that the share of employees
                                                                          with knowledge of English in companies
                                                                          is almost 90%, this skill is vitally
                                                                          important.


                                                             24
                  Several companies mentioned the worsening quality of Russian language knowledge among graduates.
                  The growing importance of the Russian market in Armenia might increase demand for this language also,
                  whereas most companies note that the level of English knowledge is far better compared to Russian.


                                                      Companies adjust their recruiting requirements and lower standards due to
                                                      the lack of qualified candidates.
Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 29
                                            Due to the qualification constraints, the companies tend to recruit junior-level
                                            graduates who have elementary basic knowledge and whose motivation and
                  personality fit with the company culture and train them to a certain level by means of on-the-job
                  training. The relatively low responses about the importance of technical skills are conditioned by this
                  practice.
                  The situation is worse with senior developers, due to the lack of high-level qualification training
                  programs, whereas the on-the-job requalification opportunity cost is much higher.
                  The base-level developers are more flexible, due to the combination of their work experience, which
                  ensures a particular knowledge level, and their non-advanced specialization level, which is easier to
                  transform into the narrow specialization required by each company specifics.
                  The requirements and evaluation of the above-mentioned criteria (see Figure 21), particularly regarding
                  the technical knowledge and soft skills, have been adjusted due to the deficit of the qualified specialists.
                  In opposition to the current educational system, some companies think that preparing their future
                  employees in their own training programs is more beneficial: several respondents mentioned a
                  preference to recruit and train young people right from school, without the intermediate interference of
                  the university.
                  As observed from interviews, currently the university degree is not one of the most crucial decision
                  factors in recruitment by companies. This is a concern that urges both private sector and educational
                  institutions to work together to close existing gaps in quality of graduated.
                  Only 8% of surveyed companies considered the university degree to be of high-level importance for the
                  recruitment process.
                  Figure 21: Company preference for different candidate skills and knowledge and other characteristics


                              University degree                        46%                                  46%          7%

                  Technical knowledge and skills 4%                      46%                                      50%

                                       Cultural fit           21%                                   79%

                                       Soft skills      11%             29%                                 61%

                                       Motivation 4%      11%                                    86%

                                                       Not important    Relatively important   Very important

                  Source: EV Consulting company survey


                                                                                  25
Number of respondents: 28

Due to the gaps between the university program and industry, job applicants tend to learn upgraded
technical knowledge and skills mostly during the probation period in the company. Thus, the hiring
executives value the cultural fit of the applicant in the company more, as by default, the technical skills
are planned to be transferred to the employee on the company premises.
However, for a long-term sustainable and high-end development of the IT industry, a strong university
base will retain its critical importance. While company base training can provide basic IT skills, the ever-
increasing sophistication of IT products will require a strong multidisciplinary educational background
that can be provided only on the basis of university education at the graduate and postgraduate levels.
Based on the responses from the companies interviewed, the most desirable solution is modernizing the
current educational process.
Currently, companies do not fully appreciate the benefit of master’s degree. This observation
demonstrates that or the level of training for master’s degree programs is inadequate or possibly
there is a limited sophistication of the IT industry that does not require yet the skills obtained from the
master’s degree.
Generally, the companies do not perceive a considerable quality increment between the bachelor’s and
master’s degrees. In addition, some university representatives agree with the fact that there are
curricular limitations in master’s degree programs, requiring upgrading of curricula to make it valuable
to the private sector
Only a small portion of graduates continue their studies to PhD degrees. It has been observed that
currently in Armenia there is a limited market for PhD graduates.
The overview of the current workforce structure shows that the major portion of the employees have
some level of university degree. The workforce distribution by bachelor’s degree and master’s degree is
about equal. In the graphs below, there is a comparison of the survey results and EIF study, which is
based on a larger data sample and might provide more precise information.
Figure 22: The current structure of the labor force in the sector by university degrees (survey results versus Enterprise
Incubator Foundation)

Survey results                                                                      EIF study

                                  1%                                                                     2%



                          45%                                                                     36%
                                        54%                                                                   62%




         Master's degree and above     Bachelor's degree                        Master's degree and above     Bachelor's degree
         Technical (non-higher)                                                 Technical (non-higher)

Source: EV Consulting company survey, EIF “Armenian ICT Sector: State of Industry Report?, 2012
Number of survey respondents: 29



                                                                   26
Cultural fit in the company and the motivation of the graduates are the most important factors for
recruitment decision-making, followed by soft skills and technical knowledge.
Due to an informal working environment, mostly teamwork on projects in sector companies, cultural fit,
and motivation are particularly important factors for the selection process. With the declining
qualification level, the sector tends to recruit fresh graduates and spend a considerable time on training
them to a relevant level. Considering the opportunity cost of the time, the importance of the cultural fit
and motivation is critical, according to ~95% of the respondents.
Ability to independently find relevant information and utilize it is a critical requirement that is
currently missing in the majority of graduates.
17% of the respondents are critical about the candidate’s ability to use available literature and other
sources for the quick self-education. Due to the rapid industry dynamics, quick adaptation skills are a
prerequisite for preserving competitiveness and are highly appreciated. Currently, the development of
those skills has an individual nature and mostly correlates with the level of candidate’s initiative, but the
real sector representatives state that the ability to self-educate should be provided and developed by
universities.
The companies do not differentiate among the faculties and major specializations of the higher
education institutions, which show that all of them meet minimal standards required by companies.
Figure 23: Companies' preference for the major or discipline of graduates
                                                                 The majority of the respondents
                     No preference                                     69%
                                                                 stated that taking into consideration
  Applied mathematics and informatics      12%                   the overall low quality of the
    Computer systems and informatics      10%                    graduates and their level of practical
     Radiophysics and radiotechnology    7%                      knowledge relative to actual
                Electronic engineering 2%                        employee activities, there is no
                                                                 significant difference between the
 Source: EV Consulting company survey                           qualifications received in different
 Number of respondents: 29                                      faculties. Consequently, given the
presence of other required selection criteria within the job candidate, the discipline studied plays a
negligible role.
Nonetheless, given the specifics of some high tech companies, the importance and irreplaceability of
precise majors, e.g. electronic engineering, is undeniable.


About 34% of the respondent companies expressed no preference in hiring graduates from a particular
university.




                                                             27
Figure 24: Company preference for recruiting from Armenian universities



   No preference                                             34%    SEUA and YSU remain the most preferred
            SEUA                             21%                    universities in the IT sector with 21% of
              YSU                            21%                    preference each, which is partially conditioned
             RAU                   11%                              by the large number of graduates in engineering
             AUA             5%                                     specializations absent in other universities and
 Training centers                 9%                                training centers as well as the active presence
                                                                    of Synopsys Armenia Educational Department
Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 28
                                                                    within the universities.
RAU and AUA follow with 11% and 5% respectively. Currently the training centers are
mostly mentioned as sources for preparing beginners and are not considered an
alternative to universities by the companies. Given similar conditions and choices,
high-technology companies tend to look for more candidates from SEUA, while IT
candidates mostly prefer YSU or Slavonic University. 2.3. RECRUITMENT AND HR
PRACTICES IN IT AND HIGH TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES
The management sophistication of local IT and high-technology companies is generally correlated
with their size and origin.
The management system of local IT companies is largely in line with the general level of other Armenian
companies, i.e., professional management is scarce and professional tools are of low usage. The
exceptions are branches of international companies, who inherit the management systems from their
headquarters. Also, the size of the companies dictates the need for better management systems.
People management in the companies is generally the function of the key executives. In bigger
companies, human resource management is more structured and the function is centered in a special
department.
The small and medium size companies do not have HR departments, as they do not see an urgent need
for it. The distribution of its functions is spread among employees in the company.
Recruitment is considered a technical procedure with a personality fit check component at the end.
Generally, the responsibility of initial filtering lies with project leads, while the final approval of the
candidate is carried out by executives. Thus, there is an opinion that the non-technical HR function is not
relevant unless the company grows beyond 50-60 employees, when the proper management of human
resources is hardly any longer possible through project leads and executives.
The motivation, professional development of employees, and other functions of the HR department are
rarely officially tracked in medium-sized companies with no HR department. In the case of high HR
capabilities of the CEO, a strong company culture, and employee alignment with the company’s
development strategy, the retention rates are high.
The performance evaluation and compensation systems are formally structured only in the bigger size
companies. The small and medium companies have processes of a more ad hoc nature.

                                                           28
Companies prefer to transfer the technical knowledge via on-the-job trainings, while the supporting
skill development is delegated to training centers or guest lecturers.
According to the respondents, the level of graduates is low and requires additional training to reach
minimum company requirements. On-the-job training provides the graduate with the necessary
technical knowledge as well as the specifics of the company without spending double the amount of
time. Based on this notion, most of the companies prefer to train their junior employees on the job.
Out of 29 surveyed companies, three have their own training centers or educational programs to
prepare employees and an additional three tend to finance or cofinance technical off-job trainings for
their junior employees. The latter were able to provide average training budgets per employee, which
range from $80 to $2,500 depending on the subject and duration of the training program.
On average, up to six months is required for a newly hired employee in an IT company to complete the
on-the-job training phase and become a qualified professional. In case of high-technology companies,
the average on-the-job training period lasts from six to twelve months. In complex cases, the
preparation of a qualified specialist can last up to 3-5 years.
In the majority of cases, off-the-job trainings are carried out on non-technical subjects such as project
management, marketing, soft skills, etc.
Due to the limited market size with a high concentration in Yerevan, references are the most popular
option in recruitment process.
Out of 5 recruitment channels mentioned only 3 are utilized by the respondent companies.
Figure 25: Recruitment channels in the IT and high-technology sector



                      References                                        76%                            14%    10%

Online announcement channels                                          69%                       14%      7%   10%

                     Universities      3%   10%             28%               14%                45%

            Recuitment agencies                                               100%

                    Newspapers                                                100%


                                            Every time   Often    Sometimes    Rarely   Never

Source: EV Consulting company survey
Number of respondents: 29

         Due to the small market mainly located in Yerevan, the most popular method of hiring managers
          at all levels is the reference model through the network.
         Online portals such as www.careercenter.am and social media are also popular. Lately,
          specialized IT recruitment online resources such as www.itjobs.am have appeared on the
          market.


                                                                 29
   Recruitment agencies and newspapers are considered irrelevant for the industry. In the case of
    the first, the recruiter should have some technical understanding, which is generally not the
    case for the Armenian recruitment agencies. Regarding newspapers, potential employees do not
    look for job announcements in offline media, thus, the newspaper channel does not satisfy the
    targeting criteria.
   University recruiting has two main options:
    o Recruitment via official relationship with the university. Among the 29 companies
        interviewed ~20% has or had an official relationship with the universities for the recruitment
        process. Nevertheless, the majority of them find the experience not satisfactory and
        unpleasant. The feedback includes dissatisfaction with the administration procedures of
        joint project organization and implementation, reporting problems, and the low number of
        career center activities.
    o Recruitment through the acting company employees, lecturing in the university. Out of 29
        respondents an additional 15% mentioned a recruitment practice through their employees,
        also employed in various universities as lecturers. The method is considered effective as
        prior to the recruitment the lecturer has a possibility to discover both professional and
        personal capabilities of the student.
   Headhunting was also mentioned as an ineffective method for recruitment in Armenia, due to
    the small market and relationships among the players.




                                               30
    3. SUPPLY SIDE ANALYSIS OF SKILLS GAP IN IT AND HIGH
       TECHNOLOGY INDUSTIRES

3.1. EDUCATION SYSTEM OVERVIEW IN ARMENIA
The higher education system in Armenia lacks competitive dynamism and efficiency.
Armenia’s higher education system consists of 63 public and private institutions. First established in
1991, private universities expanded the sector, populating it with many fledgling institutions. Demand
for private education was driven by a mass of students ready to pay for accessible and undemanding
study. Over the past few years, demand has diminished and there are 20 percent fewer schools now
than in 2003.
Despite a large number of players, the sector lacks an efficient competitive environment:
First, compared to the private universities, the state universities are privileged - providing substantial
tuition subsidies and exemptions from army service for students.
Second, Armenia is not big enough to afford several universities competing in each discipline so a few
have become monopoly providers of education in certain disciplines.
Third, five universities dominate the sector by virtue of their scale of enrollment. The smaller schools
have correspondingly limited capacities and infrastructure development opportunities. As a result, many
universities (mostly private) have become “retail outlets? for diplomas and forego competing based on
quality.
Fourth, Armenian higher educational institutions do not track their performances by international
rankings, citation indices, statistics on the career development of graduates, and other comparative
indicators, which usually drive competition among universities.
Finally, minimal connection with the global education market means that the local market is a captive
one. The vast majority of high school graduates cannot afford to study abroad so local universities are
complacent.
The quest to join the European Higher Education Area puts pressure on Armenia to reform, but the
pace is still unsatisfactory.
Armenia is undertaking reforms through the Bologna process in order to join the European Higher
Education Area. Enforcement of reforms, however, is questionable. Often the universities are unable to
keep pace with reforms, and changes are mere formalities with little impact on content. In addition,
there is little awareness of the content of ongoing reforms. Consequently, the quality of the education
has room to improve, which is also demonstrated in the World Economic Forum’s (WEF) ranking on the
Quality of Educational System.




                                                   31
Figure 26: WEF ranking on the Quality of Educational System, 2013-2014, Score, out of 7
      7

      6

      5

      4

      3

      2

      1




Source: World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report, 2013-2014

Interestingly, according to the World Economic Forum ranking that is based entirely on the perception
of business executives, the Armenian educational system lags behind more countries in the quality of
math and science education compared with the overall educational system quality. In juxtaposition with
the ambition to become a significant industry player on the international level, the ranking below
suggests plenty of room for education quality improvement.
Figure 27: WEF ranking on the Quality of Math and Science Education, 2013-2014, Score, out of 7

      7

      6

      5

      4

      3

      2

      1




Source: World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report, 2013-2014




                                                               32
3.2. IT AND ENGINEERING EDUCATION SYSTEM IN ARMENIA
For the last four years there has been no shortage in the number of graduates enrolled in IT-related
faculties.
IT-related faculties are considered technical faculties in the university providing students with
knowledge fundamentals and an algorithmic mindset to enable his/her further technical specialization
during employment. The relevant majors/disciplines are:

      Mathematics and physics
      Informatics and computing systems
      Radiophysics and radiotechnology
      Automation systems
      IT and cybersecurity
The list of the most significant higher education institutions that provide IT and Engineering
specializations is as follows:

       UNIVERSITY                                          FACULTY
STATE ENGINEERING                    Computing systems and informatics
UNIVERSITY OF ARMENIA                Applied mathematics and physics
(SEUA)                               Machinery engineering
                                     Mechanics and machinery
                                     Cybernetics
                                     Radiotechnics and communication systems
YEREVAN STATE UNIVERSITY             Informatics and applied mathematics
(YSU)                                Mathematics and mechanics
                                     Radiophysics
                                     Physics

RUSSIAN-ARMENIAN                     Applied mathematics and informatics
(SLAVONIC) UNIVERSITY                Electronics and nanoelectronics
(RAU)                                Infocommunication technologies and communication systems
                                     Construction and technology of electronic systems


AMERICAN UNIVERSITY OF               Industrial Engineering and Systems Management
ARMENIA (AUA)                        Computer and information science
                                     Computational Sciences

EUROPEAN REGIONAL                    Applied information technology
ACADEMY (ERA)                        Communications equipment and microelectronic circuits and
                                      systems
                                     Informatics and applied mathematics

                                                33
The actual number of the graduates in IT-related faculties has been stable since 2010; nevertheless, the
overall number of students is declining due to deteriorating demographics including low birth rate and
emigration.
Figure 28: Number of IT-related students and graduates

                           8,820

         7,009                               7,075
                                                              6,576
                                                                                  From 2010 to 2013 the number of
                                                                                  students enrolled in IT-related faculties
                                                                                  has decreased, while the number of
         1,657             1,950             1,842            1,959               graduates remains about the same.
                                                                                  This points toward an expected decline
                                                                                  in the number of graduates in the next
                                                                                  several years.
       2009/10           2010/11           2011/12           2012/13

                           Students             Graduates

Source: NSS Armenia

Based on statistical data, since 2010 there have been ~2,000 new graduates from IT-related faculties
annually; nevertheless, market demand has not been met. Among the factors causing the mismatch in
the market are the massive migration, demotivation of the graduates, etc., but according to the
companies, which base their opinion on the tests conducted and interviews with the job applicants,
currently the most prominent factor is the low quality of the specialists who have graduated.
In addition to the qualitative gap, provided faculty choice remains the same, the number of IT
graduates will decrease starting from 2014/15 until 2022, with a slight recovery in 2016-2017.
The decrease in the number of graduates is conditioned by several factors. One of the major reasons is
the significant decline in birth rates in the 1990s with the lowest level registered in 2002.
Due to educational reform, which changed the mandatory number of study years in primary and
secondary schools from 10 to 12, the 2011-2012 academic year was marked by a very low number of
students admitted to the universities.
Figure 29: Estimated number of graduates from IT-related faculties, 2013/14-2015/16


              3,290


                                                                   2,020              Graduates in ICT-related
                                         1,720                                        specialisations
              1,340
                                                                                      Number of ICT specialists
                                                                                      required (base scenario)
                                          190                      1,270


            2013/14                    2014/15                    2015/16

Source: EV Consulting analysis, NSS Armenia, University reports



                                                                   34
  Methodological Note
  The expected numbers of graduates are estimated based on the total number of students enrolled in
  IT faculties less the total number of students admitted four years prior to the estimation year. The
  calculation is done under the assumption of 5% historical dropout rate.
  The numbers of required specialists per year are estimated based on the base scenario of The
  employee absorption potential of the IT and high-technology sector (Figure 10).


Assuming that the number of admitted students in faculties will remain constant and 95% of the
students will graduate, it is estimated that the number of IT-related BSc graduates will plummet to the
level of ~200 in Armenia in 2015, with a following partial recovery – ~1,350 graduates – in 2016 and
later. At the same time, the growth in demand of additional qualified IT specialists of different levels is
estimated to be ~1,500-1,800 per year for the next three years. The unusually high graduate number in
2013-2014 will compensate for the shortage of graduates in 2014-2015, but starting from 2015-2016 the
quantitative gap will become noticeable.
In 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 the number of graduates is again expected to slightly diminish due to the
recent military reform owing to which males are required to have a two-year military service and defer
their higher education. As the majority of the students in IT-related faculties are male, the two-year gap
will be noticeable starting from the 2018-2019 academic year.
Currently, there is also a shortage of graduates in quantitative terms “produced? by the local higher
education system, particularly for the IT/high-tech sector.
Out of five main universities offering IT education, the largest institutions are Yerevan State University
(YSU) and the State Engineering University of Armenia (SEUA). Other universities include the Russian-
Armenian (Slavonic) University (RAU), the American University of Armenia (AUA), and the European
Regional Educational Academy (ERA). YSU and SEUA provide the vast majority of the graduates and have
the largest quantity of students enrolled in IT-related faculties.
Table 1: Number of IT and Engineering students and graduates in the universities, 2013/2014

                                       YSU                    SEUA         AUA            RAU      ERA
IT STUDENTS                            670                    1,650        100            200      90
ENGINEERING                           1,390                   1,730        50             100      40
STUDENTS
TOTAL STUDENTS                        2,060                   3,380        150            300      130
IT GRADUATES                           190                    460          25                 40   30
ENGINEERING                            480                    640          25                 20   10
GRADUATES
TOTAL GRADUATES                        670                    1,100        50                 60   40
Source: EV Consulting university survey, University reports




                                                                      35
During the 2012-2013 academic year, there were 6,576 students in total enrolled in IT-related faculties
in Armenia. In the same year 1,959 students with IT specializations graduated from the universities,
which comprises ~ 8% of the total number of graduates. The graduates from humanities, economics,
and management as well as educational and pedagogical faculties comprised 34%, 17%, and 9%
respectively.
It is estimated that only ~45% of the total graduates from IT-related faculties work in the IT and
engineering sectors in Armenia (source: ?Market study on HE graduate labor demand and employment
in Armenia?, EV Consulting, 2011). So only ~ 450 graduates considered employment in the sector, which
is a lower number compared with the demand.
All three stakeholders of the system, universities, students, and the real sector, are dissatisfied with
each other and expect negative developments in the future.
Most of the universities consider their curricula, teaching staff, and methods to be up-to-date and
aligned with industry requirements, while the respondent companies have the opposite opinion.
According to the sector interviewees, the educational system is so stagnant that few of them see reform
possibilities. Universities in turn find companies reluctant and uninterested in joint activities to educate
future specialists.
Educational system factor analysis reveals that funding for universities in Armenia is one of the lowest in
the region. This may be contributing towards education quality. Specifically IT education requires higher
investments into technical laboratories and latest technologies.
Figure 30: Public expenditure on tertiary education as % of GDP, 2011


     2.1%

            1.7%
                   1.5% 1.5%                                                                               Currently, public expenditure
                               1.4% 1.4%
                                           1.3%                                                            on tertiary education in the
                                                  1.2%
                                                         1.1% 1.1%
                                                                     1.0%                                  country comprises about 0.4%
                                                                            0.9%
                                                                                   0.8%                    of GDP and is low compared
                                                                                                           with peer countries.
                                                                                          0.4% 0.4% 0.3%




Source: UNESCO statistical database

Moreover, the lack of university funding and the imbalance between the salary ranges of academic
professionals and some employed students/real sector professionals results in the dearth of
professional dialogue and compromise. Currently, the average gross salary of a full-time lecturer in large
universities ranges between ~US$300-US$500, in line with the official average salaries in Armenia,
whereas the average IT sector salaries that students can potentially attain are much higher.


                                                                            36
The university view on cooperation with the private sector has its own specifics: especially at the lower
management level the large universities see the cooperation as mutually beneficial given external
investments for the establishment of company laboratories and R&D project execution in the university.
The downside of the approach is the risk of becoming a training center for a particular company, which
universities plan to mitigate by having part of the curriculum stable and the other subjects open to
change based on company feedback.
The ineffective dialogue between academia and the private sector together with the unfavorable
economic conditions and mass migration impact the attitude of many students. The pessimistic view of
future uncertainty in the job market is highlighted among the students starting from their second year
of study.
There is no quantity shortage of teaching staff in IT-related faculties in Armenian universities.
There are ~760 lecturers in five universities, 80% of whom are concentrated in YSU and SEUA.
Figure 31: Number of teaching staff in universities by IT and Engineering specializations, 2013/2014


 SEUA                          177                                        211
                                                                                              388
     YSU              120                        96                216
     RAU      46          43          89

     AUA   20 15      35

     ERA   18 12     30


                                                      IT      High-tech

Source: EV Consulting university survey, University reports

The average student-teacher ratios (Table 2) in Armenian universities are quite low compared to the
international standards, where 12:1 is considered a healthy ratio (in the UK the lowest ratio is 10:1).
Table 2: Student-to-faculty ratio in Armenian universities

                                YSU                    SEUA                 AUA            RAU         ERA
IT                              6:1                        9:1                  3:1         4:1        5:1
ENGINEERING                    14:1                        8:1                  7:1         2:1        3:1
       AVERAGE                 10:1                        9:1                  5:1         3:1        4:1
Source: EV Consulting analysis, University reports




                                                                     37
Figure 32: Student-to-faculty ratio in local and Western Universities, 2014




Source: Official websites of universities

Nevertheless, in the Armenian reality, the low student-staff ratio is not a result of overstaffing, but a
consequence of underutilization. A number of lecturers, including the younger generation, work part-
time, as they combine internship with their academic career. This is especially the case with the Russian-
Armenian Slavonic University, the engineering student-staff ratio of which is extremely low.
This proves that in spite of the high number of lecturers, the underutilization of the latter negatively
impacts teaching. Thus, there is room for optimization in terms of decreasing the number of the
teaching staff and increasing the quality of lecturing and corresponding salaries. This does not refer to
sector professionals who should be more than encouraged to lecture part time.
The teaching staff is gradually aging, which, combined with a weak link with the private sector, makes
the teaching profession appear to be less worthwhile and lucrative than others.
The average age of the lecturers is above 40 in smaller universities, and in the largest universities –50
and above.
Table 3: Average age of the university lecturers, 2014

                                YSU                SEUA                AUA        RAU                ERA
                                                                                      4
AVERAGE AGE                      50                 56                  45        ~45                ~40
Source: University reports, EV university survey

The necessity of the existing lecturers to go through requalification programs and to adapt international
teaching methodologies is undeniable, as the existing curriculum and methodological practices are
already out of date.
Simultaneously, due to the low remuneration and the diminishing prestige of an academic career, there
is an acute deficit of younger specialists with hands on practice in the sector who are teaching.



4
 The range of lecturer’s age was very broad as there is a group of main lecturers with an average age of 60, and a
group of part-time young lecturers with hands-on experience in the private sector with an average age of 30.

                                                              38
As another precondition, the lecturers are required to possess a higher scientific degree for teaching the
lower degree course programs, e.g., lecturer with a master’s degree has the right to teach a bachelor’s
course. This diminishes the potential pool of the candidates further.
The university survey reveals that on average, less than 1/3 of university lecturers work or have ever
worked in the sector and have hands-on experience in the industry. This, in combination with the high
average age, implies that the teaching methodology is rather theoretical and does not give practical
experience. Due to the teaching culture inherited from the Soviet Union, many classes are not
interactive and do not engage students.
Already hired younger generation specialists tend to work part-time in the university in combination
with employment in the sector. This fact has both advantages and disadvantages: the upside is the fresh
intake of innovation and alignment with real sector dynamics, while the downside is the low
concentration and lack of the academic career priority, which in some cases impacts the teaching
quality.
According to the survey the lecturer salaries are especially low in large universities, such as SEUA and
YSU, due to larger overhead costs and laboratory expenses.
This impacts the motivation of the aging teaching staff and, subsequently, the quality of the education.
Declining quality together with low remuneration negatively influence the prestige of pursuing an
academic career.
A closer collaboration between universities and private sector is needed to develop practical
capabilities necessary for students to enter the job market.
All the companies unanimously mentioned that graduates on average need 3-6 months in the case of IT
and 6-12 months in the case of engineering to learn the job specifics and become competent employees
with corresponding salaries.
Universities do not teach programming languages as separate subjects, but as support tools to develop
algorithmic thinking and understand technology. For example, in one of the largest faculties C++ and C#,
object-oriented programming languages mostly in-demand in the Armenian market at the moment and
in the next three years, are included in the curriculum for four semesters, but there is no practical
application of it in terms of working on real projects while studying. The duration of internship programs
is too short to develop hands-on skills and a practical mindset with the student.
The popularity of laboratories and training centers on the university premises is just starting to increase,
but the majority of current teaching staff is not accustomed to practical classes. In this respect,
graduates need more experience within a company environment to gain knowledge.
Currently, the trend of establishing technology laboratories in Armenian universities is poised to
facilitate the transfer of practical knowledge to students.
There are two main models:
General educational labs: General educational labs are established on the premises of a university and
aim to join the theoretical knowledge received in the university with practical activities and to develop


                                                    39
the student’s practical engineering capabilities. ANEL (Armenian National Engineering Laboratory) is an
example of a general lab that opened in September 2013, the demand for which is gradually increasing.
Utilization of general laboratories up to the present has had more of a demonstrative nature, where the
students had a passive role of spectators while the instructor was experimenting with the tools. The
current downside of general labs is their slow adaptation rate.
Specialized company labs. Company labs are established on the premises of the university (or company)
at the expense of the company as supporting tools for trainings/education. The labs are mainly aimed at
preparing specialists for the investing company. Due to the more certain future employment possibilities
under this model, company labs are in high demand among the students. The Synopsys Armenia
Educational Department established an educational department within the SEUA faculty on the
premises of the company with a special lab. Smaller labs are established in YSU, RAU, and ERA.
The downside of such laboratories is the narrow specialization of the trainees, who according to some
potential employers encounter difficulties when switching jobs.
There is no set process between universities and companies in terms of organizing internship projects
for students, yet there are discussions to make the internships of students an efficient link between
the two domains.
Currently, almost all higher education institutions include mandatory internships in their curriculum.
However, in some cases, these programs have a formal nature and lack efficiency, e.g., the students do
not attend the companies and pass the exams, or are entitled to pass the internship program within the
department of the university. Moreover, there are deeper issues on the faculty management level,
some representatives of which see the connection with the real sector only via company investments in
the university for establishing R&D or training labs with the further recruitment purpose.
The survey revealed that most of the internships are not coordinated between universities and the real
sector. While the companies generally need interns and seek them using different channels, the
graduates and, in some cases, universities do not have set relationships with the companies to organize
this flow and generally rely on personal connections to find a relevant company. Only a small number of
companies carry out joint programs with the universities in the form of R&D projects or contests.
Career centers can also serve as a link between universities and the private sector. However, these
currently do not operate efficiently and are in their infancy stage.
While all the respondent universities have or used to have dedicated career centers, the actual activities
of job placement are of an informative nature and have little impact on the employment level of
graduates. In addition, career centers are understaffed and underpaid. One of the universities reported
a temporary shutdown of the career center, due to lack of funding and staff.
University career centers carry out informative functions similar to PR departments, i.e., the main
functions of the career centers include attracting companies for campus presentations, networking
events, and organizing student trips to company premises, as well as disseminating vacancy
announcements for students and faculty via email. Few career centers organize trainings of resume



                                                   40
writing or interviewing skills for the upcoming graduates. However, the attendance rate of such events is
rather low, - ~33%, indicating the low level of efficiency.
Career centers of well-known western universities have larger roles and serve as an efficient channel
and component of recruitment for companies from one side and a communication channel for students
to the private sector on the other, by constantly keeping in touch with the company HR departments.
The function of the career center includes providing HR executives with CVs of relevant graduates for
particular vacancies and active engagement in the recruitment process stages, in addition to
informational and training activities. Such centers also keep track of the employment statistics of the
graduates, as the employment rate is the main KPI of their activities.
The local career centers generally do not trace the employment statistics of the graduates due to the
lack of communication tools and resources, as well as the low collaboration level of graduates. In fact,
career centers are understaffed, with a graduating student/staff ratio of more than 500:1, and are not
equipped to contact each graduate and alumnus separately as well as to maintain a contact database.
The graduating student/staff ratio of career centers in more developed higher education systems is
higher – from 20:1 to 200:1. Thus, being understaffed is another factor affecting the performance and
development of career centers and their activities.
Currently, there is no significant gap between the job search and job announcement channels in the
Armenian IT and high-tech market.
Figure 33: Main methods of job search by students (on the left) and their effectiveness (on the right, measured by receiving a
job offer)


 Self-initiated applications to companies                              46%                                             33%

                             References                            40%                                           29%

        Online announcement channels                    24%                                      10%

                   Recruitment agencies           14%                                  3%

      Application to internship company          10%                                        7%

                            Newspapers      0%                                    0%


Source: EV Consulting, “Market study on HE graduate labor demand and employment in Armenia?, 2011

In search of employment, graduates undertake various measures. Currently, the most popular job
search method is self-initiated proactive applications to companies regardless of available vacant
positions. With this approach, students tend to contact the target companies to present themselves and
try to create a position.
The next most popular job search methods are references and online announcement channels, which
coincide with the main chosen channels of candidate search by companies. Interestingly, online
announcement channels proved to be not very effective in finding employment from the graduates’
perspective, because there are a high number of applications for a single job position. The effectiveness
of the channels is measured by success in receiving a job offer.


                                                              41
3.3. CASE OF SUCCESSFUL UNIVERSITY-PRIVATE SECTOR COLLABORATION:
Synopsys Educational Department
The international semiconductor producer Synopsys aggressively entered the Armenian market in
2004, after partnering with local firms for many years. It acquired three chip design automation
companies (LEDA Systems, Monterey Arset, Virage Logic) and now is the largest software company
in Armenia (600 employees) and the largest Synopsys office outside the US. The Synopsys Armenia
Educational Department was established before company acquisitions by Synopsys. The purpose of
the project was to prepare microelectronics specialists for LEDA Systems, as experience revealed
that already in the 1990s engineering graduates were not qualified for employment. An initial
agreement was reached with SEUA to open a special learning department as part of the faculty,
where a group of students starting from the third year will be selected based on their excellence
indicators and taught by a special curriculum aligned with the business. The physical premises were
established near the company, with the objective to immerse the students into ongoing projects
(“University goes to the industry premises?). The project was successfully set forth and acquired
together with LEDA Systems by Synopsys, which is also providing all financing.
Later, the Synopsys Armenia Educational Department began a collaboration with YSU, RAU, and ERA
but utilized a different method, where “the industry goes to the university premises?. In spite of best
practices in the western culture, where the companies gather on university premises, the
methodology did not prove to be as effective as the one with SEUA.
Currently, the Synopsys Armenia Educational Department continues preparing engineers for the
industry. Although its education is considered too narrowly specialized or practical by some industry
experts, 100% of the graduates constantly obtain employment before graduation.
       To date, 646 engineers have graduated from the Synopsys Armenia Educational
        Department, all of who are extremely in demand on the market.
       77% are employed by Synopsys Armenia, while 23% are employed in local and international
        companies such as Microsoft, IBM, etc.
       43% of the technical workforce in Synopsys Armenia is supplied by the Synopsys Armenia
        Educational Department.
The department strives for success utilizing several principles:
       The number of the students in every intake is kept low. A relatively small number of students
        in the classroom allows for more individual attention from the instructors as well as more
        project load per student.
       There are a limited number of places and only the best students are selected. The single
        examination is conducted via the “conveyer? method, where each candidate entering the
        room is questioned by a number of different instructors in different disciplines. Each
        discipline is represented by two instructors, who ask different questions to mitigate the
        subjectivity of the grading. By the end of the examination, the overall grades of the
        candidates in each discipline are averaged and the top students are selected.

                                                    42
          The curriculum is intertwined with practical activities. The acquired knowledge is
           utilized instantly by implementing it in real company projects. Thus, later transferring
           into an actual job position in the company does not require additional effort for the
           graduate to adjust.
          Relevant hardware and software for the practical activities are provided. The
           department is well-equipped with technology (about 70 sets of Synopsys Electronic
           Design Automation tools), the total license cost for which is in the hundreds of millions.
           The provision of high quality practical knowledge implies high investments, which the
           universities are not currently able to make.
          The lecturers are selected based on superlative characteristics and receive higher
           salaries compared with university lecturers. The main two principles of instructor
           selection are the highest available qualification of the specialist in the discipline to be
           taught and personality traits. According to the head of the Synopsys Armenia
           Educational Department, any personality traits that are less than superior directly
           influence the quality of teaching and the outcome irrespective of the qualification of
           the instructor.
Recently, the Synopsys Armenia Educational Department started providing preparatory courses of
programming, English, and other technical subjects aimed at preparing second-year students for
their full program. Synopsys EE attempted to bring first-year students into the program, but the
quality of the students did not prove to be sufficient, and thus the initiative was stopped.




                                                    43
3.4. VOCATIONAL EDUCATION IN IT AND ENGINEERING SECTORS
The gaps in higher educational systems are being partially filled by the increasing role of vocational
training providers.
There are two types of training centers currently functioning in the country. The first type is the one
supported by government/donor or international corporations, such as the Microsoft Innovation Center,
the Armenian-Indian IT Center of Excellence, and mLab ECA. The second type of vocational education is
provided by private company initiatives, which in some cases are not training centers as such, but
educational alternatives to universities. Examples of such initiatives are the Instigate Training Center and
the Synopsys Educational Department.
The objective of the first is to prepare junior specialists for Armenian IT companies, while the second
aims to meet its own demand for engineering specialists. After graduation from the company training
center, the best graduates generally receive job offers. The rest have no legal obligations to the training
company and are free to find employment in other IT companies.
IT training center services have significant demand from both the students and junior level working
professionals. Their estimation of the demand in the next three years is firmly positive.
In spite of providing paid trainings, the training centers see a constant increase in demand for their
services. Students attend practical trainings to acquire basic knowledge of programming languages as
well as to develop their soft skills.
There are both short-term trainings with a minimum of six hours activity and long-term trainings with
several levels that last up to 6-7 months in total (~180 hours). The courses consist of theoretical
knowledge with practical application in a project that the trainees are generally assigned as homework.


Table 4: Characteristics and indicators training centers in Armenia

                                     MICROSOFT                ARMENIAN-INDIAN IT           MLAB ECA
                                    INNOVATION                EXCELLENCE CENTER
                                      CENTER
TECHNICAL COURSES                      Available                      Available             Available
NON-TECHNICAL
DEVELOPMENT                            Available                      Available             Available
COURSES
PREREQUISITES                   Basic knowledge and            No requirements for      Basic programming
                                algorithmic thinking5          beginners, minimum    knowledge required for
                                                              test score/knowledge    transferring to mobile
                                                               for advanced stages   programming platforms
ANNUAL NUMBER OF
                                         ~1,000                         ~500                  ~300
GRADUATES

5
 The prerequisite is for the beginner level. In order to pass to the next level, the trainee needs to complete the
previous training level or have the corresponding knowledge.

                                                              44
NUMBER OF
                                             96                   10                         ~50
INSTRUCTORS
AVERAGE AGE OF
                                            ~27                  ~40                        ~33-35
INSTRUCTORS
INTERNSHIP                                Available          Not available               Not available
EMPLOYABILITY RATE                        80%-90%                N/A                         90%
Source: EV Consulting university survey

The anticipation of the student growth is based on the fact of flexible and practical curriculum the
centers provide depending on the market need. Although each of the centers is concentrated on a
particular direction (e.g., Microsoft platform, mobile programming, etc.), they have no difficulties in
shifting to respond to market changes. The current market information is available through centers’
connections with companies and the instructors, ~80% of which work in a real sector and are familiar
with ongoing trends. This guarantees an entry-level employment for students, thus, fostering demand
for the training centers.
The prerequisites for the trainings vary from center to center and from discipline to discipline. There is
no competitive selection among the students, but basic knowledge of fundamentals might be required
depending on the level of the chosen training. For example, mLab ECA provides mobile programming
trainings; thus, knowledge of the corresponding programming language is a precondition for working on
Android, iOS, or other mobile platforms.
The availability of internship programs in training centers is underway. The Microsoft Innovation Center
collaborates with a number of IT companies to provide a 4-5 month internship programs, during which
the students undertake a real project and report to the company. Upon the successful completion of the
project, the companies hire the intern on a permanent basis.
Currently, training centers do not maintain official statistics on the employment of their graduates;
nevertheless, due to the ongoing relationship between the companies and graduates, the information is
informally accessible.
The Microsoft Innovation Center also provides professional certification programs available from
Microsoft Corporation.
Engineering educational establishments initiated by the companies prepare specialists that meet
international quality standards and are almost 100% employed.
These types of educational establishments do not charge fees, but have limited places and select only
the best candidates based on their technical knowledge and mathematical/algorithmic aptitude. Classes
are intentionally small, as the management believes that a high number of students in the classroom
compromises the quality of the graduates. The trainings last longer and replace a significant portion of
university education.



6
    The number is volatile and depends on the number of courses running at the moment.

                                                        45
Table 5: Characteristics and KPIs of educational systems initiated by private companies


                                      INSTIGATE TRAINING CENTER                    SYNOPSYS ARMENIA
                                                                                EDUCATIONAL DEPARTMENT
TECHNICAL COURSES                                     Available                            Available
NON-TECHNICAL
                                                    Not available                          Available
DEVELOPMENT COURSES
PREREQUISITES                                                                   Strong technical knowledge and
                                          Capacity to solve technical
                                                                                  algorithmic thinking. Strong
                                        problems, basic mathematical
                                                                                   knowledge of all technical
                                                 knowledge
                                                                                         fundamentals
ANNUAL NUMBER OF
                                                          ~50                                ~80
GRADUATES
NUMBER OF
                                                          ~30                                 67
INSTRUCTORS
AVERAGE AGE OF
                                                          ~30                               ~30-35
INSTRUCTORS
INTERNSHIP                            Involvement in company projects           Involvement in company projects
EMPLOYABILITY RATE                                       100%                               100%
Source: EV Consulting university survey, University reports



The employment rate is 100% out of which 70% and 77% of the graduates are employed in Instigate and
Synopsys respectively.
There is a lack of professional on-the-job training programs for senior developers on the market;
companies are closing this gap through in-house provision of on-the-job training.
Currently, there is a huge demand in professional training programs for senior-level specialists in both
the IT and high-technology subsectors. The general trend with the senior developers reveals a narrow
specialization tendency, which is relevant in the employer company. Owing to the absence of such
trainings, the cost of recruiting senior specialists and requalifying them is very high for companies. Base-
level specialists tend to be raised from junior specialists within the company environment; nevertheless,
the respondents confirmed that in case of training availability, the demand for senior developers would
be considerable.
Large international companies have opportunities and can afford to requalify senior level specialists
abroad, particularly in their headquarters. Nevertheless, despite their financial capabilities,
management still considers the opportunity too costly and would prefer to train the staff locally. The
international trainings are more preferable after the employee has already spent some time inside the
company.




                                                                  46
    4. SUMMARY AND HIGH LEVEL RECOMMENDATIONS
Currently, the number of graduates with IT specializations annually closely coincides with the annual
new demand in the overall market, but only 45% of the graduates consider employment in the sector,
thus, creating a quantitative workforce imbalance.



                       ~450 graduates                             ~2,000 new specialists demanded




                                        IT and high-technology sector

The estimated number of needed specialists derived from the demand only in the IT and high-
technology sector and does not include non-IT and non-high technology companies, which are also in
need of IT specialists. Thus, the actual demand in the market might be much higher than 2,000 new
specialists per year.
In addition, due to the positive and rapid industry dynamics, there is also a qualitative skills gap
conditioned by the following factors:
       Teaching programs are not fully meeting private sector requirements: the private sector
        assessment for practical and theoretical knowledge of graduates is below average.
       More effective links are needed between universities and private sector companies in respect to
        internships and recruitment procedures.
       There is a need to have professional development opportunities for the teaching staff
       Teaching staff is aging, while the younger generation with hands-on experience has little interest
        in an academic career.
       University programs do not emphasize to the fuller extend the self-development and self-
        educational capabilities of graduates, essential for the dynamically developing industry.
       The university degree program is too long in comparison with industry dynamics and stifles the
        development of students until they reach the workforce market.
       There are no high-level training programs for base and senior level specialists to requalify.
The shortage of expertise results in a dysfunctional labor market, where remuneration by foreign owned
and locally owned companies has disproportionate differences.
Also, the quantitative balance in place at present will be negatively affected in the next several years,
due to several factors, such as:
       military service will result in a decreased applicant number for 1-2 years with a corresponding
        lower number of graduates in 4-5 years.
       low student enrollment during 2018-2019 because of low birth rates in 2001 and 2002.



                                                    47
Sector competitiveness is on the verge of diminishing, unless policymakers take practical steps to
balance the situation.

4.1. HIGH-LEVEL SHORT-TERM RECOMMENDATIONS AND KEY POINTS FOR
POLICYMAKERS
A new university curriculum should be developed together with the private sector
The overall curriculum needs a revision and amendments to be better aligned with industry needs. For
this purpose, it is recommended that special curriculum development boards be established and board
members be elected from industry specialists and executives. The contribution of industry specialists to
curriculum development is essential to make it more relevant and attuned to industry needs.
The quota of government-funded students for IT specializations at universities should be increased.
It is recommended that policymakers explore the possibility of increasing the quota of students in IT-
related faculties whose tuition is funded by the Government. Provided there is additional budget, a
higher free student quota, which is allocated to students based on their entrance exam results, will
attract more qualified candidates.
The link between universities and the private sector should be strengthened through transforming the
role of mandatory internship/apprenticeship programs.
The changes in the university-private sector relationship currently underway globally are possible to
implement in the short term in Armenia only through the intervention of policymakers. Dialogue
between the parties can be compelled through the creation of a new standard of internship programs —
apprenticeship, mandatory for students to receive the degree.
To address the gap of practical knowledge/experience, the Union of Information Technology Enterprises
(UITE) developed and suggested a concept of mandatory internship-apprenticeship programs for
students in all Armenian universities. The concept proposes mandatory part-time employment with a
gradually increasing number of working hours for all students starting from their first year. This would
ensure that by the time of official graduation, the specialists will already have work experience to
develop their specialist qualification and actual portfolio projects to demonstrate their on-the-job
capabilities.
This initiative will enable a quick transfer of professional knowledge to students from companies and
knowledge sharing among the students themselves, which will naturally raise the expectation levels
from the educational establishment and gradually change the teaching program.
Besides recruitment opportunities, the companies should be incentivized by additional benefits such as
publicity, free or low-cost workforce, etc., and should monitor the progress of the student.
More young professionals from the real sector should be encouraged to teach in universities to bring
practical skills into the classroom.
The lack of relevant remuneration and prestige in an academic career should be addressed by
encouraging younger professionals to become involved in the university teaching experience. Their


                                                  48
interest can be raised by initiating relevant R&D projects, professional trainings, guest-lecturing
practices, additional bonus programs for young faculty, etc.
The presence of younger generation instructors is the main precondition for the implementation of
international and up-to-date teaching standards in the universities. Moreover, academia needs to
prepare qualified replacements for the aging generation of lecturers.
The urgent need for base- and senior-level specialists can be satisfied by the creation of special
training programs, currently absent in the market.
Currently, there are no high-level qualification training programs for middle and senior developers
available in the market. Due to the narrow specialization of senior staff, the retraining of high-level
specialists on the job requires considerable time and resources and represents a high cost for
companies. Correspondingly, the demand for high-level qualification trainings increases, creating a niche
segment for training centers.
The lack of senior staff can be addressed by providing a set of requalification trainings to base- and
senior-level specialists, in order to make career transitions more affordable for companies and flexible
for developers. This can be implemented through a dedicated support mechanism (technical assistance
to identify the relevant niches and develop content, cofinance the infrastructure) to private training
providers or by setting up publicly-funded training programs. Utilizing and creating online training
courses as a blended learning format can also supplement these training programs in a cost-effective
way.
Cofinancing schemes for workforce development through the creation of training centers can help
smaller companies to close the skill gap.
The skill mismatch can be addressed through enhancing the resources that smaller companies can spend
on training and development. Special co-financing schemes (with matching requirements) can be
developed supported by the government or international donor programs to establish special training
centers within the companies. Specifically, companies meeting predefined requirements (size, local
ownership, etc.) may be eligible for cofinancing of short- to medium-term training courses for their
employees locally and abroad. This approach may be especially useful for training senior developers,
who currently have no requalification trainings available for them on the market.
In special cases, cofinancing may be granted also to establish corporate training centers.
Widespread and targeted communication campaigns should be organized to highlight the prospects
and strong market demand for the engineering profession.
Due to the significance of the IT industry within the local economy, these problems need to be
addressed urgently and intensively. An effective approach suggests increasing both the quantity and the
quality of graduates to ensure an increase in the number of qualified specialists.
The quantity of applicants in technical faculties can be stimulated by information campaigns on the
engineering profession, in which the engineer is presented as a person solving real-life problems rather
than an office clerk doing “dull coding work?.



                                                    49
4.2. HIGH-LEVEL          LONG-TERM         RECOMMENDATIONS               AND     KEY     POINTS      FOR
POLICYMAKERS
University funding would need to be increased as well as diversified through research grants and
endowment foundations.
Currently, the Armenian IT industry is at the inflection point from where it can accelerate into rapid high
value growth. Achieving the next level of value addition will require a significant increase in the number
and the quality of the labor force. Only comprehensive, focused and collaborative engagement of the
government and private sector can have a sizeable impact.
Intervention into the educational system faces possible strategic choices:

       A focused approach that is based on the principle that with limited resources it is vital to target
        the “critical pressure points? by focused interventions and mainstreaming the results
        throughout the entire system. The approach puts the emphasis on the creation of a small
        number of centers of excellence to become the agents of change for the system.

       A horizontal approach suggests a more balanced advancement in the existing educational
        system by opening small-scale centers of excellence. Within the frame of this approach, the role
        of the change agent is distributed among a much larger number of institutions and the best
        professional resources are more spread throughout the system.
Funding diversification can be implemented through attracting R&D grants and establishing endowment
foundations. Currently, except for the American University of Armenia, no other Armenian university
has an endowment fund.
The number of university-based laboratories that are established with the help of multinationals
should be scaled up.
The establishment of laboratories in cooperation with multinationals helps to expose students to global
best practices and the latest technologies. Similar to the establishment of ANEL together with National
Instruments, USAID, and the Government, more laboratories need to be established on the university
premises to strengthen the technical environment for students. The spread of labs with different
multinationals will help mitigate the risk of concentrating the students’ learning only on the
technologies of a limited number of multinationals.
Creating a certification program that would allow preparing software programmers in less than four
years will help increase the supply of labor in the medium term.
Taking into consideration the rapid dynamics of the industry it may be beneficial to augment four year
degree programs with certification programs.
The educational solution to the current industry speed that can be considered is an introduction of
globally recognized certification programs or, when applicable, associate degrees. Such programs can be
university-based and be provided in addition to standard degree programs.




                                                    50
The advantages of introducing non-degree programs are their intensity as well as their shorter duration,
which is aligned with the high speed of industry development dynamics. The disadvantages are the
absence of general education subjects; however, these programs is not intended to substitute for
traditional degree-based education.
These university based training programs would complement certification or training programs provided
by private training centers. This will increase availability of labor force for outsourcing and
entrepreneurial models. Currently, the value of such trainings is crucial in the sector.
The universities would benefit from transforming their career centers into a modern support
mechanism for their graduates.
Universities may consider redefining the role of career centers by making them an important element of
their service delivery process. Specifically, apart from information dissemination, the role of the career
centers in the recruitment process should be improved and highlighted. The centers may also institute
advanced performance measurement systems to track the progress and communicate to potential
applicants, graduates, and alumni. Publicly accessible performance data will help create a transparent
competitive landscape. A dedicated technical assistance program may help spread such practice in
leading universities.
If Armenia aspires to transition from an outsourcing and development center destination to an
innovation and design center functioning under the entrepreneurship model, it has to integrate
fundamental and hard-core research into its university system.
The innovation in IT requires world class research, knowledge and expertise. The development of
innovation and R&D capabilities is easier to inculcate if students are accustomed to performing
fundamental research from the early years of their study.
The integration of public research in university education can substantially enhance the role of
universities. Outsourcing of R&D projects to university groups and engaging students would gradually
increase the level of complexity and sophistication.
High-tech accelerators can become the new type of schools for entrepreneurs.
The growth of the entrepreneurship model suggests the need for new types of skills and knowledge in
addition to the traditional approach, as discussed in the report. As the new model is based on more
innovation and product development, it eventually requires radically new approaches to education and
skills development to move up the innovation value chain. The model is crucial for the further
development of the IT industry as Armenia is a small country, which realistically cannot compete on cost
over the long term without a higher skill level.
Currently, different types of accelerators and mentorship programs are becoming the new type of
educational establishments for high-tech entrepreneurs. More and more young entrepreneurs in
advanced economies prefer to gain practical experience of building startups in accelerators for a short
period of time rather than spend years in business schools and other mainstream establishments.
The number of accelerators, incubators, mentorship programs, and startup competitions is also growing
in Armenia, but needs more highlighting. Specifically, the proliferation of accelerators and

                                                   51
entrepreneurship programs and contests should be supported by public money at the initial stage,
which will trigger private players to step in and take advantage of the trend.
Mentorship programs with Diaspora representatives of the entrepreneurial ecosystem need to be
organized for better knowledge transfer. Similar to the Israeli model, some Armenian entrepreneurs
that have been successful in developed markets should be heavily involved in building the ecosystem.
This should be organized mostly by public intervention with the support of the local private sector.




                                                52
5. APPENDIX
     5.1 COMPANIES SURVEY



                                 Questionnaire ID Nr. ____
EV Consulting contracted by the World Bank is conducting a research study of Armenia’s IT sector aimed
to assess the sector’s need in qualified personnel and human capital. The survey will require about 20 -30
minutes of your time.
CONFIDENTIALITY: Survey responses are strictly confidential and individual responses are not
identified.


Date of the interview _________________________________



GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE COMPANY
Name of the company _________________________________________________________________
Name of the respondent ________________________________________________________________
Position of the respondent_______________________________________________________________
Location of the company ____________________________________________________

1.   Please, state the main services/products offered by your company
     1.1 __________________________
     1.2 __________________________
     1.3 __________________________


HUMAN RESOURCES


2.   Please, state the total number of PERMANENT employees at your company __________
3.   Please, state the total number of NON-PERMANENT employees at your company_________
4.   Please, state the number of your permanent TECHNICAL/MANAGERIAL STAFF_________




                                                   53
5.    Please, state the share of your specialists in the total number of TECHNICAL/MANAGERIAL staff by
      the following factors.
                                                          % in total TECHNICAL/MANAGERIAL staff
 5.1. Specialists with foreign education/work
 experience
 5.2. Specialists with good knowledge of English



6.    Please, state the educational level of your PROFESSIONAL/MANAGERIAL staff.
                                                            % in total TECHNICAL/MANAGERIAL staff
 6.1. Technical (non-higher)
 6.2. Higher education – Bachelor’s degree
 6.3. Higher education – Master’s degree
 6.4. PHD (including candidate of science and doctor
 of science)



 7.   Please, state what are the constraints in recruiting?
         ? 7.1. Lack of qualified candidates
         ? 7.2. Lack of recruiting personnel
         ? 7.3. Lack of budget
         ? 7.4. Lack of attractive salary
         ? 7.5. Lack of future business opportunity/contract pipelines
         ? 7.6. Others________________________________________


8.    Which recruiting channels do you use and how frequent?

                                                                                             5= Every
           Channel              1= Never      2= Rarely    3=Sometimes        4= Often
                                                                                               time
8.1. Online sources

8.2. References

8.3. Recruiting agency

8.4. University relationship

8.5. Newspaper

8.6. Other_______



                                                   54
9.   Do you have any preference for recruiting from certain universities or training institutions?
     ? Yes                ?No (Pass to Q11)


10. If yes, please state from which universities and training centers you prefer to hire and why.


              University/Training Center                             Reasons for preference
10.1.1.                                              10.2.1
10.1.2.                                              10.2.2.



11. Does the candidate’s discipline/major of study matter when hiring?

      ? Yes               ?No


12. If yes, please state from which discipline/major of the study you prefer to hire and why.


                  Discipline/major                                   Reasons for preference
12.1.1.                                              12.2.1.
12.1.2.                                              12.2.2.



13. How important are each from the following factors, when recruiting candidates?

                                                           1=Not          2=Relatively
                                                                                          3=Important
                                                         important         important
13.1. Subject matter knowledge/Technical skills
13.2. Education qualification/University degree

13.3. Attitude/Motivation
13.4. Soft skills (communication, team-work)

13.5.Ethics/fit with the company culture
13.6. Other_____________________________




14. How many hours on average per year does your company spend on training a newly recruited candidate?
    _________



                                                    55
15. How much budget do you spend on average per newly recruited candidate per year? _________


16. Please, describe your off-job trainings (duration, depth, etc.)

     _________________________________________________________________________________
     _________________________________________________________________________________


17. What are the main topics the off-job trainings cover?

     ? 17.1. Technical knowledge/skills
     ? 17.2. Soft skills (teamwork, communication)
     ? 17.3. Managerial skills/Project management
     ? 17.4. Sales and marketing
     ? 17.6. English
     ? 17.7. Other _________________________________________


We would like to understand your company’s need for specialists and management in SHORT-TERM
(coming 3-4 months) and LONG TERM (next 3 years) perspectives.


SHORT-TERM perspective
18. Does your company need to recruit new specialists in the coming 3-4 months?
                                    ? Yes                  ?No (Pass to Q18)

19. If yes, state the number of employees by specialization and level your company needs in the
    coming 3-4 months.


                                Requirements           Number of employees
     Specialization        (education level, soft     needed in the coming 3-
                           skills, experience etc.)         4 months

19.1.1.                   19.2.1.                     19.3.1.
19.1.2.                   19.2.2.                     19.3.2.
19.1.3.                   19.2.3.                     19.3.3.




                                                      56
LONG-TERM perspective

20. What are your expectations regarding the number of your PROFESSIONAL/MANAGEMENT STAFF
    in the next 3 years?
                                                                                Average annual
                                                                             increase/decrease, %
The number of specialists will increase
The number of specialists will decrease (Pass to Q20)
The number of specialists will roughly remain the same (Pass to
Q20)


21. Please, state specifically what specialists you plan to hire in the next 3 years.


                                  Requirements           Number of employees
     Specialization          (education level, soft       needed in the next 3
                             skills, experience etc.)           years

21.1.1.                      21.2.1.                    21.3.1.
21.1.2.                      21.2.2.                    21.3.2.
21.1.3.                      21.2.3.                    21.3.3.



IT AND ENGINEERING GRADUATES

22. Please, evaluate the graduates of local universities in IT and high tech by the following factors.

                                        5=Excellent          4=Good    3=Average        2=Fair           1=Poor
22.1. Subject knowledge
22.2. Practical technical skills
22.3. Soft skills (communication,
team-work)
22.4. English
22.5. Other_________________




                                                        57
23. Which skill do you expect the potential candidate to be trained at the university/training
    institutions before joining the workforce? And how important each skill is?

                                                    1=Not           2=Relatively
                                                                                      3= Important
                                                  important          important
23.1. Subject matter knowledge
23.2. Practical technical skills
23.3. Soft skills (communication, team-work)

23.4. English
23.5. Other_________________________


24. Which is THE MOST CRITICAL skill/knowledge that in your opinion most IT and Engineering
    graduates lack and need to improve.
    _________________________________________________________________________


25. In your opinion what could be done to improve the quality of graduates and young specialists in IT

    and high tech sector.
    __________________________________________________________________________________
    __________________________________________________________________________________
    __________________________________________________________________________________



Tel. number of the respondent _______________________________________________
                    Thank you for taking the time and answering our questions!




                                                  58
5.2. UNIVERSITY SURVEY
                                Questionnaire ID Nr. ____
EV Consulting contracted by the World Bank is conducting a research study of Armenia’s IT education.
The interview will require about 30 minutes of your time.
CONFIDENTIALITY:    Interview results are strictly confidential and individual responses are not
identified.


Date of the interview _________________________________


GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE UNIVERSITY


Name of the university ___________________________________________________________
Name of the respondent __________________________________________________________
Position of the respondent
_________________________________________________________________


The main IT and high tech related departments and quotas at each department
                   Department                                           Quota




STUDENTS AND GRADUATES

1. The total number of graduates with IT majors per year _________________
2. The total number of graduates in Engineering majors per year _____________
3. The total number of graduates per year _________
4. The total number of currently enrolled students in IT departments __________
5. The total number of currently enrolled students in Engineering departments ___________
6. The total number of currently enrolled students ___________




                                                59
7. What are your expectations regarding the enrolment and number of your graduates from IT and
   Engineering departments in the next 3 years?
    __________________________________________________________________________________
    __________________________________________________________________________________
    __________________________________________________________________________________



INSTRUCTORS


8. The total number of your teaching staff _____________
9. The total number of your teaching staff in IT department _____________
10. The total number of your teaching staff in High Tech department _____________
11. The average age of your instructors _____________
12. Do you have instructors that work in private sector and have hands-on industry experience?
     ? Yes                ?No
12.1 (if yes, detailed description)
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________

13. In your opinion what are the main impediments for recruiting highly qualified teaching staff? (e.g.
    low salary of professors)

 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



CURRICULUM AND STUDY PROGRAMS

14. In your opinion, do the curriculum and study program at your university meet the demands of the
    private sector in preparing qualified graduates and job candidates?
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



                                                  60
15. (Only for computer science departments) Which programming languages do you teach?
 15.1. Describe the courses (number of hours, teaching methods etc.).
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________

16. Do you have internship programs for students? If yes, is it mandatory? Please, describe the
    internship (duration, depth etc.).


     ? Yes                ?No
 16.1. (internship description)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________


17. Do you have a joint program/initiative/lab with a private company?


     ? Yes                ?No
17.1. If yes, please, describe.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________

18. Do you get any input from private sector on your course materials/curriculum development?


     ? Yes                ?No
18.1 (if yes, please, describe)
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________




19. Do you offer a professional skills certification program (e.g. SAP, Oracle etc.) in addition to regular
    degree programs?


     ? Yes                ?No




                                                    61
STUDENTS JOB PLACEMENT

20. Do you have dedicated career center/employee to support your students with job/internship
    search and placement?

     ? Yes                ?No


20.1 (if yes, please, describe)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________

21. Do you track the job placement of your students?

     ? Yes                ?No
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



22. Do you have any statistics regarding the job placement of your graduates?

     ? Yes                ?No
 22.1. (if yes, please, describe)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



23. Do you teach your students’ job search related skills such as resume writing, networking, job
    interview etc.?

     ? Yes                ?No
 23.1. (if yes, please, describe)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________




                                                  62
24. Do you know which job search channels your students use? Please, rate how often each channel is
    used.

                                                                                      5= Every
        Channel             1= Never    2= Rarely    3=Sometimes        4= Often
                                                                                        time
24.1. Online
24.2. Personal
connections/ references
24.3. Recruiting agency
24.4. University-Private
sector relationship
24.5. Other______


Tel. number of the respondent _______________________________________________


                    Thank you for taking the time and answering our questions!




                                                63
5.3. TRAINING CENTER SURVEY
                                    Questionnaire ID Nr. ____
EV Consulting contracted by the World Bank is conducting a research study of Armenia’s IT education.
The interview will require about 30 minutes of your time.
CONFIDENTIALITY:           Interview results are strictly confidential and individual responses are not
identified.


Date of the interview _________________________________


GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE TRAINING CENTER


Name of the training center _______________
Name of the respondent _______________
Position of the respondent _______________
Main courses offered _______________


1. Was the establishment of the training center a private initiative or a government/international
organization initiative?
    ? Private initiative           ? Government/international organization initiative
1.1. (Description)
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________



TRAINEES AND GRADUATES

2. The total number of graduates of your center per year ____________
3. The total number of graduates in IT per year ____________
4. The total number of graduates Engineering per year ____________
5. The total number of currently enrolled trainees at your center ____________
6. The total number of currently enrolled trainees in IT ____________
7. The total number of currently enrolled trainees in Engineering ____________




                                                       64
8. What are your expectations regarding the number of your enrolments and graduates (and those
who are in IT and Engineering majors) in the next 3 years?
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________

9. What are the selection criteria and requirements of acceptance to your training program?

 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



INSTRUCTORS


10. The total number of your teaching staff _________
11. The total number of your teaching staff in IT department _________
12. The total number of your teaching staff in Engineering department _________
13. The average age of your instructors _________
14. What is the final education degree of the instructors? (categorize in proportion among BA, MA,
    and PhD) _________
15. Do you have instructors who, also, teach at universities?
     ? Yes              ?No
 15.1. (additional information)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



CURRICULUM AND STUDY PROGRAMS

16. Describe your training courses (duration, depth, study plans, main topics covered etc.)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________


17. In your opinion, do your courses meet the demands of the private sector in preparing qualified
graduates and job candidates?
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________




                                                  65
 18. (In case of software development) Which programming languages do you teach?
 18.1 Describe the courses (number of hours, teaching methods etc.).
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________



19. Do you have internship programs for trainees? If yes, is it mandatory?


     ? Yes                 ?No
 19.1. Please, describe the internship (duration, depth etc.)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________


20. Do you have a joint program/initiative/lab with a private company?

     ? Yes                 ?No
20.1. If yes, please, describe.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________


21. Do you get any input from private sector on your course materials/curriculum development?
     ? Yes                 ?No
21.1 (Please, provide details)
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________




22. Do you offer professional skills certification programs (such as SAP, Oracle, etc.), in addition to
your regular training courses?
     ? Yes                 ?No


                                                     66
 22.1. (Please, name the courses)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



TRAINEES JOB PLACEMENT
23. Do you have dedicated career center/employee to support your trainees with job/internship
search and placement?

     ? Yes                ?No
 23.1. If yes, please, describe its activities.
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________


24. Do you track the job placement of your trainees?

     ? Yes                ?No
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



25. Do you have any statistics regarding the job placement and career of your trainees?


     ? Yes                ?No
 25.1. (If yes, please, provide additional information)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________




26. Do you teach your trainees job search related skills such as resume writing, networking, job
interview etc.?



                                                      67
     ? Yes                ?No
 26.1. (If yes, please, describe)
 ____________________________________________________________________________________
 ____________________________________________________________________________________



27. Do you know which job search channels your trainees use? Please, rate how often each channel is
used.

                                                                                       5= Every
         Channel                    1= Never   2= Rarely   3=Sometimes   4= Often
                                                                                         time
27.1. Online
27.2. Personal
connections/ references
27.3. Recruiting agency
27.4. Training center -
private sector relationship
27.5. Other______


Tel. number of the respondent _______________________________________________


                    Thank you for taking the time and answering our questions!




                                                     68
5.4. LIST OF THE SURVEYED PARTIES


COMPANIES                                          UNIVERSITIES

1.    National Instruments, Armenian Branch        1.   European Regional Academy
2.    Symotec LTD                                  2.   Russian-Armenian (Slavonic University)
3.    Synopsys Armenia CJSC                        3.   American University of Armenia
4.    Nairi-Tech LLC                               4.   Yerevan State University
5.    Artin Varoujan CJSC                          5.   State Engineering University of Armenia
6.    Agnian LLC
7.    Instigate CJSC
8.    Ani-Test CJSC
9.    CQGI MA
10.   Macadamian AR CJSC                           TRAINING CENTERS
11.   Flexible Applications CJSC
12.   Monitis GFI CJSC                             1.   Instigate Training Center Foundation
13.   Plexonic                                     2.   Microsoft Innovation Center Armenia
14.   SFL LLC                                      3.   Armenian-Indian ICT center of excellence
15.   Shahumyan Media LLC                          4.   mLab ECA
16.   LTXC Credence LLC
17.   OMD
18.   X-tech Studio
19.   Idram LLC
20.   Essential Solutions LLC                      OTHER PARTIES
21.   Zoom Graphics LLC
22.   Mentor Graphics, Armenia                     1. Union     of  Information       Technology
23.   LynxSEL LLC                                     Enterprises
24.   X –art LLC                                   2. ANEL Laboratories
25.   Volo LLC                                     3. Synopsys      Armenia           Educational
26.   Eyesoft LLC                                     Department
27.   Locator CJSC                                 4. SEUA Career Center
28.   Seven Smarts LLC                             5. Granatus Ventures
29.   LimeTech LLC




                                              69
