                                                      90175




The Loch Ness Model:
Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
Björn-Sören Gigler, Savita Bailur, and Nicole Anand
The Loch Ness Model:
Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?

Björn-Sören Gigler, Savita Bailur, and Nicole Anand
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of the World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of
such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




Cover design: James E. Quigley, World Bank
Cover artwork: Llanco Talamantes, District Design Group
Contents




Note................................................................................................................................. v


Acknowledgments...........................................................................................................vii


Understanding the Dimensions of ICT-Enabled Citizen Engagement................................ 1


How Can ICTs Bridge Accountability Gap? The Loch Ness Model.................................... 6


Key ICT Enabling Factors................................................................................................ 10
   Openness and Directness...................................................................................................................11
   Timeliness..........................................................................................................................................11
   Responsiveness and Friendliness.........................................................................................................12
   Inclusiveness......................................................................................................................................12
   Activeness and Collectiveness.............................................................................................................13
   Collaborativeness...............................................................................................................................14
   Effectiveness.......................................................................................................................................14


Constraints on ICTs: A Door Still Ajar.............................................................................. 15
   Social, Economic, and Political Barriers: Limited Access and Use.......................................................16
   Technology Barriers: The Choice Conundrum of Multiple Mediums.................................................16
   Recommendations.............................................................................................................................17
   Designing for Inclusiveness................................................................................................................17
   Exploring Intermediaries....................................................................................................................18
   Building an Enabling Ecosystem........................................................................................................18
   Measuring Outputs and Outcomes ...................................................................................................18




                                                                                           The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   iii
                          Experimenting with ICTs on Non-ICT-Enabled Initiatives................................................................19
                          Interpreting Crowdsourced Data........................................................................................................20
                          Informing New Regulations and Ethics..............................................................................................20


                    References...................................................................................................................... 22


                    Figures
                        Figure 1. Strengthening Civic Engagement in Development with ICT-Enabled Feedback....................2
                        Figure 2. Dimensions of Citizen Engagement: Embedding ICTs .........................................................2
                        Figure 3. The Loch Ness Model: Contextual and ICT-Enabling Factors...............................................6
                        Figure 4. The Loch Ness Model: Process...............................................................................................7
                        Figure 5. ICT Penetration Rate, 2001–13..........................................................................................13


                    Tables
                        Table 1. Opportunities and Barriers to Closing the Accountability Loop through ICTs ......................4
                        Table 2. Contextual Constraints.........................................................................................................17




iv   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
Note




This case study was carried out under the umbrella of the Open Development Technology Alliance—the
World Bank Group’s ICT Knowledge platform that aims to enhance the accountability and improve the
delivery and quality of public services through technology-enabled citizen engagement.
    The study was authored under the guidance of Marie Sheppard, Robert Hunja, and Randeep Sudan.
The corresponding author is Soren Gigler (bgigler@worldbank.org).




                                                            The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   v
Acknowledgments




The authors would like to extend their gratitude to the following people for their comments and insights:
Sundeep Sahay, Professor of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway; Helene Grandvoinett, Cluster
Leader, Social Accountability and Demand for Good Governance Team, World Bank; Saki Kumagai, Social
Development Specialist, World Bank; Astrid Manroth, Operations Advisor, OPCS, World Bank; Harika
Masud, Results Specialist, OPCS, World Bank; David Bonbright, Founder of Keystone Accountability and
Former Board Chair, CIVICUS; Michael Woolcock, Lead Social Development Specialist, World Bank;
John Garrison, Senior Civil Society Specialist, World Bank; Tiago Carneiro Peixoto, Specialist in Open
Government at the World Bank Institute; Rakesh Rajani, Founder of Twaweza and Open Government
Partnership (OGP) Civil Society Chair; Jonathan Fox, Professor at American University and author of
Accountability Politics: Power and Voice in Rural Mexico; Mary McNeil, Team Lead, Governance World
Bank Institute and Jane Fountain, Distinguished Professor, Amherst University and Director of National
Center for Digital Government.




                                                              The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   vii
The Loch Ness Model:
Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
Björn-Sören Gigler, Savita Bailur, and Nicole Anand




Can information and communication technologies (ICTs) empower through participation, transparency,
and accountability and if so, under which conditions? Theory and practice demonstrate that technologies
can empower citizens to hold governments and international donors accountable, but true accountability
will only result from recognizing the gap between supply (governments, international donors, service
providers) and demand (citizens, civil society organizations, communities) and considering how to bridge
it from both sides. ICT-enabled initiatives have contributed to shrinking this “accountability gap,” yet in
many cases, it remains open. In this paper, we develop a framework for analyzing how technologies can
accelerate efforts to close the gap, which we call the Loch Ness model. We then offer reasons why the gap
remains open and put forth recommendations for closing it.



Understanding the Dimensions of ICT-Enabled Citizen Engagement


ICTs have been used to collect, visualize, and analyze data (crisis mapping, mobile monitoring), to access
and disseminate information (health kiosks, right to information hotlines), and to unify and engage
communities (community mapping, community radio, online parliamentary forums). While non-ICT
initiatives using similar approaches (community scorecards, citizen report cards, participatory budgets)
have had success in many programs (Wittemyer et al. 2014), there are reasons to believe that ICTs can
contribute to empowering citizens and government alike, shrinking the gap between them and drawing
us nearer to an accountable governance system. Evidence suggests that ICTs can accelerate citizen
engagement—the two-way interaction between citizens and governments or public service providers
that gives citizens a stake in decision making with the objective of improving intermediate and final
development outcomes (figure 1).
    To examine how citizen engagement occurs with ICTs in practice, we draw on Arnstein’s ladder of
citizen participation, in which informing and consulting take place at lower levels, while partnering




                                                                 The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   1
                    Figure 1. Strengthening Civic Engagement in Development with ICT-Enabled Feedback


                                                                         Civil society


                                                                            Citizens
                                     Figure 1. Strengthening Civic Engagement in Develop-
                                     ment with ICT-Enabled Feedback

                                                         Increased                       Expanded capacity
                                                         proximity                       and accountability




                                                    International
                                                    organizations                            Government
                                                                            Improved
                                                                          transparency




                    Source: Custer, S., N. Novin, and E. Palumbo, 2011.




                    Figure 2. Dimensions of Citizen Engagement: Embedding ICTs


                                                                         Empowerment

                                 Figure 2. Dimensions of Citizen         Collaboration
                                 Engagement: Embedding ICTs



                                                                         Participation




                                                                          Information




                    Note: Information = one-way flow of information to citizens to inform problems, alternatives, opportunities, and
                    solutions; participation = two-way flow of information and meaningful citizen consent; collaboration = partnering
                    and sharing between communities; and empowerment = multistakeholder coalition building.




2   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
takes place at higher levels and is more representative of real citizen power (Arnstein 1969). Combining
this model with the Public Participation Spectrum developed by the International Association of
Public Participation (IAP2)1 and literature on civic engagement (Gramberger 2001; Reuben 2004), we
develop a new lens that begins with citizen engagement facilitated through ICTs along four dimensions:
information, participation, collaboration, and empowerment (figure 2). As one moves from information to
empowerment, the effects of citizen participation on political decision-making increases.
    The extent to which ICTs can act as an accelerator for civic engagement along these dimensions will be
limited by barriers that prevent this process from occurring and depend on factors that create an enabling
environment. Table 1 delineates the capabilities and limitations of ICTs to enhance the level of citizen
participation in information sharing, participation, collaboration and empowerment.
    To start, ICTs can reduce information asymmetries by providing improved access to relevant, timely,
and actionable information (Kapur and Whittle 2009). Open and free access to information can lower
transaction costs by reducing the time that citizens spend obtaining access to information or directly
processing transactions, such as obtaining a birth certificate. However, simply enhancing citizens’ access
to information is insufficient for meaningful citizen engagement because it does not provide citizens with
opportunities to participate in decision-making processes (Macintosh, 2003). As elucidated in Wittemyer
et al. (2014), improvements in transparency frequently result in one-way flows of information sharing
from government to citizens, but they do not lead to enhanced accountability. Thus improved access to
information is a critical factor for closing the accountability loop, but it is not sufficient.
    As discussed in Bailur and Gigler (2014) and Gigler (2014), assessing the impact of ICTs needs
to move beyond issues related to simple access to ICTs and instead focus on evaluating the effects of
the widespread use and generation of information by citizens on enhancing social accountability and
facilitating collaboration and empowerment. These processes are enabled through (a) a two-way exchange
of information (Martin 2009), (b) increased transparency and accountability with enhanced visibility of
performance (Kuriyan et al. 2011), and (c) improved outlets for visualization and feedback (Martin 2009).
    Within the broader context of human development, as discussed in Gigler (2014), the process depends
on the expansion of people’s informational capabilities—the ability to access and use information—
and not solely on the provision of ICTs. The expansion of people’s ability to analyze, evaluate, and act
on information is a requisite for the process of individual and collective empowerment and thus can
contribute to enhancing people’s human capabilities (Gigler 2004). As Gigler (2014) outlines, enhanced
access and use of ICTs are critical enablers; however, this approach focuses the analysis on changes in
people’s human development instead of the technologies. Here, the concept of ‘information poverty’ stresses
that the deprivation of information restricts the advancement of a person’s economic, social, political and
cultural freedoms. In this sense, the lack of information is a critical ‘unfreedom’ which has far reaching
repercussions on a person’s well-being (Gigler 2004). While ‘information poverty’ is only one dimension of
poverty it plays a critical role for human development overall since it affects all other dimensions of people’s
well-being. Thus enhancing poor people’s information capabilities can act as a catalyst for the enhancement
in the economic, social and political spheres of a person’s life and thus is a critical factor for development.



1.	 See https://www.iap2.org.au/resources/iap2s-public-participation-spectrum




                                                                                The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   3
Table 1. Opportunities and Barriers to Closing the Accountability Loop through ICTs

                          Enabling
Dimensions               environment                                            Opportunities                                                     Barriers
Information                                                             Reduce information                Informational capabilities: limited capacity to process and evaluate information
                                                                        asymmetries                       and lack of ability to evaluate and act on information and data
                                                                        Reduce transaction costs          Information poverty: marginalized and excluded groups with very limited access
                                                                                                          to information in spite of rapid diffusion of ICTs (mobile phones) in rural and poor
                                                                                                          communities
                                                                        Improve access to information     Mismatch of information needs by citizens (local content, microdata) and the
                                                                        and enable timely access to       supply of information by government (policy, macrodata)
                                                                        information
                                                                        Enhance transparency              Serious constraints due to existing information ecologies and asymmetric power
                                                                                                          relationships (that is, information gatekeepers)
                                                                        Democratize the flow of           Political commitment from policy makers to receive and access information and
                                                                        information—that is, direct       lack of resources and time limitations, with many policy makers overwhelmed by
                                                                        information flows from citizens   information overload and lacking the resources to process new information
                                                                        to senior policy makers in
                                                                        addition to access to “expert
                                                                        knowledge”
Participation                                                           Broaden the reach and be          Digital exclusion and high levels of illiteracy of marginalized groups
                                                                        more inclusive
                                                                        Motivate nontraditional           Selection bias—that is, exclusion of disadvantaged groups and the elderly
                                                                        stakeholders (such as youth)
                                                                        Encourage “active citizenship”    Temporary—for example, appearance and disappearance of online communities
                                                                                                          (crisis mapping)
                                                 Institutional change




                                                                        Enable more open and              Lack of incentives—need of citizens to see how their actions result in meaningful
                                 Infomediaries




                                                                        participatory deliberation        changes of policies or projects
                         Trust




                                                                        though networks
Collaboration                                                           Reduce the time lag between       Little evidence of vertical collaboration—connecting different communities (for
                                                                        hearing voices and closing        example, civil society and governments)
                                                                        the loop (more instant access
                                                                        to information in ICT-enabled
                                                                        consultations)
                                                                        Connect people across             Lack of government capabilities or resources
                                                                        geographically disparate
                                                                        groups
                                                                        Create horizontal                 Political economy, existing structures, and power relations
                                                                        collaboration and bring
                                                                        together like-minded
                                                                        communities
Empowerment                                                             Reduce Information Poverty        Lack of government responsiveness due to culture, existing structures, and power
                                                                        Intrinsic value in itself         relations
                                                                        Enable a collective voice         Citizens’ lack of agency, capabilities, trust, and organization
                                                                        and collective action
                                                                        (crowdvoicing)
                                                                        Participatory monitoring          Lack of “vertical accountability” mechanism between government and traditionally
                                                                        of programs and co-               excluded groups
                                                                        management of public
                                                                        resources
                                                                        Facilitate joint decision-        Government’s lack of awareness, political will, human capabilities, resources,
                                                                        making processes between          incentives, and institutional mandates
                                                                        government officials and
                                                                        citizens




              4   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
    At the same time, barriers that prevent ICT from “closing the accountability loop” are predominately
socioeconomic and political in nature, although inevitably related to the appropriateness of technology.
As illustrated in Wittemyer et al. (2014), Shkabatur (2014a), and Bott, Gigler and Young (2014),
through crisis mapping, social media platforms, and technology-enabled public consultations, accelerated
collaboration is perhaps the best understood contribution of ICTs. The “crisis mapper” community has
demonstrated that ICTs can help to facilitate collaboration among like-minded, geographically disparate
groups of volunteers who convene around a common objective, such as responding to a humanitarian
crisis. After the earthquake in Haiti in 2010, the highly effective online collaboration of thousands of
online crisis mapper volunteers, which resulted in the development of a comprehensive relief map of Port-
au-Prince in just 48 hours, demonstrated the power of crowdsourcing and social networks (see Bott, Gigler
and Young, 2014 for additional cases). However, the community is facing key challenges related to making
crowdsourcing approaches sustainable over the long term. A critical issue that requires attention is how
to move online technical volunteer communities beyond temporary response systems that focus on the
immediate needs of a humanitarian crisis or natural disaster to providing ongoing support for long-term
development challenges.
    The extent to which ICTs can help to move beyond horizontal collaboration between like-minded
groups by facilitating similar collaborations across different sectors, institutions, and traditionally
dissimilar groups remains to be seen. In this context, it is critical to understand which institutional,
sociopolitical, and cultural factors need to be addressed in order to overcome barriers to enhancing “vertical
accountability” mechanisms between governments and traditionally excluded groups such as youth,
minorities, or the elderly. In this context, sociopolitical factors, including the willingness of government to
engage in a genuine process of political reforms, are critical.
    Related to vertical accountability mechanisms in particular, the degree to which ICTs improve
the relationship between citizens and government is contingent on trust relationships between key
stakeholders. Frequently, lack of trust (see Table 9.1) between government, civil society, and citizens is the
key impediment to technologies being effective in enhancing governance (Nye, Zelikow, and King 1997;
Avgerou et al. 2005). Holzer, Zhang, and Dong (2004) argue that citizen trust in government declines
when “first, the citizenry feel as though government officials abuse their powers in the interest of self-
aggrandizement. Second, citizens feel disconnected from government. Third, government service delivery is
perceived to be inadequate.”
    Gigler et al. (2014) demonstrate how lack of trust by both citizens and government officials can be
an impediment to closing the feedback loop. In Bolivia, for instance, indigenous peoples from remote
communities expressed doubts about whether the government would listen and act on the feedback they
provided through the OnTrack system. In spite of the government’s full commitment to the ICT-enabled
citizen feedback program, the lack of trust among marginalized groups was one of the most challenging
obstacles to overcome.




                                                                   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   5
                    How Can ICTs Bridge Accountability Gap? The Loch Ness Model


                    Like our belief in the Loch Ness monster, a sea creature found in the Scottish Highlands so rarely that
                    its very existence has become legend, the accelerating role ICTs can play to enhance accountability and
                    human development is something we have seen but are still trying to fully understand and document. Key
                    sources have provided theoretical frameworks and supporting empirical evidence on the role that ICTs can
                    play in fundamentally altering the relationship between government and citizens. The findings presented
                    here highlight how technologies are deeply embedded in existing sociopolitical local contexts and what
                    preconditions must be satisfied for ICTs to accelerate the opening up of government and the closing of the
                    accountability loop. The Loch Ness model provides a framework for an in-depth analysis of the conditions
                    under which ICTs can empower citizens to hold government more accountable, enhance their access to
                    and quality of basic services, and improve their overall human well-being.
                         We hypothesize that there are ten factors where ICTs play an important enabling role for closing the
                    accountability gap and enhancing people’s human development (figure 3) and a process through which
                    these intended outcomes are pursued (figure 4). As shown in figure 3, the Loch Ness model presents key
                    contextual “Ness” factors (that is, readiness, appropriateness, willingness, and so on) and critical enabling
                    “Ness” factors (that is, openness, inclusiveness, responsiveness); the former are constraining effects and the
                    latter are effects of how ICTs can act as an accelerator for closing the accountability gap.
                         The framework is centered on four models of government as seen through an information lens. Each
                    of these models is a form of an emerging approach to open government (derived from the dimensions
                    in figure 2), with gradually increasing levels of citizen engagement and degrees of collaborative decision-
                    making processes, from transparency to co-production.

                    Figure 3. The Loch Ness Model: Contextual and ICT-Enabling Factors


                             Context/                                        Co-produced                            Intended
                            Conditions                                       government                             Outcomes

                        •   Readiness                     GAP
                                                Figure 3. The Loch Ness Model: Con-
                                                textual and ICT-Enabling Factors
                                                                                                                •   Enhanced
                        •   Fitness                                                                                 decision-making
                        •   Appropriateness                                                                     •   More inclusive
                        •   Willingness                                                                             public policies
                        •   Fairness                                                       Collaborative        •   Increased access
                        •   Steadiness                                                     government               to and quality of
                        •   Trustworthiness           Transparent                                                   public services
                        •   Inventiveness             government                                                •   Policy reform and
                        •   Legislativeness                                                                         institutional change
                                                                                                                •   Improved human
                                                                                                                    well-being
                                                                         Participatory
                                                                         government




                       ICT           1. Openness                4. Friendliness          6. Collaborativeness   8. Collectiveness
                       Enabling      2. Timeliness              5. Responsiveness        7. Inclusiveness       9. Activeness
                       Factors       3. Directness                                                              10. Effectiveness




6   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
Figure 4. The Loch Ness Model: Process

    Figure 4. The Loch Ness Model: Process
                                                                                        GAP

            Transparent             Participatory              Collaborative              Co-produced
            government              government                 government                 government
             New public              Government as a            Government                 Citizen-centered
             administration          service provider           as a platform              government




                                      Infomediaries
                                      Transformation of structures and processes
                                      Building trust




    We acknowledge that the levels of citizen engagement linked to each model of government may not
be sequential; for example, collaborative governance may occur in the absence of transparent processes.
Moreover, we recognize that the different stages of citizen engagement and the extent to which this leads
to an increasing impact on decision-making processes is not based on a linear process and is dependent
on many factors that are unrelated to ICTs, but are based on broader local political economy context. As
such, the “gap” remains even in the co-production model of government (figure 4). Nevertheless, both the
theoretical (Bailur and Gigler 2014; Gigler 2014; Wittemyer 2014) and the empirical (Shkabatur 2014a;
Shkabatur 2014b; Bott, Gigler and Young 2014; Madon 2014) evidence presented demonstrate that the
degree to which the access, generation, and use of information as knowledge are being “democratized” is
central to collaborative public decision making and improved social accountability.
    The aim of the Loch Ness Model is to delineate critical areas in which ICTs are uniquely positioned to
support the supply side of governance; by promoting institutional changes towards a more open, inclusive
and effective government; and the demand side of governance; by expanding citizens’ ability to meaningfully
participate in decision-making processes to enhance their political, social and economic freedoms.
    Central to the Loch Ness model is the process by which ICTs enhance civic engagement and help
to transform how government operates. Figure 4 showcases how innovative uses of technologies can
fundamentally redefine the relationship between government and citizens and move it toward a model
of co-production, characterized by joint decision-making processes. New mechanisms of governance and
accountability are central to this process—whereby the power of decision-making processes is increasingly
diffused—with the ultimate goal of closing the accountability loop and enhancing human well-being.
Figure 4 further incorporates key enabling institutional factors (that is, intermediation, trust building) and
maps each to a corresponding model of government along the loop.
    The Loch Ness model differentiates four types of open government according to level of citizen
engagement and overall citizen-government interaction.
    First, transparent government emphasizes providing citizens with open access to transparent and
comprehensive information and data about government programs and public affairs (DeMaio 2009; Fung,
Graham, and Weil 2007). Although enhanced transparency, in terms of the open and comprehensive access




                                                                      The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   7
                    to public information, is necessary for citizen engagement, Wittemyer et al. (2104) and Gigler et al. (2014)
                    have illustrated that such a one-way flow of information is rather limited in enhancing accountability.
                    This mode of government continues to treat citizens as passive recipients or beneficiaries of government-
                    designed programs, representing a rather narrow interpretation of open government.
                        Many transparency initiatives have fallen short of been useful for citizens. Gigler (2014) offers reasons
                    why mere heightened access to information without equal strengthening of informational capabilities fails
                    to enable people to derive meaning from the information obtained and hence does very little to enhance
                    people’s human development. Figure 4 visualizes the limited contribution of increased transparency to
                    closing the loop, as an important accountability gap remains at this level of the change process.
                        Second, participatory government stresses the need to move beyond merely achieving transparency and
                    toward fostering the full and meaningful participation of citizens in government programs. This approach
                    moves the role of government to that of a “service provider,” with government officials listening to the
                    concerns of citizens and responding as quickly and accurately as possible to their needs (Maier-Rabler and
                    Huber 2011). At the forefront of this approach is an extensive process of public deliberation and civic
                    participation facilitated by ICTs, which is argued to enhance the quality of government decisions regarding
                    more effective public service delivery (Nam 2012, 17).
                        Coleman has argued that innovations in ICTs are changing the communicative relationship between
                    the governed and the governors (Coleman 2007, 369). As the citizen feedback case study from Punjab
                    presented by Gigler et al. (2014) has shown, ICTs can be instrumental for creating a vibrant community of
                    participation and enabling a broad range of citizens to make their voices heard in policy debates. However,
                    the experience from Daraja—an ICT-enabled citizen monitoring system of water points in Tanzania—
                    demonstrates that social and cultural factors can prevent such feedback systems from being inclusive and
                    thus from being sustainable in the long term. As in Daraja, marginalized women are frequently excluded
                    from accessing mobile phones and lack incentives to provide feedback to an “abstract” and remote political
                    system they generally do not trust.
                        The continuous lack of access to ICTs and informational capabilities by the most excluded and
                    marginalized groups threatens to undermine the “inclusiveness” of programs and thus can derail the goals
                    of improved e-participation overall. Along these lines, figure 9.4 again illustrates an accountability loop
                    closed only to a certain degree. Participatory approaches frequently stand in stark contrast to existing
                    bureaucratic traditions and cultures of government agencies. As such, they represent only the beginning of
                    a much deeper and more meaningful process of civic engagement and empowerment.
                        Third, collaborative government aims to encourage active participation by citizens in the design
                    and delivery of public services by fostering an approach that is based on (a) enhanced two-way flows
                    of information and communications between government agencies and citizens, (b) partnership and
                    cooperation among different government agencies as well as between government officials and citizens in
                    the design and implementation of programs, and (c) high levels of civic engagement through a process of
                    open and public deliberation about planned policies and programs (Nam 2012, 18). Here, government
                    agencies act more as facilitators, providing a platform for all stakeholders to meet and collaborate around a
                    common objective.
                        In the context of open government, Beth Noveck stresses that collaborative approaches highlight
                    the importance of citizens’ ability to participate fully in agenda-setting and decision-making processes




8   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
that are based on a “culture of participation” (Noveck 2010, 64). Technologies and social networks
can play a critical role in promoting collaboration between government and citizens. As discussed by
O’Reilly, technologies can be instrumental in government as a platform, where open data and collaborative
technology platforms can enable “anyone with a good idea to build innovative services that connect
government to citizens, give citizens visibility, … and even allow citizens to participate directly in policy
making” (O’Reilly 2010). Shkabatur (2014) and Bott, Gigler, and Young (2014) discuss crowdsourcing
examples that represent this model in that they show how citizens move beyond being passive recipients of
government solutions toward becoming active providers of data, proactively engaged in collaborating with
government officials to find the best ways of responding to natural disasters or provisioning public services.
     As shown in the case study of Rio Grande do Sul, highlighted by Gigler et al. (2014), ICTs can play
a critical role in enhancing public deliberation about government policies. At the same time, as shown in
the case study of CheckMySchool (CMS), the process of ICT-enabled public deliberation will be limited,
and obstacles will continue to block the path toward fostering true and sustained collaboration between
government and citizens.
     A key limitation of the collaborative government approach, however, is that decision-making
power continues to reside with policy makers, who often do not fully incorporate the results from the
collaborative planning and design processes. While this model of government recognizes the importance
of citizen contributions to developing new ideas, generating data, and finding solutions, it nevertheless
is limited in its ability to democratize political decision-making processes. Important asymmetries in the
distribution of power remain. While technologies and social networks can be a powerful instrument to
promote nonhierarchical, flat, and collaborative approaches to policy making, they often cannot alter
existing power inequalities between government bureaucracies, civil society, and citizens. Thus, in spite
of enhanced levels of civic engagement and significant improvements in accountability, ICTs cannot fully
close the loop, as displayed in figure 4.
     Finally, the co-production or citizen-centered model of government represents the highest level of civic
engagement and is characterized by a process of shared decision making between government and citizens.
In this approach, citizens and civil society organizations (CSOs) are empowered to co-design and co-
manage the delivery of public services with government officials. The concept of co-production, first coined
by Elinor Ostrom in the 1970s, analyzes how this new form of government can support the “crossing of
the great divide” between citizens, CSOs, and government to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of
public programs (Ostrom 1996). The co-production approach has been promoted by the New Economics
Foundation, which offers the following definition: “Co-production means delivering public services in
an equal and reciprocal relationship between professionals, people using services, their families, and their
neighbors. Where activities are co-produced in this way, both services and neighborhoods become far more
effective agents of change” (Boyle et al. 2010, 1).
     Co-production essentially redefines the relationship between public service professionals and citizens
from one of dependency to one of mutuality and reciprocity. Citizens become active agents in the design
and implementation of public services. The existing human capabilities of individuals and the social capital
of citizen groups are recognized as key assets in the design, implementation, and maintenance of public
programs (Bovaird 2007, 846). At the center of this model is the empowerment of citizens to become




                                                                  The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   9
                    active agents in the process of development and the planning and provision of public services. It entails a
                    sharing of power between government agencies, private service providers, civil society actors, and citizens.
                        New forms of accountability are critical for the success of such an approach. In the context of open
                    government, this model requires an approach of radical openness, whereby all decision-making processes
                    are based on open, free, and easy access to information as well as open and extensive processes of public
                    deliberation. ICTs can play a critical role in both individual and collective empowerment (Bailur and
                    Gigler 2014; Gigler 2014). ICT-enabled social networks can be leveraged to support nonhierarchical
                    decision making where all citizens are given a voice and where processes are broadly dispersed in a
                    decentralized network structure. ICTs can play a critical role as an enabler of social change, whereby
                    government takes on a new role as facilitator of partnerships between different stakeholders and where
                    citizens and communities are empowered to co-manage public resources and the provision of public
                    services. However, as the ICT impact chain in Gigler (2014) highlights, the degree to which technologies
                    can play a catalytic role for such a process of empowerment depends on the broader political economy, the
                    existing information ecology, and multiple contextual and socioeconomic factors. As figure 4 shows, the co-
                    production model has the potential to close the accountably loop almost entirely.
                        Information and ICTs are a critical part of an empowered active citizenship that can hold governments
                    to account (Bailur and Gigler 2014, Gigler 2014). However, even in this model of government, the loop
                    cannot be closed entirely, leaving an accountability gap. A genuine process of civic engagement, which
                    is based on the sharing of power between government agencies and citizens, faces multiple challenges in
                    implementation. Frequently, such a process requires fundamental cultural and behavioral changes within
                    both bureaucracies and citizen groups. It requires the strengthening of human capacities and trust on both
                    sides, which requires time and a clear vision from policy makers and civic leaders. Based on the evidence
                    presented in this book, some critical factors influence the extent to which ICTs can be transformational
                    for promoting a genuine process of civic engagement and empowerment. Based on the Loch Ness model,
                    the following section summarizes the major areas where ICTs can act as a critical enabler for people’s
                    empowerment and closing the accountability loop.



                    Key ICT Enabling Factors


                    Actors interacting with ICTs will experience varying value additions. Citizen-driven approaches cite the
                    advantages of openness, directness, activeness, and collectiveness. Government and service provider–driven
                    approaches see value in ICTs for enhancing timeliness, responsiveness, friendliness, and effectiveness.
                    Finally, in a co-created landscape, the major benefit will be in the form of collaborativeness.
                        Added value corresponds to one of the four models of government presented in the Loch Ness model.
                    In a transparent government, ICTs tend to enhance openness, directness, and timeliness. In a participatory
                    government, technology-enabled programs will showcase greater effects of responsiveness and friendliness.
                    In a collaborative government, ICTs contribute to inclusiveness and collaborativeness. Finally, in a co-
                    production government, ICTs show signs of heightened activeness, collectiveness, and effectiveness.




10   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
Openness and Directness


Openness is “central to digital democracy” and “predicated on improving access to government
information” (Holzer, Zhang, and Dong 2004). Taking from this definition of openness, we can say that
ICTs specifically increase the visibility of information by removing silos, leading to more active citizenship.
     The cases presented in this book show that “transparency and accountability represent an opening up
of organizations, people, and processes to scrutiny and feedback loops” (Smith 2013) and that technology
has helped to facilitate this process unlike ever before. For example, in the case of I Paid a Bribe highlighted
in Wittemyer et al. (2104), Indian citizens report bribe requests through a simple text message (short
message service or SMS), phone call, or online report. Petty corruption was known only through isolated
anecdotal evidence before ICTs enabled a collectivized, transparent front.
     The work of Map Kibera (Shkabatur 2014a) additionally illustrates the power of technologies to make
information transparent. By identifying and marking their roads, homes, and sanitation facilities, the
residents of Kibera are empowered with information about their rights and access to them in a visual way
that they absorb, trust, and desire to use for their benefit.
     These examples also demonstrate a derivative of openness: directness or an ability to leapfrog barriers,
particularly as they relate to communications, in order to reach a desired endpoint. I Paid a Bribe gives
citizens direct access to a former government official who collects feedback on the corruption issues they face.
In this way, the online platform and mobile technologies put citizen-government interaction on the fast track.
Mapping efforts, particularly those that target crisis situations, offer similar evidence of directness. Specifically,
they illuminate problems that CSOs can present to the responsible authorities for amelioration.



Timeliness


ICTs enable meaningful participation through timely information. They can redress the persistent
problem of “time lags” through continuous exchange of information, which provides a more accurate
picture of on-the-ground realities. In a similar vein, by generating almost real-time data, ICTs allow for
midterm corrections, learning on-the-go, and generally greater flexibility in service provision and project
implementation. As citizens gain access to the same information that international donors and governments
have about project priorities, performance, and expenditures, their ability to exact accountability and shape
future decision making is substantially strengthened (Kapur and Whittle 2009).
    Bott, Gigler and Young (2014) invoke “real time” to convey the timeliness of data collection and
subsequent action. To illustrate the value of timeliness through ICTs, World Bank project implementers
liken real-time, crowdsourced mapping to “having [one’s] own helicopter,” because it enables immediate
sense of events occurring in time and space.




                                                                      The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   11
                    Responsiveness and Friendliness


                    According to Vigoda (2002), “Responsiveness generally denotes the speed and accuracy with which a
                    service provider responds to a request for action or information.” In addition to these quantitative metrics
                    for assessing the quality of responsiveness is the qualitative element of friendliness. Leveraging ICTs to
                    facilitate information flows can support more substantive civic engagement by encouraging recurring
                    interaction through timely, precise, and friendly response.
                        Shkabatur (2014b) illustrates how a community monitoring tool on educational services in the
                    Philippines called CheckMySchool uses ICTs to motivate friendly responsiveness. In a specific example,
                    the existence of CMS fueled reports on the poor quality of toilets at local schools. This further incentivized
                    authorities to respond to the reports holistically: first with inspections and second with funding to improve
                    the facilities. The willingness of the government to act with urgency and thoroughness exemplifies the
                    power of the ICT-led approach.



                    Inclusiveness


                    Exponential growth in social media, mobile phones, and the Internet has generated enthusiasm for
                    harnessing this connectivity to reduce communication barriers and bolster both the direct participation of
                    citizens as well as more communal civic engagement (Holzer, Zhang, and Dong 2004). Globally there has
                    been tremendous growth in ICT penetration over the last decade, particularly with mobile phones (figure
                    5). In addition, there has been a decrease in tariffs for using ICTs. The International Telecommunication
                    Union, using data from 143 countries across the globe, found that between 2008 and 2010 the price for
                    a high-speed Internet connection dropped 52 percent, while that for mobile cellular service dropped 22
                    percent. The increase in penetration, combined with the decrease in tariff rates, suggests the possibility of a
                    more inclusive role for ICTs.
                        The existing literature on e-participation outlines both the opportunities as well as the limitations to
                    using ICTs for enhancing the inclusiveness of political decision making processes (Benkler 2006; Novek
                    2009; Fung et al. 2013). Several scholars have highlighted the limitations of ICT platforms to making
                    political decision-making processes more inclusive. Often critical parts of communities do not participate
                    in technology-enabled public participation process due to the lack of awareness, incentives or distrust in
                    government. (Hindman 2009; Schlozman, Verba and Brady 2012).
                        On the other hand, innovative uses of technologies can broaden the ‘public sphere’ by facilitating
                    a process to amplify voices in deliberation. New technologies have been noted to accelerate
                    communication and information flows and empower people to participate in many-to-many
                    communication (whereby traditional media such as radio or television are one-to-many broadcasting
                    technologies), lower the cost of expressing a diverse set of views and enhance the openness of the public
                    debate (Benkler 2006). For instance, a recent study on political participation through SMS in Uganda
                    concludes, “ICT leads to significant flattening: a greater share of marginalized populations use this
                    channel [through mobile phones] compared to existing political communication channels” (Grossman,
                    Humphreys, and Sacramone-Lutz 2013).




12   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
Figure 5. ICT Penetration Rate, 2001–13
                                     100
                                                                                                                                                     96.2

                                      90                 Mobile-cellular telephone subscriptions
                                                         Individuals using the internet
                                      80
                                                           Figure 5. ICT
                                                         Fixed-telephone    Penetration
                                                                         subscriptions        Rate, 2001–13
                                                         Active mobile-broadband subscriptions
   Penetration per 100 inhabitants




                                      70
                                                         Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions

                                      60

                                      50

                                      40                                                                                                             38.8

                                      30                                                                                                             29.5

                                      20
                                                                                                                                                     16.5
                                      10                                                                                                             9.8

                                       0
                                           2001   2002      2003      2004       2005     2006     2007   2008   2009    2010    2011    2012a   2013a



Source: International Telecommunications Union, World Telecommunication database, ICT indicators.
a. Estimate.




    Evidence however also shows how ICTs can not only enhance processes of political participation
however contribute to expanding the reach of public services (Smith, 2009 and Gigler 2001). The
analysis presented above highlights that ICT can be under certain conditions a critical enabler
for inclusiveness and enhance the reach of the delivery of public services and disaster response to
marginalized and remote communities
    Madon (2014) improves this understanding by offering field results from ICT-led primary health
care systems in the southern state of Karnataka, India. The case study demonstrates the opportunities
and challenges involved in the growing use of technologies in local kiosks to grapple with the problem of
remote beneficiaries and make decentralized governance more effective.
    Crowdsourced and live mapping of needs resulting from the major earthquake in Haiti in 2010 (Bott,
Gigler and Young 2014) exemplifies how ICTs can involve citizens in crisis management in a way that was
not possible in their absence. In this case, the leading nongovernmental organization (NGO) Ushahidi
partnered with volunteers and used a local SMS channel for reporting. As a result, the effort included a
population often overlooked due to time constraints.



Activeness and Collectiveness


Activeness can be understood as the citizen-led precursor to responsiveness or the way in which technology-
mediated citizen accountability mechanisms enable citizens to “express their ideas, experiment with
measures and actions, and … raise awareness,” with or without prompting (Wien, Otjens, and van der




                                                                                                            The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   13
                    Wal 2003). The act of citizens engaging in governance matters is especially strong when their actions are
                    conducted collectively; ICTs ease the collectivization of individual citizens.
                        Discussed in Shkabatur (2014b), the CMS platform stimulates citizens to engage with the education
                    system and unites them to target problem areas uncovered through collective monitoring. The health care
                    kiosks in Karnataka, as discussed by Madon (2104), have similar effects on citizen activity. The technologies
                    prompt citizens to inform themselves about health service rights and needs. They also give local community
                    members reason to act collectively and to track expected, in relation to actual, project outcomes.



                    Collaborativeness


                    Collaboration is perhaps the single most transformative power of ICTs. At a macro level, technologies are
                    playing a significant role in the emergence of “communities of interest that go beyond the confinements
                    or boundaries of the nation state and beyond mere rights” (Cammaerts and Van Audenhove 2005). In this
                    way, actors are joining forces to collaborate on achieving common goals in an effective manner that was not
                    possible in the absence of technologies.
                        The Open Government Partnership is a multistakeholder global platform designed to partner
                    governments and civil society in the struggle for greater transparency and accountability. In its Articles
                    of Declaration, member governments commit to “creating mechanisms to enable greater collaboration
                    between governments and civil society organizations and businesses” and acknowledge that “new
                    technologies offer opportunities for information sharing, public participation, and collaboration.” The
                    acknowledgment of and commitment to collaboration, including through new ICTs, ensure that the value
                    of collaboration is recognized across the globe.
                        On a micro level, Kuriyan et al. (2011) highlight how technologies can be used to enhance analytical
                    and visualization tools that help users to understand raw project information. For example, platforms that
                    have an aggregation function can facilitate dialogue among geographically disparate citizens and enable
                    them to share and compare their experiences. Adding to this is evidence from crowdsourced mapping
                    efforts (Shkabatur 2014a). The technology tools used in mapping projects allow multiple parties, including
                    civil society organizations as infomediaries, citizens as beneficiaries, and governments as service providers,
                    to work together toward achieving a common goal.



                    Effectiveness


                    Effectiveness through ICTs can be understood in three ways: first, the cost of project execution; second,
                    the alignment of organizational goals with project outcomes; and third, the institutional uptake of changes
                    made and tools used in the process.
                        Costs are a frequent barrier to project sustainability. ICTs reduce these costs significantly. For example,
                    the Libya crisis mapping model (Shkabatur 2014a) is used in an “extreme-conflict environment,”
                    exacerbating the level of difficulty to achieve impact. However, through the technology-led approach, it




14   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
becomes “successful in rapidly collecting valuable data at much lower cost than would have been possible
through other means.”
     Effectiveness can also denote “producing a result that is wanted” (Nam 2012). Nam extrapolates that
projects are effective when outcomes are aligned with organizational goals, mission, and objectives. In this
way, the emphasis is on the importance of project design, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation.
Gigler et al. (2014) examine the U-report, a RapidSMS system designed to poll Ugandans on pressing
community development issues. Owing to the ICT-enabled data collection tool, in a mere few weeks a poll
received up to tens of thousands of reports, meeting the original objectives of the initiative.
    The third interpretation of ICT-led effectiveness is the incorporation of changes by government into
existing processes and actions. In the case of the Rural Alliances Project in Bolivia and use of the OnTrack
system, as described in Gigler et al. (2014), rural producers provide timely feedback using broad-based
technologies. The project is made effective by the government implementation officers who adapt and
absorb the project by leveraging the same tool to promote internal goals, including strengthening economic
partnerships for the rural poor.
    Effectiveness will only change in the presence of certain contextual conditions, such as well-understood
organizational objectives and an enabling political economy. Barriers related to these conditions are
structural in form, uniquely local, and difficult to alter. They are discussed in further detail in the following
section because the persistence of the accountability gap can be attributed in large part to them.



Constraints on ICTs: A Door Still Ajar


While technology has the potential to lower barriers, facilitate multidirectional exchange of information,
as well as increase transparency and accountability through access to data for visualization and improved
communication, its limitations must also be recognized. These include the intertwined challenges of elite
capture and digital exclusion, which arise as a result of limited access to ICTs, poorly designed systems,
constrained information capabilities, and low citizen motivation (table 2).

Table 2. Contextual Constraints
 Type of constraint                                                                 Indicator
 Socioeconomic and political
 Willingness                         Does the government have the political will to implement reform?
 Fairness                            Do citizens have the opportunity to participate in government decision-making processes in a fair
                                     and representative manner (participatory budgeting)?
 Trustworthiness                     What is the level of trust between citizens and government?
 Inventiveness                       What are the incentives for citizens to engage?
 Fitness                             Do citizens have a minimal level of digital literacy and informational capabilities to participate in
                                     decision-making processes in a meaningful way?
 Legislativeness                     Does an enabling legal framework exist at the country level (access to information law)?
 Technical
 Readiness                           Does a certain level of e-readiness exist at the country level (diffusion and use of ICTs)?
 Appropriateness                     Are the technologies appropriate for the local socioeconomic context (use of traditional media)?
 Steadiness                          Are the ICT programs financially and socially sustainable in the long term (community ownership)?




                                                                        The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?       •   15
                    Social, Economic, and Political Barriers: Limited Access and Use


                    Due to economic and social barriers, the “beneficiaries” of development assistance often do not have access
                    to the requisite hardware and software. Insufficient broadband and lack of connectivity are acute barriers to
                    access among communities and citizens living in lower socioeconomic circumstances or in rural and remote
                    areas (United Nations 2012).
                        Socioeconomic conditions further influence the use of technologies by communities. According to
                    a recent survey of 2,253 U.S. adults, “The well-educated and the well-off are more likely than others to
                    participate in civic life online just as those groups have always been more likely to be active in politics
                    and community affairs offline” (Smith 2013, 1). This study suggests that technology has not acted as an
                    equalizer for civic participation because its use will remain higher in rich communities, reinforcing the
                    status quo.
                        Technology itself may also become a barrier to participation; incentives to engage will disappear
                    when the technology needed to create or access information is too expensive (Gigler, Custer, and
                    Rahemtulla 2011). In sum, with little knowledge of the “communicative ecology” (Tacchi, Watkins,
                    and Keerthirathne 2009) or greater environment in which the ICT is grounded, designing a citizen
                    engagement mechanism will be difficult, especially when done at a distance—geographically and
                    politically—from the user or beneficiary.
                        Lastly, citizens’ compliance with regulations and acceptance of government legitimacy, for example,
                    will depend on trust or confidence in government. According to Smith (2013), although “e-government
                    applications have the potential for many positive changes (efﬁciency, effectiveness, transparency, and
                    increased connectedness) that provide a multitude of pathways to build citizens’ trust in democratic
                    institutions of government,” the supporting empirical evidence remains unclear.



                    Technology Barriers: The Choice Conundrum of Multiple Mediums


                    Beyond socioeconomic and political constraints, the type of technologies available and appropriate for
                    use can be a limiting condition. The problem is that the diversity of available ICTs is often insufficiently
                    understood and explored. Since the Arab Spring, many have argued that high-tech solutions including
                    smartphones and particularly social media are critical channels for civic engagement because they reach
                    a mass audience at low cost, provide maximum flexibility with asynchronous platforms, and provide
                    rich interactions with visualizations and multiple parties. In parallel, however, donors and NGOs have
                    targeted and tracked improvements in transparency, accountability, and participation through many
                    low-cost, low-tech channels; these include community radio, loudspeaker broadcasts, narrowcasting
                    (playing tapes at self-help or other cooperative group meetings), simple SMS-capable phones (not
                    smartphones), and free phone calls.
                        A broad spectrum of methods is available in order to design for context. For example, high-technology
                    modalities, such as the Internet or social media, have great appeal from an efficiency perspective: they can
                    reach a mass audience rapidly and at low cost. They also provide maximum flexibility and a rich interactive
                    experience, with visualizations and multiparty interaction, among others. However, the more advanced




16   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
the technology, the higher the level of information capabilities needed. These include traditional literacy,
information literacy (how to access the information strategically), and digital literacy (how to use the ICT)
to make meaning from the content (Gigler 2011). In this way, high-tech tools may be most appropriate
when targeting users with greater information capabilities, or they may require support through capacity
building when targeting users with lower information capabilities.



Recommendations


We conclude by offering recommendations for policy makers, practitioners, researchers, and others in
the following areas: designing for effectiveness, exploring intermediaries, building an enabling ecosystem,
measuring outputs and outcomes, experimenting with ICTs in non-ICT-enabled initiatives, interpreting
crowdsourced data, and informing new regulations and ethics.



Designing for Inclusiveness


While early evidence showed that ICT-led transparency and accountability initiatives run the risk of
exclusivity—because access to technologies is hindered by cost, connectivity, infrastructure, and the
relevance and meaningful use of technology (Gigler 2011)—taking an inclusive approach to employing
ICTs is increasingly possible, particularly as the costs of technology have continued to fall. In addition,
we recommend designing hybrid initiatives that integrate new and “older” technologies, together with
offline strategies. Cases shared in this book offer insights into how this can be achieved: for example,
integrating reports from low-tech mobile phones with high-tech mapping software and offline community
ICT training. For deeper use, we recommend including digital literacy programs in the architecture and
operational plans of citizen engagement initiatives.
    For policy makers, we recommend specifically accounting for lower-income groups by recognizing that
their participation may be constrained by structural issues and a lack of opportunities to enhance their
information capabilities. It is also important to recognize that data produced through crowdsourcing and
interactive mapping may not be representative of all citizen information, data, and desires, masking the
true needs of the most marginalized groups.
    For researchers, we recommend examining the actual use, participation, and impact of citizen feedback
mechanisms, participatory budgeting, and interactive mapping by poor and marginalized groups. To what
extent does participation include these groups? What is the role of intermediaries acting on behalf of them?
    Finally, it has been argued that transparency initiatives often benefit mainly the upper and middle
classes, even though the poorer population is particularly affected by issues of corruption (Wade 2002;
Knox 2009). Lower-income groups are less likely to participate in transparency and accountability
initiatives, due to lack of access to ICTs, lack of confidence in using them, insecurity about making
complaints, and lack of basic literacy (Madon and Sahay 2002; Wade 2002). For these reasons,
intermediaries such as NGO practitioners and professionals act on behalf of poor communities, and it is
important to understand the role of all stakeholders.




                                                                 The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   17
                    Exploring Intermediaries


                    Due to the existence of supply-side issues, as well as constrained information capabilities, the risk of
                    selection bias arises in using ICT platforms to enable citizen feedback. Of particular concern is that
                    younger, more educated, and mostly male citizens will participate, while more marginalized groups,
                    including the elderly, the less literate, and women, will be excluded from the process. However, this view
                    tends to ignore the existence of external capabilities. In developing countries, access to technology for
                    those with lower levels of literacy is facilitated by their access to the capabilities of other members of the
                    family or community (Basu and Foster 1998; Foster and Handy 2008). The role of these intermediaries, or
                    “infomediaries,” in ICT-mediated feedback initiatives deserves further attention.
                         Consider the case of an illiterate woman living in a remote village that is covered by a cash transfer
                    program. In the event that an ICT-based citizen engagement mechanism is incorporated into the program,
                    the woman could report her feedback with the help of a younger or more educated family member who
                    is technologically literate. In addition, sharing, particularly for cell phones, is very common among
                    households as well as within communities in developing countries. At the same time, the existence of
                    external capabilities might be limited depending on the type of technology in question, which should be
                    taken into account when designing technology-enabled platforms for civic engagement.



                    Building an Enabling Ecosystem


                    While technologies can be used to make information transparent and inform citizens, create new spaces
                    for citizens’ voices, connect voices to government, and enable governments to respond, a nurturing
                    environment—people and institutions—is necessary for intended outcomes to be realized. For example,
                    websites, wikis, and social media seem to be strongest when they are used together to run a campaign—
                    specifically, their greatest advantage is the speed at which they gather momentum. A strong civil society
                    caucus, civic-minded coders, and a public willing to believe that the status quo can be challenged are all
                    inputs to a campaign that “goes viral.” To be heard and responded to, a campaign requires policy makers
                    who are willing and able to digest the campaign, legislative bodies through which changes can be made,
                    and judicial bodies that enforce the change. In this way, citizen engagement is about more than just using
                    tools for participation; it is also about priming an entire ecosystem for reform by way of those technologies.



                    Measuring Outputs and Outcomes


                    Measuring the impact of citizen engagement initiatives is a daunting task, and the path to tackling it
                    remains unclear. A case in point is the Ushahidi platform, first hailed as a success in 2008 for crowdsourced
                    mapping of postelection violence in Kenya and then used to map Haiti after the 2010 earthquake, Japan
                    after the 2011 earthquake and tsunami, and, most recently, the Syrian Arab Republic after the revolution.
                    Many questions arise concerning the results of these experiments. Did the crisis mapping techniques used
                    in 2008 succeed in creating actual impact? That is, were electorally instigated acts of violence mitigated? To




18   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
what extent did media attention contribute to these outcomes? With less media coverage on the following
interventions, did the level of impact differ? Were the levels of output—crowdsourced reports—significant?
Did outputs translate into reaching outcomes such as aiding in crisis response and disaster management? If
goals were achieved, how did technologies specifically help to facilitate this?
    Interested parties have already begun to dig for answers to these questions. “Dead Ushahidi”2 notes
the failures of the platform to generate anticipated usage levels in several cases. However, the ways
in which this approach has produced outputs and achieved outcomes in other cases have not been
measured or clearly articulated.
    For practitioners, we recommend designing models fit for dynamic learning. Monitoring, documenting,
and assessing should occur on an ongoing basis with the intention being to promote learning from
experience. This could look like tracked outcomes paired with targeted communication plans to learn
from existing successes, avoid repeating failures, and design forward-looking initiatives. A significant point
of consideration is the potential inability to quantify outcomes and, hence, the difficulties involved in
measurement. In these cases, it will be necessary to describe qualitative changes.



Experimenting with ICTs on Non-ICT-Enabled Initiatives


In this paper, we have discussed ways in which ICTs benefit citizen engagement mechanisms as well as
their limitations in doing so. One way of determining the added value of using ICTs would be to analyze
their effects on non-ICT-enabled transparency and accountability initiatives. For instance, how would
the results of an online community scorecard or citizen report card compare to those of a traditional face-
to-face one? What did Anna Hazare’s campaign against corruption in India, characterized by a Mahatma
Gandhi–inspired hunger strike, look like after Facebook publicity? Many assume a straightforward answer:
through social media, the campaign picked up speed and volume. Examining it from a different angle
complicates this conclusion. For example, Cohen (2011) argues that Egyptian President Mubarak’s decision
to shut down the Internet and mobile phone networks during protests in Tahrir Square backfired by
encouraging face-to-face interaction, spreading the message to a wider demographic. Mubarak’s decision
“implicated many apolitical citizens unaware of or uninterested in the unrest; it forced more face-to-face
communication, i.e., more physical presence in streets; and finally it effectively decentralized the rebellion
on the 28th [January] through new hybrid communication tactics, producing a quagmire much harder
to control and repress than one massive gathering in Tahrir.” This analysis demonstrates the need to see
the benefits of ICTs, such as hastening the process of interaction, together with the limitations, including
engendering no more than armchair discussions within elite groups. One approach to unpacking this nexus
is to experiment with ICTs in non-ICT models.




2.	 See http://deadushahidi.tumblr.com/.




                                                                 The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   19
                    Interpreting Crowdsourced Data


                    As crowdsourcing becomes an increasingly popular technique for data collection, a question about the
                    robustness and meaning of the data arises. Namely, if individuals are self-reporting on, for example,
                    elections, corruption, and public service delivery, are there ways to verify the validity and quality of this
                    information? Do we need to “validate” it, and, if so, to what extent? What role do personal motivations
                    play in the reporting process, and how does this affect outputs?
                        The concern with crowdsourced data is twofold but overlapping: the authenticity of individual data
                    and the meaning of composite data. Data users, whether they are government, donors, or NGOs, seek data
                    points that are relevant to their goals. It is difficult to determine a universal definition of relevance, but
                    issues of user motivation and demographics are defining factors. Inappropriate intentions or mismatched
                    demographics may call the relevance of the data into question. However, a large sample size can render this
                    issue insignificant; for example, if hundreds of reports identify violence in a single location, verifying each
                    data point may not be necessary or useful for taking action.
                        Interpretations of aggregate data are equally important. I Paid a Bribe, the online bribe-
                    reporting platform in India, reveals that the heaviest traffic is from Bangalore. Is this due to the city’s
                    disproportionately tech-savvy population, or does it suggest that Bangalore has the highest level of petty
                    corruption? Are there other ways to interpret this information?
                        By decentralizing data collection, crowdsourcing has accelerated the pace at which geographically
                    disparate pieces of information are aggregated. Going forward, the main task will be to analyze data
                    critically and to communicate what the results mean for furthering citizen engagement and bettering
                    government responsiveness and action.



                    Informing New Regulations and Ethics


                     As ICTs play an increasingly prominent role in shaping routes to accountable governance, there are new
                    implications for how ICTs should be used and regulated. We encourage a debate about the responsibilities
                    of companies that manufacture the technologies used in social movements and changes. For example,
                    should Vodafone, a British-based company, have acquiesced to Mubarak’s telecommunications blackout?
                    The company was criticized for later releasing a “power to you” advertising campaign, suggesting that it had
                    been a major tool in the protests, despite having acquiesced to Mubarak’s suppression. If ICTs are used to
                    spark a riot, revolution, or even a peaceful protest, what role should technology companies play in these
                    events? What responsibility do they have to the end users who are making demands or even threats using
                    these technologies? Who should be regulating these activities, and what should this regulation look like?
                    How should the legal system operate if the technology company enabling the ICT service is based in one
                    country, while the technology is used for various purposes in another?
                        Technology-driven transparency and accountability initiatives raise several ethical questions regarding
                    issues of security and privacy. If a citizen uploads data to report human rights violations, corruption, or
                    general public wrongdoing, are the data secure and to what extent? What are the risks to participating in
                    these initiatives? Are steps being taken to ensure privacy and protect human rights?




20   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
    Finally, what are the ethics behind policy to limit or increase the use of technologies? Opposing
approaches to using technologies—one for openness in the name of democracy and prosperity and one
for surveillance in the name of national security—begs the question: who decides what is “for ill” and “for
good”? How and who will legislate for this in the new paradigms of citizen-government interaction?
    There is an urgent need for and much to be done about developing a better understanding of the
impact that technologies for transparency have on privacy, security, and human rights. Researchers should
examine what constitutes a regulatory environment that nurtures civic participation without encroaching
on fundamental rights to privacy. Policy makers need to direct their attention toward building a regulatory
and legal framework under which citizen engagement initiatives can operate to promote transparency
while also protecting security. This requires open dialogue and collaboration between governments, private
technology companies, donors, and civil society organizations to define and explore the list of possibilities
and boundaries. How we use technologies today—for creating openness versus restricting privacy, for
engagement versus surveillance or censorship, for human rights protection versus harm—will determine
the societies we live in tomorrow. The more we work to demystify the use and effects of ICTs for citizen
engagement, the closer we will come to closing the accountability gap.




                                                                 The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   21
                    References


                    Arnstein, S. R. 1969. “A Ladder of Citizen Participation.” Journal of the American Institute of Planners 35
                          (4): 216–24.
                    Avgerou, C., C. Ciborra, A. Codella, J. Kallinikos, and M. Smith. 2005. The Role of Information and
                          Communication Technology in Building Trust in Governance: Toward Effectiveness and Results.
                          Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.
                    Basu, K., and J. E. Foster. 1998. “On Measuring Literacy.” Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society 108
                          (451): 1733–49.
                    Benkler, Y. 2006. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom.New
                          Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
                    Bott, Maja, Gigler, B.S. and Young, Gregor. The Role of Crowdsourcing for Better Governance in Fragile
                          State Contexts. Closing the Feedback Loop. World Bank, Washington D.C.
                    Bovaird, T. 2007. “Beyond Engagement and Participation: User and Community Co-Production of Public
                          Services.” Public Administration Review 67 (5): 846–60.
                    Boyle, D., J. Slay, and L. Stephens. 2010. Public Services Inside Out: Putting Co-Production into Practice.
                          London: NESTA.
                    Cammaerts, B., and L. Van Audenhove. 2005. “Online Political Debate, Unbounded Citizenship, and the
                          Problematic Nature of a Transnational Public Sphere.” Political Communication 22 (2): 147–62.
                    Cohen, N. 2011. “In Times of Unrest, Social Networks Can Be a Call to Action, or a Distraction.” New
                          York Times, August 29. http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/29/business/media/in-times-of-unrest-
                          social-networks-can-be-a-distraction.html?_r=2andscp=4andsq=noam%20cohenandst=cse.
                    Coleman, S. 2007. “E-Democracy: The History and Future of an Idea.” In Oxford Handbook of Information
                          and Communication Technologies, edited by C. Avgerou, R. Mansell, D. Quah, and R. Silverstone,
                          362–82. Oxford: Oxford Online.
                    Custer, S., N. Novin, and E. Palumbo. 2011. “Social Media–Enabled Beneficiary Feedback Loops:
                          Mitigating Risk in Technological Innovation.” Paper commissioned for the World Bank Institute,
                          Innovation Practice, Washington, D.C.
                    DiMaio, A. 2009. “Government 2.0: A Garner Definition.” Gartner, November 13. http://blogs.gartner.
                          com/andrea_dimaio/2009/11/13/government-2-0-a-gartner-definition/.
                    Foster, J. E., and C. Handy. 2008. “External Capabilities.” University of Oxford, Oxford Poverty and
                          Human Development Initiative, Oxford, January.
                    Fung, A., M. Graham, and D. Weil. 2007. Full Disclosure: The Perils and Promise of Transparency.
                          Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
                    Fung, A., Russon Gilman, H., & Shkabatur, J. 2013. Six Models for the Internet+ Politics. International
                          Studies Review 15(1), 30-47.
                    Gigler, B. S. 2001. Empowerment through the Internet: Opportunities and challenges for indigenous
                          peoples. Technology for Social Action. TechKnowLogia, July/August.
                    ———. 2004. “Including the Excluded: Can ICTs Empower Poor Communities? Towards an Alternative
                          Evaluation Framework Based on the Capability Approach.” Paper prepared for the “Fourth
                          International Conference on the Capability Approach,” University of Pavia, Italy, September 5–7.




22   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
———. 2011. “‘Informational Capabilities’: The Missing Link for the Impact of ICT on Development.”
     E-Transform Knowledge Platform Working Paper 1, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
———. 2014. Informational Capabilities: The Missing Link for Understanding the Impact of ICT on
     Development. Closing the Feedback Loop. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Gigler, B. S., S. Custer, and H. Rahemtulla. 2011. “Realizing the Vision of Open Government Data:
     Opportunities, Challenges, and Pitfalls.” ODTA Working Paper, World Bank, Open Development
     Technology Alliance, Washington, D.C.
Gigler, B.S, Bailur, S. and Anand, N. The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
     Closing the Feedback Loop. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Gigler, Björn-Sören Gigler, Samantha Custer, Savita Bailur, Elizabeth Dodds, and Saher Asad with Elena
     Gagieva. 2014. Closing the Feedback Loop. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Gramberger, M. R. 2001. Citizens as partners: OECD handbook on information, consultation and public
     participation in policy-making. Publications de l’OCDE.
Grossman, G., M. Humphreys, and G. Sacramone-Lutz. 2013. “Does Information Technology Flatten
     Interest Articulation? Evidence from Uganda.” Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania,
     Philadelphia.
Hindman, Matthew Scott. 2009. The Myth of Digital Democracy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Holzer, M., M. Zhang, and K. Dong, eds. 2004. Frontiers of Public Administration: Proceedings of the Second
     Sino-U.S. International Conference; “Public Administration in the Changing World,” Beijing, China,
     May 24–25, 2004. Newark, NJ: Rutgers University, National Center for Public Productivity.
Kapur, D., and D. Whittle. 2009. “Can the Privatization of Foreign Aid Enhance Accountability?” Paper
     presented at the symposium “Financing Development: The Privatization of Development Assistance,”
     New York University, School of Law, December 4–5.
Knox, C. 2009. “Dealing with Sectoral Corruption in Bangladesh: Developing Citizen Involvement.”
     Public Administration and Development 29 (2): 117–32.
Kuriyan, R., S. Bailur, S. Gigler, and K. Ryul Park. 2011. “Technologies for Transparency and
     Accountability: Implications for ICT Policy and Implementation.” World Bank, Open Development
     Technology Alliance, Washington, D.C.
Macintosh, A. 2003. Using information and communication technologies to enhance citizen engagement
     in the policy process. Promises and Problems of E-Democracy: Challenges of online citizen
     engagement.
Madon, Shirin. 2014. Information Tools for Improving Accountability in Primary Health Care: Learning
     from the Case of Karnataka. Closing the Feedback Loop. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Madon, S., and S. Sahay. 2002. “An Information-Based Model of NGO Mediation for the Empowerment
     of Slum Dwellers in Bangalore.” Information Society 18 (1): 13–19.
Maier-Rabler, U., and S. Huber. 2011. “Open: The Changing Relation between Citizens, Public
     Administration, and Political Authority.” JeDEM 3 (2): 182–91.
Martin, C. 2009. “Put up a Billboard and Ask the Community: Using Mobile Tech for Program
     Monitoring and Evaluation.” MobileActive, October 31. http://mobileactive.org/put-billboard-and-
     ask-community-using-mobile-tech-program-monitoring-and-evaluation.




                                                               The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?   •   23
                    Nam, T. 2012. “Suggesting Frameworks of Citizen-Sourcing via Government 2.0.” Government Information
                         Quarterly 29 (1): 12–20.
                    Noveck, B. 2009. Wiki Government: How Technology Can Make Government Better, Democracy
                         Stronger, and Citizens More Powerful. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
                    ———. 2010. “The Single Pint of Failure.” In Open Government: Collaboration, Transparency, and
                         Participation in Practice, edited by D. Lathrop and L. Ruma. Sebastopol: O’Reilly Media.
                    Nye, J. S. Jr., P. D. Zelikow, and D. C. King, eds. 1997. Why People Don’t Trust Government. Cambridge,
                         MA: Harvard University Press.
                    O’Reilly, T. 2010. “Government as a Platform.” In Open Government: Collaboration, Transparency, and
                         Participation in Practice, edited by D. Lathrop and L. Ruma. Sebastopol: O’Reilly Media.
                    Ostrom, E. 1996. “Crossing the Great Divide: Coproduction, Synergy, and Development.” World
                         Development 24 (6): 1073–88.
                    Reuben, William. 2004. “Civic Engagement, Social Accountability, and the Governance Crisis.” In
                         Globalisation, Poverty, and Conflict, edited by Max Spoor, 199–216. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
                         Publishers.
                    Schlozman, Kay Lehman, Sidney Verba, and Henry Brady. 2012. The Unheavenly Chorus: Political Voice
                         and the Promise of American Democracy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
                    Shkabatur, Jennifer. 2014a. Interactive Community Mapping: Between Empowerment and Effectiveness.
                         Closing the Feedback Loop. World Bank. Washington, D.C.
                    Shkabatur, Jennifer. 2014b. Check My School: A Case Study on Citizens’ Monitoring of the Education
                         Sector in the Philippines. Closing the Feedback Loop. World Bank. Washington, D.C.
                    Smith, A. 2013. “Civic Engagement in the Digital Age.” Pew Internet, August 25. http://www.pewinternet.
                         org/Reports/2013/Civic-Engagement.aspx.
                    Smith, G. 2009. Democratic innovations: Designing institutions for citizen participation. Cambridge
                         University Press.
                    Tacchi, J., J. Watkins, and K. Keerthirathne. 2009. “Participatory Content Creation: Voice,
                         Communication, and Development.” Development in Practice 19 (4-5): 573–73.
                    United Nations. 2012. “E-Government Survey 2012: E-Government for the People.” United Nations,
                         New York.
                    Vigoda, E. 2002. “From Responsiveness to Collaboration: Governance, Citizens, and the Next Generation
                         of Public Administration.” Public Administration Review 62 (5, September–October): 527–40.
                    Wade, R. 2002. “Bridging the Digital Divide: Route to Development or New Form of Dependency?”
                         Global Governance 8 (4): 443–66.
                    Westholm, H. 2002. “E-Democracy Goes Ahead: The Internet as a Tool for Improving Deliberative
                         Policies.” In Electronic Government, edited by R. Traunmüller and K. Lenk, 240–47. Berlin: Springer.
                    Wien, J. J. F., A. J. Otjens, and T. van der Wal. 2003. “ICT Tools for Participatory Planning.” Paper
                         prepared for the “Food and the Environment 2003 Conference,” European Federation for
                         Information Technology in Agriculture, Debrecen, Hungary, July.
                    Wittemyer, R., Bailur, S., Anand, N., Park, Park, K-R., and Gigler, B.S. 2014. New Routes to Governance:
                         A Review of Cases in Participation, Transparency, and Accountability. Closing the Feedback Loop.
                         World Bank, Washington D.C.




24   •   The Loch Ness Model: Can ICTs Bridge the “Accountability Gap”?
