                                                  90176




Outcome-Based Learning
Field Guide
Tools to harvest and monitor outcomes and
systematically learn from complex projects

Based on pilot experiences with World Bank teams and clients




                                                               1
Copyright © June 2014
The World Bank
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433, USA
All rights reserved

Cover photo: Curt Carnemark, World Bank Photo Collection




                                                2
Outcome-Based Learning
Field Guide
Tools to harvest and monitor outcomes and
systematically learn from complex projects
________________________________________________

Based on pilot experiences with World Bank teams and clients




                      3
4
Table of Contents
Acknowledgments                                                                         7
Summary                                                                                 8
Introduction to Outcome-Based Learning                                                  9

Harvest Outcomes with Stakeholders
Identify outcomes during implementation or at review stage
    Guide for Harvesting Outcomes                                                       13
    Tools for Harvesting Outcomes                                                       18
        A. Sample Template to Document Outcomes Retrospectively                         18
        B. Sample Template to Report Outcomes                                           20
        C. Visually Map Outcomes to Date or as They Happen                              22
        D. Checklist to Review Outcome Information                                      23
        E. Sample Open Questionnaire for Harvesting Outcomes from Stakeholders          24
        F. Sample Questions for an Open Interview with Stakeholders                     25
        G. Sample Template for Terms of Reference: Consultant to Harvest Outcomes       26

Substantiate Outcomes with Stakeholders
Validate the significance of and contribution toward the outcomes
    Guide for Substantiating Outcomes                                                   30
    Tools for Substantiating Outcomes                                                   35
       A. Sample Tables to Organize Outcome Substantiation                              35
       B. Sample Communication for Email Outreach to Substantiators                     36
       C. Sample Interview for Outreach to Substantiators                               37
       D. Sample Form to Collect Stakeholder Feedback                                   40
       E. Sample Table to Track Substantiation Responses                                42

Make Sense of Outcomes with Stakeholders
Interpret outcomes to draw lessons and communicate progress
    Guide for Interpreting Outcomes                                                      44
                 Is the quality and quantity of the outcome information sufficient?
                 What is the sustainability of the changes to institutionalize results?
                 How are the outcomes advancing impact?
                 How is the program design advancing what needs to be achieved?
                 Which interventions have been most beneficial?
                 What are essential “how to” lessons to adapt or inform scale-up?
                 What are lessons to overcome critical development challenges?
                 How can a results framework be developed to assess achievement of outcomes?
                 What progress has been achieved?
                 Which outcomes reflect setbacks or failures?
    Tools for Interpreting and Monitoring Outcomes                                       60
       A. Quality Checklist for an Outcome Statement                                     60
       B. Decision Tree for Identifying Institutionalized Results                        61
       C. Sample Change Strategy Maps and Template for Organizing Outcome Areas          62
       D. Sample Results Framework Template                                              64
       E. Sample Monitoring Plan Template                                                65
       F. Sample Stakeholder Questionnaire for Tracking Progress Toward Targets          66


                                                 5
   Guide for Identifying Lessons from Mapped Outcomes                        67
   Guide for Communicating Outcomes                                          73
   Snapshot of Outcomes from External Training Knowledge Services Projects   76

Resources                                                                    80
Case Study in Outcomes Evaluation: Mongolia                                  81
Example of how and why a World Bank program used outcome harvesting
to learn about social change impacts from capacity building interventions




                                                   6
Acknowledgments
This toolkit was developed based on first pilot experiences with about 20 World Bank knowledge
projects in strategic thematic areas. Since 2012, the World Bank has used the experiences of projects
applying these tools to customize this evolving toolkit of resources for learning across the program cycle.

Examples of knowledge projects that used the tools:
    Constitutional mandates in health initiative (online community, country-based coalitions)
    Leadership public sector reform initiatives (in education, civil service, financial management
       information systems, sewerage services, energy)
    Open contracting program at global and country levels
    Access to Information network in Latin America
    Parliamentary oversight of national budgets in Africa
    Local governance capacity building in South East Europe
    eLearning for capacity development of city officials in China
    Solid waste management in Bosnia
    Governance in pharmaceutical procurement in African countries
    Social accountability in education in the Philippines
    Brazil drought preparedness and climate program

Jenny Gold coordinated the development of the tools with Dawn Roberts, Dale Hill, and the project
teams. Sharon Fisher provided analysis, writing, editing, and design for the guides and tools. Samuel
Otoo and Ricardo Wilson-Grau provided overall guidance.




                                                    7
Summary
Documenting, understanding, and making sense of outcomes—achieved or not achieved, planned or
unexpected—can facilitate strategic, systematic knowledge sharing among task teams, partners, and
clients. However, this can be a difficult undertaking, especially with complex development processes
that involve profound development challenges, experimentation with new innovations, or country-led
behavioral and institutional changes by multiple social actors.

Methods such as outcome harvesting (from the Outcome Mapping Learning Community) offer
approaches to manage knowledge and learn from complex and difficult-to-monitor development
processes. Collecting—also known as harvesting—bites of detailed outcome information with
colleagues, partners, and stakeholders can allow teams to identify, monitor, and learn from changes in
social actors. The information collected describes who changed what, when and where, why it matters
to the development objective—the significance of the change to the development challenge and
context—and how the program contributed to the change.

Harvesting program information for outcome-based learning is a stakeholder-centered process that
captures qualitative, tacit knowledge. The process includes substantiating and analyzing harvested
knowledge collaboratively to communicate progress toward impact to clients, management, and
partners. Tools are flexible to adapt to a program’s design and can provide useful details to inform the
theory of change, implementation lessons, outcomes, and indicators.

From 2012–2014, the World Bank Capacity Development and Results team undertook pilot experiences
to identify how outcome harvesting could be integrated with the World Bank’s results management
approach. Teams explored how customized outcome harvesting concepts and tools could lend
themselves to learning about how change happens in complex aspects of about 20 World Bank
knowledge projects.

Based on feedback from the task teams and clients involved in the pilot experiences, suggestions on
ways to use the outcome harvesting tools going forward include: capture tacit and contextual
knowledge from program implementation; use for systematic learning to maximize benefits of
interventions; seek evidence and lessons from an implementation process; use for client reporting on
results and promoting learning by doing; and triangulate outcomes with other data to validate results.

To move forward on these suggestions and advance project learning, the guides and tools customized in
the pilot experiences were brought together in this field guide. The field guide is intended as a
collaborative vehicle for World Bank staff, clients, partners, and other stakeholders to harvest,
substantiate, interpret, monitor, and learn from outcomes across the project cycle to improve
effectiveness and results. Key uses identified include:
     Reviewing results from complex program/project components to improve the benefit of
        interventions, sustainability and mix of actors involved
     Gathering evidence and lessons from the change process that can complement other M&E tools
     Rigorous knowledge management of complex, multi-actor processes

It is hoped that these first outputs of the pilot experiences will continue to be adapted in different ways
and improved upon through ongoing application and learning.




                                                     8
Introduction to Outcome-Based Learning
What is it
Outcome harvesting—a practical tool for outcome-based learning—is a participative method used to
identify, monitor and learn from the changes a program influenced or produced in social actors.
Implementation teams and stakeholders collect outcome information to define who changed what,
when and where, why it matters, and how the program contributed to the change. This process provides
the foundation of outcome-based learning: information on the program’s outcomes allows teams and
stakeholders to understand the progression of change—what worked and did not work—to adaptively
learn from results.

The outcome harvesting approach is adapted from the outcome mapping community, with an outcome
defined as a significant change in the behavior, relationships, activities, or actions of the people, groups,
communities or organizations with whom a program works directly. By identifying and monitoring those
changes that fall within the “sphere of influence” of a program (figure 1), practitioners can understand
the many often non-linear streams of outcomes that characterize that program’s contribution toward a
development goal.
                                Figure 1. Sphere of influence of a program




                  Source: Simon Hearn. Overseas Development Institute. At www.outcomemapping.ca

Civil society organizations, research institutes, and government agencies globally have adapted outcome
harvesting and related outcome mapping concepts to understand complex programs. The Outcome
Mapping Learning Community (www.outcomelearning.ca) has developed a hub of information and
experiences on how, why, and when to use related tools.

Other development partners have also used outcome harvesting and/or outcome mapping, such as the
Ford Foundation, UK Department for International Development, Canadian International Development
Agency, Oxfam, and Open Society Institute. The Overseas Development Institute supports the Outcome
Mapping Learning Community, and the US Agency for International Development identifies outcome
harvesting tools as useful for complex aspects of programs and strategies as a complement to
performance monitoring (http://usaidlearninglab.org/library/discussion-note-complexity-aware-
monitoring). An August 2013 discussion paper from the UN Development Programme evaluation office
selected Outcome Harvesting as one of 11 promising innovations in monitoring and evaluation practice
(https://undp.unteamworks.org/node/370238).



                                                       9
When to use it
Outcome harvesting can be useful for understanding complex aspects of development programs. What
do we mean by complexity? Complexity comes in part from the number and nature of the social actors,
the challenging development problems addressed and the uncertain solutions to these problems. There
are often difficult to monitor processes because of the multiple actors involved and unclear results
chains, but they offer an opportunity for experimentation to gather new lessons.

The Cynefin Framework (figure 2) shown below provides a typology of contexts to guide explanations
and solutions to address development challenges. When a program is complex, there tends to be
considerable uncertainty about whether the planned activities will have the intended results. Outcome-
based learning—documenting, understanding, and interpreting outcomes—can help teams and
stakeholders learn how a program has (or has not) addressed development problems with uncertain
solutions and to understand the context of the changes.

                                      Figure 2. Cynefin Framework




                              Source: Dave Snowden at http://cognitive-edge.com/

How it promotes learning
Outcome harvesting offers tools for knowledge capture and results learning across the stages of
substantially complex development programs where it is difficult to show impact (figure 3). The
information gathered can be used to maximize the benefits of interventions and offer a context-specific
lens to inform and complement learning from other M&E data.

Outcomes provide qualitative learning on key interventions and identify essential lessons, such as how
best to adapt successful efforts to different contexts and how to choose the best mix of actors to
involve. Learning could be used to inform program design and delivery, as well as defined areas for
further operational research and evaluation.




                                                     10
                 Figure 3. Results learning across the stages of development programs




This field guide focuses mainly on the implementation stage, offering guides and tools for systematic
qualitative learning of what has been achieved and then working backwards to determine how the
change happened. It is a paradigm shift in thinking: first, identify the outcomes (changes in social
actors), then discover the activities and outputs that contributed to the outcomes.




                                                   11
             Harvest Outcomes with Stakeholders

g Outcomes




                    12
Guide to Harvesting Outcomes
Outcome harvesting is a participative method for
                                                          What Is Meant by Outcomes
identifying outcome information with colleagues,
                                                          In outcome harvesting, an outcome is what each
partners, and stakeholders. It is used to learn about     social actor (or change agent) did, or is doing, that
who changed what, when and where, why it matters,         reflects a significant change in their behavior,
and how the program contributed.                          relationships, activities, actions, policies or practice.

Why Outcome Information Is Important                      In a World Bank program, an outcome might describe
The outcome information collected can capture             an action that reflects a demonstrated change in
unrecorded knowledge on a program to provide a            awareness, knowledge or skills, collaborative action,
detailed understanding of results and how the actors      or the use of knowledge or innovative solutions.
                                                          Outcomes might also describe deeper institutional
achieved them on the ground. This information can
                                                          changes relating to policy, citizen engagement or
inform evidence-based adjustments during delivery,
                                                          government accountability and organizational
leading to continuous adaptive management of              arrangements. The outcome always refers to the
complex change processes. The information can also        changes influenced in change agents.
promote dialogue and inform strategic decisions on
next steps. Finally, the information can help answer      Discovering what a program’s outcomes are is a
questions about a program’s results, and be a starting    process—you may discover that some outcomes
point for more comprehensive evaluation.                  aren’t outcomes at all or that some matter more than
                                                          others. The focus of the process is looking at actions
Process for Learning from Outcomes                        by social actors, asking why they matter and what
                                                          they represent within the change process.
This guide summarizes the basic steps to
systematically learn from outcomes. Other learning
materials will explain specific steps in more detail.


                                  Strategize evaluative
                                   learning questions




                                          Adapt              Harvest information
         Reflect on the                  project,             within teams and
          outcomes                     inform next             from clients or
                                          steps                   partners




                                  Gather evidence and
                                   substantiate key
                                       outcomes




                                                     13
Strategize Evaluative Learning Questions
Tools for harvesting outcomes can be used in a variety of ways to gather the information that best
allows programs to address strategic questions of most concern. A team may decide to:
     Look at outcomes across the entire program to learn from the whole change process.
     Examine part of a complex reform to understand what problems were addressed and how.
     Collect outcome information to help answer specific questions, such as:
            o How has the change process differed across countries?
            o What is the sustainability of the changes to institutionalize results?
            o How is the program design advancing what needs to be achieved?
            o What are lessons to overcome critical development challenges?

The aim could be continuous learning from outcome information, gathered frequently from the design
stage of a program through implementation and completion. Or the aim could be to record change in
more detail periodically—collecting it at key stages to learn from cumulative results achieved over
several years.

Harvest Information within Teams and from Clients or Partners
For a 2–3 year program, 20–30 outcomes might be reported. An attempt should be made to “unpack”
significant outcomes to show the various change processes that contributed to the outcome. All
outcomes—positive and negative, intended and unintended—hold the potential of enhancing learning
about the change process and should be recorded.

Think like a detective to first identify outcomes and evidence of changes, and then work backwards to
discover how the change happened. Activities to identify outcomes with team members and
stakeholders might include:
    • Facilitated group sessions to identify outcomes
    • Periodic documentation or reporting of outcomes in a template, database, or online form by the
         project team or clients
    • A client survey which is designed to collect information on outcomes relevant to the project and
         key evaluation questions
    • Structured interviews by a trained third party to identify outcomes.

If methods are used for the initial outcome harvesting that do not involve the entire team, a later team
discussion would allow for dialogue, bring out multiple perspectives, and provide richer content for
learning together. Outcome information can be monitored in a table or spreadsheet, to include the
outcome statement, outcome significance and program contribution.

      OUTCOME STATEMENT                           SIGNIFICANCE                           CONTRIBUTION
   Actions by government, civil            Significance to objective and          Program activities and outputs
     society or private sector                  particular problem                      plausibly linked to
          change agents                                                                   the outcomes
Change in a change agent’s             A description of the relationship of     Processes, goods or services
behavior, relationships, activities,   the outcome to the specific problem,     produced by the program that
actions, policies or practice that     need or situation it influences, which   influence change in some way.
the program has influenced in          brings out its significance in moving
some way.                              the program closer to meeting its
                                       development objectives




                                                         14
IN MORE DETAIL:




Gather information on outcomes
Each description should:
    State who is the change agent as the subject of the sentence.
    Describe what they are doing differently from before.
    Specify the timeframe for when the change occurred—at least the year and month, if relevant.
    Identify the geographical location where the change took place.

As you brainstorm on outcomes, use the following checklist:
     Identify outcomes (or lack of expected outcomes) for all the major agents involved.
     Identify changes across the relevant time line of the program.
     List both small and big changes observed in each agents to capture milestones in the change
        process.
     Identify key setbacks or turning points that shifted the direction of the program.
     Where possible, specify quantitative and qualitative aspects of each change.

Describe the significance of the outcomes
Explain why the outcome matters. Put the meaning of each outcome into detailed context so a reader
who does not have country or topic expertise will understand its importance. Include enough
information such that someone not familiar with the program can understand the baseline problem or
situation that changed.

Significance to objective
     Describe how the outcome is a relevant step toward a development objective, or a key
         milestone in the change process. Projecting forward potential impact can be done here if it can
         be substantiated by external stakeholders and if conditional wording is chosen carefully (not
         should or will happen but could or may be expected to happen)



                                                   15
       Explain if the change represents positive progress toward the objective, if it set back or blocked
        progress and/or how it shifted the direction of the program.

 Significance to particular problem(s) and solution(s)
     Describe how the outcome addresses a problem, need or changes a situation.
            o Explain significance of changes in policy, citizen engagement or government
                accountability, and organizational arrangements.
            o Explain significance of changes in awareness, knowledge or skills, collaborative action,
                or the use of knowledge or innovative solutions.
            o Explain any changes in beneficiaries’ welfare that resulted from the outcome.

Describe how the project or program contributed
Describe how program activities plausibly influenced the outcome(s).
    Describe what the program did, when and where. The description should describe a
       contribution that goes beyond financial support.
    Report both direct and indirect contributions, explaining in precise terms the form of the
       contribution. The contribution may have been cumulative over time, or may have been shared
       with other partners.
    If the program’s contribution is part of other organizational or external partner support, explain
       the program’s role as a part of that support. Be as precise as possible.
    Quantify the program’s contribution as much as possible, such as 3 advisors, 4 meetings, 100
       hours of advisory services, 3 guidance documents translated, etc. As with the outcome, the
       formulation of the program’s contribution must be specific enough to be verifiable.

Gather Evidence and Substantiate Key Outcomes
We can deepen our understanding of the changes reflected by select outcomes through stakeholder
feedback. This feedback loop serves to verify our understanding of the outcomes, and provides a
medium for stakeholders to raise issues to improve the program. Substantiation can also collect
evidence on the select outcomes, such as documents, reports, photos, videos, or media clips. A separate
guide provides more detail on the substantiation process.

Reflect on the Outcomes to Adapt the Project or Program and Inform Next Steps
Interpret what types of changes the outcomes reflect, and what has worked to address critical
problems. Understand the overall picture, that is, how the outcomes come together to advance change
toward the development objective.

Use the outcomes to identify next steps:
    What to continue and what to adjust to make the project or program more effective
    Emerging practices or lessons that could be applied to other projects or programs
    How to scale up the influence of the project or program.

Discuss with all involved the benefits of using outcome information. Consider how and whether your
unit might continue to monitor and learn from outcome information.




                                                    16
Do’s & Don’ts
               DON’T                                                        DO
Don’t describe a project activity as   Describe not what you did, but what the change agent did because of the
an outcome, such as, “We organized     influence of your activities. A change agent may be an individual leader,
a conference or prepared tool X.”      coalition, civil society organization network, mayor or elected official, or
                                       government team.
Don’t force yourself to find direct    Realize that some changes may not be directly linked to an activity. Also, an
relationships between all activities   activity might have been completed last year but the outcome may only
and an outcome.                        have become visible this year. And finally, some things carried out may not
                                       lead to the expected or desired or unintended outcomes.
Don’t report only positive outcomes    Report outcomes that are negative, unintended or unexpected. Report
or intended outcomes.                  expected outcomes that did not occur as planned. These can be identified
                                       as pivot points and provide opportunities for learning to help explain why a
                                       process of change took a new direction.
Don’t give vague descriptions of the   Describe the outcome information in simple language and in sufficient
change that happened.                  detail so third parties are able to understand the change and verify it.
                                       Quantify the change to the degree possible.
Don’t use words that embellish the     Explain the reasoning as to why the outcome is valuable, worthy, or
potential impact of an outcome         successful at that point in time, providing sources or illustrative examples.




                                                        17
Tools for Harvesting Outcomes
The following templates, exercises, questions, and other support are assembled here to help teams
harvest outcomes:
    A. Sample Template to Document Outcomes Retrospectively
    B. Sample Template to Report Outcomes
    C. Exercise to Visually Map Outcomes to Date or as They Happen
    D. Checklist to Review Outcome Information
    E. Sample Open Questionnaire for Harvesting Outcomes from Stakeholders
    F. Sample Questions for an Open Interview with Stakeholders
    G. Sample Template for Terms of Reference: Consultant to Harvest Outcomes


A. Sample Template to Document Outcomes Retrospectively
It is helpful to record information on significant milestones or outcomes as you proceed with a project.
This makes the gathering of evidence for review at key points or at completion of a project or program
less time-intensive. You can record information quarterly or monthly, depending on the pace of the
project. The option here is to divide your entries by the expected outcome/results areas of the project.
These areas may change during implementation, so you may add any new area to track those results.
The template may be modified based upon your needs.

Last updated    Date of last outcome entry

PROJECT TITLE –
GOAL –
OBJECTIVE –

OUTCOME AREA 1 –
OUTCOME AREA 2 –
OUTCOME AREA 3 –
*Note: The outcome areas could change during implementation or a new area of unforeseen outcomes
could be identified.

Outcome Area 1:

Timing and                  Milestone                Significance            Contribution            Progress
Location
WHEN and WHERE       WHAT happened and WHO       WHY is the change      HOW did the project        DEGREE OF
was it?              was involved?               relevant?              contribute?                PROGRESS
• WHEN did the       • WHO are the actor(s)      • Relevance to the      HOW did project          made toward a
    change happen    • WHAT changed in               objective              activities/outputs     development
• WHERE did the          their behaviors,        • Relevance to             support the change     objective
    change take          relationships,              address problem     HOW did other            (indicate 1 for
    place                activities, actions,        or need in local       partners support the   low, 2 for
                         policies or practices       context                change, if relevant    medium, 3 for
                                                                                                   high)




                                                   18
Outcome Area 2:

Timing and                 Milestone                Significance            Contribution            Progress
Location
WHEN and WHERE      WHAT happened and WHO       WHY is the change      HOW did the project        DEGREE OF
was it?             was involved?               relevant?              contribute?                PROGRESS
• WHEN did the      • WHO are the actor(s)      • Relevance to the      HOW did project          made toward a
    change happen   • WHAT changed in               objective              activities/outputs     development
• WHERE did the         their behaviors,        • Relevance to             support the change     objective
    change take         relationships,              address problem     HOW did other            (indicate 1 for
    place               activities, actions,        or need in local       partners support the   low, 2 for
                        policies or practices       context                change, if relevant    medium, 3 for
                                                                                                  high)




Outcome Area 3:

Timing and                 Milestone                Significance            Contribution            Progress
Location
WHEN and WHERE      WHAT happened and WHO       WHY is the change      HOW did the project        DEGREE OF
was it?             was involved?               relevant?              contribute?                PROGRESS
• WHEN did the      • WHO are the actor(s)      • Relevance to the      HOW did project          made toward a
    change happen   • WHAT changed in               objective              activities/outputs     development
• WHERE did the         their behaviors,        • Relevance to             support the change     objective
    change take         relationships,              address problem     HOW did other            (indicate 1 for
    place               activities, actions,        or need in local       partners support the   low, 2 for
                        policies or practices       context                change, if relevant    medium, 3 for
                                                                                                  high)




                                                  19
B. Sample Template to Report Outcomes

Program (name and P number)
Start date:
Country(ies) or region(s):
Names of team members:
Development objective:
Change agents:
Development problem: (What specific development problem(s) does the program address)

Also cite background materials on the program’s results, such as concept notes, videos, reports, other



You can organize outcomes by actor (change agent) and date.


        Outcome Statement                                Outcome Significance                              Program Contribution
   Who did what, when and where?                     Significance for the development              How did the program contribute to the
                                                      objective                                     outcome?
                                                     Specific problem addressed
                                                     Note if outcome describes a
                                                      positive change, a setback or
                                                      turning point
Example:                                         Example:                                           Example:
In early 2012, a municipal reform team in        Significance to objective                          The municipality was one of the urban teams
Bijelijna, Bosnia (including the municipality    The creation of the new team allowed the           that received project support in 2011. The
and 2 utilities) formed a new implementation     reform team to move forward when it was            support began with a regional workshop in
team in the waste collection utility to find a   stuck. Basing the team in the collection utility   January 2012, which provided learning
solution to the difficulties in setting up a     was important to improve its collection            opportunities on leadership, coalition-
household database in order to reach its goal    processes. This structure allowed senior           building diagnostics, strategic
of increasing solid waste collection coverage    leaders from the municipality and implicated       communication and the Rapid Results
and fees.                                        utilities to provide joint oversight to a team     Approach to policy reform and change. This
                                                 that could find solutions to the problems.         was followed by an 11-month laboratory
                                                                                                    phase to explore innovative solutions to their
                                                 Problem addressed                                  chosen urban problem, which was solid
                                                 There was no information on household              waste collection in the case of this team. The
                                                 locations, following the civil war, which was      project provided technical support to the
                                                 required to increase solid waste coverage to       reform team to help them re-think the
                                                 all households and create a database. There        nature of their problem, goal and
                                                 was also a requirement for the municipality        stakeholders.
                                                 to approve any service fee increase. The
                                                 collection utility had shifted its staff to work
                                                 on more profitable services, such as street
                                                 cleaning, since there was not an effective
                                                 system to collect waste from households.
                                                 The dump utility was operating on a deficit
                                                 since it did not have information to charge
                                                 accurate service fees for the amount of
                                                 waste collect. .

                                                 Shift in direction of the program, since the
                                                 team was stuck and a new team was formed.




                                                                        20
        Outcome Statement                              Outcome Significance                              Program Contribution
   Who did what, when and where?                    Significance for the development             How did the program contribute to the
                                                     objective                                    outcome?
                                                    Specific problem addressed
                                                    Note if outcome describes a
                                                     positive change, a setback or
                                                     turning point
Between April and June 2012, the new           Significance to objective                          The project provided rapid results coaching
implementation team conducted a                The survey became a means to increase              support to facilitate the team to launch a
community survey in one village and one        support and participation from the broader         rapid cycle learning process to find their own
urban area to find out under which             citizenry, and allow for data collection to test   solutions to the problems and to advance the
conditions citizens would pay fees and         demand for services at alternative price           goal of improved waste collection in 11
identify household location.                   levels and to document household locations         months. This support was part of a
                                               in a database. Citizens began to express           laboratory phase.
                                               specific complaints.

                                               Problem addressed
                                               Citizens were not willing to pay for waste
                                               collection and did not demand service
                                               improvements. Households were not
                                               documented.

                                               Positive change toward objective
In October 2012, after receiving input from    Significance to objective                          The project encouraged the inclusion of a
many local stakeholders, one municipality in   The policy provided guidance that previously       diverse set of stakeholders in the reform
Bosnia drafted a new policy to guide solid     was lacking and which was necessary to             team structure, as well as an oversight
waste utility operations.                      regulate the utilities and improve services to     relationship of the reform team with the
                                               citizens. The pilot provided motivation and        implementation team. This encouraged
                                               lessons of experience to help inform this          better communication and the development
                                               policy guidance for the municipality, since it     of relationships to inform policy, and for the
                                               gave examples of solutions to the same             learning from the rapid results process to be
                                               problems. It provided a new consensus and          institutionalized in the new policy. The
                                               clarity between the municipality and utilities     lessons could be replicated or reinforced
                                               to meet the objective to improve solid waste       once the laboratory phase was complete.
                                               management coverage while improving
                                               financial sustainability through gradually
                                               increased fees.

                                               Problem addressed
                                               There was previously a lack of municipal level
                                               guidance to regulate utility services and
                                               payments. There was also a lack of dialogue
                                               among the municipality and waste
                                               management utilities (including consultation
                                               with the utilities and citizens) on how to
                                               clarify policy to guide household services and
                                               fees.

                                               Positive change towards objective



                                                   - Add rows for more outcomes -




                                                                     21
C. Exercise to Visually Map Outcomes to Date or as They Happen
On a flip chart or in a table, list the relevant actors (or change agents) along the left and the program
timeline across the top. Then, document outcome statements for each actor across the timeline in the
table cells or on sticky notes.

Timeframe                  Month, Year           Month, Year         Month, Year       Month, Year

 Social actor              OUTCOME
(Name the change agent)    • What did the
                             actor do, where?
                           • Significance to
                             objective
                           • Problem
                             addressed
                           • Contribution of
                             initiative
Social actor




Social actor




                                    - Add more actors and outcomes -




      Source: Overseas Development Institute and International Livestock Research Institute, 2006




                                                    22
D. Checklist to Review Outcome Information
Each outcome should describe detailed information listed below in the program context.

      Outcome Statement                Outcome Significance               Program Contribution

   Names the change agent as        Explains how outcome is a        Describes what the program
    the subject                       relevant step toward              did
                                      objective or key milestone in
   Explains what the agent is                                         Includes both direct and
                                      change process
    doing differently                                                   indirect contributions, as
                                     Describes the specific            relevant
   Specifies the timeframe
                                      problem or need the
                                                                       Explains the program’s role as
   Identifies what change took       outcome addressed
                                                                        part of other organizational or
    place
                                     Notes whether change              external partner support
   Describes how much/how            positively advanced the
                                                                       Gives precise details—how
    many                              objective, set back progress
                                                                        much, where, and when
                                      and/or shifted direction of
   Is plausible
                                      program




                                                  23
E. Sample Open Questionnaire for Harvesting Outcomes from Stakeholders
An outcome is what each social actor did or experienced, differently from before, intended or not.
Outcome information may be collected through a blend of different approaches, such as a survey
questionnaire of stakeholders. This sample questionnaire was developed and used by the Constitutional
Mandates for Right to Health program to collect outcomes from members of an online community of
practice.

Introduction
In 2011, the Constitutional Mandates for Right to Health Program supported Latin American regional
stakeholders in launching the online SaluDerecho network. The network aimed to engage a broader
group of practitioners from countries, regionally and globally, to discuss, analyze and inform solutions to
health and judiciary rights and policy issues. The program is now exploring the outcomes of the
SaluDerecho Initiative to date and would like to hear from you.

Changes
Changes influenced by SaluDerecho network. Please reflect on your experience with the SaluDerecho
network. To date, how has the network influenced new actions or changes in behaviors, relationships,
activities, policies or practices on the right to health? These changes could be observed in stakeholders
in your country, regionally, or globally. These changes could be positive transformational changes or
negative changes for the right of citizens to health. Also, if you have influenced a social actor not to take
action—e.g., you helped prevent a law from being passed—that too is as an outcome.

For each important change, please describe the following:
    a. WHAT happened and WHO was involved? Please identify the main actor(s) by organization(s)
        and/or titles and describe what changed in their behaviors, relationships, activities, policies or
        practices.
    b. WHEN and WHERE did the change take place?
    c. WHY is the change relevant? Explain why you consider this to be a substantial change related to
        the right to health. How is it different from the previous situation of right to health?
    d. HOW did the SaluDerecho Coalition contribute to making this change happen? Describe which
        activities or inputs specifically supported the change.
    e. WHAT EVIDENCE could be used to demonstrate this change? Identify any documents, online
        content, data sources or methods that could be used to verify this information.
    f. Would you like to describe additional important changes?
         Yes
         No
            [If YES, then questions would repeat]

Contact Information (Optional)
Please provide the following information to indicate how you have been involved with the SaluDerecho
Coalition and how we can contact you if any clarification or additional details are needed.
Name:
Organization:
Title/Position:
Email address:
Brief description of your engagement or role with the SaluDerecho Coalition:




                                                     24
F. Sample Questions for an Open Interview with Stakeholders
The following is a sample script and questions for talking with key actors to collect outcomes. In this
case, it involves a coalition process in Costa Rica supported by the Constitutional Mandates in Health
program. Kemly Camacho developed the questions.

Introduction
As you are aware, an initiative aimed at promoting the right to health is being carried out in Costa Rica.

As part of this process, we are evaluating the program using a methodology known as outcome
harvesting. The discussion that you have kindly agreed to engage in today will contribute to harvesting
the outcomes that have been achieved to date in our country. Once collected, all of the outcomes will
be organized into a document to facilitate an evaluation of the process thus far.

Thank you for taking the time to participate in this interview, which will last approximately 40 minutes.
We will send you the results of the outcome harvesting exercise at the end of the process.

Questions

    A. Involvement in the process
       1. Where are you currently working?
       2. What is the nature of your involvement with the right to health issue?
       3. What do you think about the issue of right to health?
       4. In what way have you participated in the process promoted by the SaluDerecho Coalition
           and supported by the initiative?

    B. Outcomes
       When we speak about outcomes, we are referring to changes that have been influenced during
       the process promoted by the SaluDerecho Coalition.
       1. What are the most significant changes that have resulted from the activities and actions
           being promoted by the SaluDerecho Coalition?
       2. Which individual, institution, or unit has been responsible for these changes?
       3. When and where were these changes produced?
       4. Is there any evidence to substantiate these changes?
       5. Why do you think that these are major changes regarding the issue of right to health?
       6. How are these changes relevant to citizens’ right to health?
       7. In what way has the process promoted by the SaluDerecho Coalition and supported by the
           initiative contributed to these changes?
       8. Are there any changes that are crucial and should be highlighted?

If the answer to question 8 is yes, return to question B.2.

If the answer to question 8 is no, end the interview, thank the respondent and provide my contact
information in case of questions or additional information. Inquire if there is another suitable individual
who could be interviewed to provide further input about the outcome harvesting process.




                                                     25
G. Sample Template for Terms of Reference: Consultant to Harvest Outcomes
A. Background
Outcome harvesting is a tool for learning on implementation science. It is used to identify, monitor, and
learn from changes in social actors, through collecting outcome information with colleagues, partners,
and stakeholders.* The information defines what changed, for whom, when and where, why it matters,
and how the program contributed to the change. Outcome harvesting is useful for complex projects that
involve behavioral changes, challenges with unknown solutions and multiple actors with different roles
and capacities.

The harvesting process is stakeholder-centered and captures qualitative, tacit knowledge. It includes
tools to substantiate and analyze this knowledge collaboratively and communicate progress toward
impact to clients, management, and partners. The method is flexible to adapt to a project’s design and
combine with other M&E tools.

B. Objectives
The consultant will harvest outcomes to support real-time learning, inform program adjustments and
next steps and communicate progress and results. To fulfill these objectives, the consultant will engage
with the team and relevant stakeholders on the following tasks:
     Strategize the outcome harvest process based on learning questions
     Harvest outcome information from a specified timeframe
     Review the outcomes found in documentation and identify additional outcomes by engaging
        with various stakeholders and team members
     Substantiate selected outcomes for additional credibility
     Review and make sense of the outcome information
     Write up the outcomes and analysis in a report

Guides, tools and case examples are available to support the consultant in these tasks.

C. Duties and Responsibilities
A focal person from the local team will be the counterpart to the consultant. Joint work with the team
and local stakeholders ensures accurate outcome information and a locally owned process.

The steps for the consultant are as follows.
     Step 1. Orientation: The consultant will participate in an orientation with the project team.
     Step 2. Outcome Harvesting workshop: The consultant will support a workshop with the
        relevant stakeholders to launch the harvesting process. Following the workshop the consultant
        will prepare a 1-page work plan with the country counterpart to guide the harvesting activities.
     Step 3. Identification, formulation and review of outcomes:
             o The consultant will work with relevant stakeholders to identify and formulate outcomes
                (about 20-40, depending on the scope and magnitude, or about 3-5 per informant). The
                number of outcomes should be sufficient for a critical mass of evidence to answer the
                learning questions. Identifying outcomes should include a review of existing
                documentation to extract changes in social actors. It may also include meetings or
                workshops with relevant stakeholders to review these outcome descriptions and
                identify additional outcomes.
             o The consultant will review the outcomes with the country counterpart and project team
                and update as needed, to ensure the information: is detailed and accurately describes
                local changes and context; includes outcomes at different levels (major outcomes and


                                                   26
               process related), for all key actors and across the timeframe; describes significant
               change in behaviors, relationships, activities, actions, policies or practice; and links to
               tell a story of change from the start to the current situation (if not, outcomes are likely
               missing).
      Step 4. Substantiation: The consultant will engage with relevant stakeholders to identify about
       20% of the outcomes for substantiation through client feedback and evidence collection.
      Step 5. Outcome analysis and mapping:
           o The consultant will engage with the team and relevant stakeholders to identify
               outcomes that reflect major changes: solutions to overcome critical problems or
               bottlenecks; major achievements in a change process; direct results to further a
               development objective; or more permanent/sustainable solutions or deeper
               institutional changes.
           o The consultant will identify 2-3 outcomes that reflect key setbacks, constraints or
               turning points and explain why.
           o The consultant will visually map the outcomes chronologically and along the results
               chain of the project. .
      Step 6. Report: The consultant will write a report on the outcomes, and organize meetings to
       review and discuss the draft report with country counterparts and the project team, making
       changes and finalizing content.

D. Deliverables
The consultant is given a 30-day timeframe to deliver the following:
     Work plan outlining key activities and timelines to harvest outcomes, provide progress updates,
       substantiate selected outcomes (estimated 20%), make sense of the outcome information and
       write the report.
     Table of formulated outcomes, with the following information on each:
           o Where –where the outcome took place.
           o Who –the social actor(s) [individual(s) or group(s)] that showed a significant change in
                their behaviors, relationships, activities, actions, policies or practice.
           o When –month and year in which the outcome was achieved (ex. January 2013).
           o What changed – 2-3 sentence plausible outcome statements explaining what the actor
                is doing differently, identifying what change took place and quantifying the change in
                terms of how much/how many.
           o Problem the change addressed: 3-5 sentences that detail the local problem and/or
                situation that is addressed or changed by the outcome.
           o Significance of outcome to further an objective: 2-3 sentences that explain how the
                outcome is a step toward objective or a key milestone in a process of change.
           o Supporting activities – Activities and how they contributed to the change.
           o Classification of outcome – whether the outcome represents a major change and which
                outcomes represent key setbacks or turning points.
     Table of substantiated outcomes, gathered through the opinions of knowledgeable
       independent third parties.
     5-10 page report that includes:
           o Introduction and background: Introduce the case and summarize the goal, problems and
                key objectives being addressed as well as local projects and activities.
           o Outcome stories on each identified major change area.
           o Substantiation findings: Describe ratings and selected quotes from individual feedback
                providers.




                                                   27
            o   Lessons: Describe how the outcome stories and setbacks provide key learning on the
                project and inform next steps.

E. Qualifications
The candidate must have experience working in the specified location and have:
       1. Experience in the use and facilitation of Outcome Mapping or Outcome Harvesting
       2. Experience in evaluation and strong analytical thinking
       3. Willingness to learn how to apply a new tool for monitoring and evaluation
       4. Demonstrated capacity to support medium and high range professionals to learn to use a
          new tool
       5. Demonstrated working ability to write synthetically in the local language and English.

Experience working with multi-sectoral groups and coalition-building processes is not required but will
be strongly considered.




                                                   28
Substantiate Outcomes with Stakeholders




            29
Guide for Substantiating Outcomes
Once your information on outcomes—and related outputs and milestones—is harvested within your
team and from stakeholders, you can collect feedback from third parties and evidence sources to
further verify the accuracy of the information and deepen understanding of what has been achieved and
how.

Decide on the Purpose of the Substantiation
The team should decide the purpose of substantiating the outcome information since it affects the way
the process is conceived and managed. Possible purposes are:
     Encourage strategic learning within the team. The discovery and agreement on outcomes, their
        relationships, and their significance provides new information that can advance team
        understanding and influence decisions on next steps. The new information may lead to a
        modification in the change strategy, or it may inform a strategy for scale up in the next phase.
        This learning could be partially achieved without substantiation, but is likely enhanced by
        selective substantiation.
     Enhance the credibility or appreciation of the findings for an external audience. A side benefit
        of substantiation is that quotations are often suitable for published case studies or other
        communications products on a program’s results.
     Ensure outcome information is consistent and concretely and correctly presented to
        stakeholders and beneficiaries.
     Elicit different perspectives of the various stakeholders, which may have implications for the
        team’s decisions on next steps.
     Further understand the influence of context on the change processes, which may yield
        important information on potential for replication or scale up.

Choose a Subset of Outcomes to Substantiate
Given that substantiation takes time and it may not add value to substantiate all of the outcomes, in the
past a subset of information (about 20% of outcomes) for substantiation has been the aim. The
information is usually summarized as a table with columns for each outcome, its significance and the
program contribution. Once the choice of stakeholders to be contacted for substantiation is made,
columns can be added to record their degree of agreement with the outcome information, and to list
other evidence sources.

Suggestions to help a team choose a subset of outcomes for substantiation by stakeholder feedback:
    Outcomes over milestones: “True outcomes” represent a key behavioral, institutional or policy
        change. An outcome harvesting exercise might also unpack key steps and milestones important
        to the change processes.
    Pivotal outcomes: ”Pivotal” outcomes have affected follow-up decisions in major ways, such as
        resulting in scaling up, new networks, or replication, or in determining steps that followed. A
        deeper understanding of the context of these outcomes is recommended for its learning value.
    Setback outcomes: “Setbacks” are outcomes that are unintended, negative or reflect an
        expected outcome that did not occur. A deeper understanding of the context of these outcomes
        is recommended for its learning value.
    Non-action outcomes: Sometimes an important change is a proposed policy that is not
        approved or an undesirable practice that is stopped.
    No easy access to evidence: Do not choose outcomes where the behavioral, institutional or
        policy change is easily verified by means other than stakeholder consultation, such as inspection




                                                   30
         of documentation. For example, commitment of an external partner to finance subsequent
         steps, or a change in legislation, are presumably credibly supported by documentation.
        Most recent outcome in a causal series: If there is a series of outcomes that are causally
         related, choose the most recent to be substantiated. The earlier outcomes are less likely to be
         questionable.
        Potential to strengthen understanding of program contribution: Choose an outcome where the
         program contribution may be questioned, or where there may be differences of opinion on its
         significance. For example, a contribution of advisory support may require further substantiation
         that such support was relevant to the context and/or linked to the outcome.

Outcome Information to Substantiate
All parts of the information on a given outcome can be substantiated. The information consists of:
      Outcome statement, describing the action taken by a social actor or change agent—consisting
         of a description of who changed what, when, and where.
      Significance of the outcome, elaborating on the type of change the action reflects, and
         describing why the action mattered—how it addressed a given problem, need or situation.
      Program’s contribution to the outcome, and its extent and importance.

Verification of the outcome statement is likely to be the least controversial part of the substantiation,
whereas agreement on significance of the outcome, and/or the extent to which the program
contributed might be subject to more variation depending on stakeholders’ roles, interests and views.

Identify Sources for Feedback
Consider who can best attest to the outcome information. For each possible substantiator, describe the
individual’s title, contact information and role s/he played in the program. Consider:
     Substantiators within a department outside the program unit who are knowledgeable about
        your initiative. You may also consider others you know who are in contact with country-level
        stakeholders associated with your initiative.
     Substantiators that are stakeholders outside of your organization. It is best to have at least one
        external substantiator who is perceived as an objective observer and is knowledgeable about
        the initiative.

The suggestion is to identify three potential substantiators to provide feedback per selected outcome.
Possible sources are described in table 1.

Table 1: Possible Sources of Substantiation
What is in need of substantiation?            Source of substantiation
Whether an event or milestone occurred        Usually evidence is available to collect, such as in written documents.
Whether an agent’s behavior changed in the    The substantiator should be someone other than the change agent, unless the
way described                                 interest is to understand the motivation of the change.
Whether a change in organizational            The substantiator should be a stakeholder who can observe the effectiveness
effectiveness occurred                        of the organization, and/or is affected by it.
Details about the information on an           Choose substantiators who have been sufficiently engaged to know details.
outcome                                       Some details may be available in documentation.
Significance of the outcome—for example, in   Choose a knowledgeable, engaged stakeholder who has been associated with
terms of its relationship to program          the change agent or organization long enough to observe the change.
objectives, or the degree to which it
addresses a relevant development problem
Link of the program contribution to the       Choose a knowledgeable, engaged stakeholder who has been associated with
outcome (causality)                           the change agent or organization long enough to be aware of the program
                                              contribution and how it influenced the change, but who is not the main
                                              counterpart.


                                                           31
Significance of the program contribution—    Choose a substantiator from the client country organization benefitting most
relative to other external partners          from the contributions. A second substantiator may be from another external
                                             partner organization, but preferably one who works directly with the client, not
                                             one who is exclusively an external financing partner.

Select the Outreach Method for Stakeholder Feedback
You will need to decide on an outreach method to conduct the substantiation. Table 2 provides
information on possible outreach methods. Sample communications and questions for outreach by
email or interview are found in the section, “Tools for Substantiating Outcomes.”

Table 2: Advantages and Disadvantages of Possible Outreach Methods for Substantiation
                    Email alone             Telephone + email           Conference call +            Face-to-face meeting
                                            (individual)                email                        + email
 Advantages         Can reach out faster    Once scheduled, can         Presence of several peers    Where possible, this has
                    to more respondents.    motivate real-time          may motivate more            all the advantages of the
                                            response, answer any        detailed response;           previous two methods,
                                            questions, obtain richer    collaborative approach       with a promise of higher
                                            detail in some cases,       can motivate                 motivation to respond;
                                            and ask for                 substantiators to involve    documentation may be
                                            substantiation of more      other stakeholders for       readily accessed; if a
                                            than one outcome            further verification or      group is involved,
                                            while substantiator is      detail                       personal contact may
                                            available.                                               make it easier to deal
                                                                                                     with disagreements
 Disadvantages      Explanatory email is    An additional step of       Additional step of finding   This method may
                    long; respondents can   scheduling the call is      convenient time for all      require extra time and
                    postpone response;      involved; during call, it   may impose costs;            cost in some cases, but
                    considering             may be harder to stay       experience and roles of      may be preferred for
                    connectivity and        focused on descriptions     substantiators may differ;   stakeholders available at
                    communication           of specific outcomes.       and disagreements            organization
                    habits, this method                                 among different              headquarters.
                    may work better in                                  participants may be
                    some contexts or                                    awkward.
                    countries

When contacting the substantiators, inform them that their role will be part of the published record. Ask
if there is anything they have said they do not want quoted by name and title in the evaluation report. Or,
if there is anything that they do not want quoted in an external publication. Explain that at the least they
will be listed among all of the substantiators.

Assign Roles in the Substantiation Process
     One person needs to be accountable for overseeing the process of substantiation, such as
        approving external communications, assuring follow through, enlisting optimal participation for
        objectivity and quality, and ensuring full reporting and transparency of the substantiation. This
        person may be the team leader or another assigned person.
     Other tasks to conduct the substantiation may be delegated, for example:
            o An assigned person may be responsible for sending emails to substantiators, following
                up with reminders and keeping track of results.
            o Another person may be enlisted to write the findings for an external audience.
     To conduct the substantiation—such as questionnaires, interviews or meetings—a team of two
        persons is recommended to assure objectivity. It is suggested that one of the two persons is not
        engaged in the implementation of the program.




                                                            32
Handling Disagreement Among Substantiators
A challenging aspect is making decisions when the substantiators disagree on the accuracy of
information submitted to them. If there is disagreement, consider the following options:
     Revise the outcome information
        descriptions to incorporate any comments           Tips on Implementing the Substantiation
        provided; this is suitable if most responses        Share the proposed wording of the outcome
        are positive, but some useful additional                information with the substantiators in
        comments are received that may expand the               advance, so they can verify the accuracy of
        description.                                            the descriptions and provide comment.
     Drop the outcome from the substantiation,               Keep   track of responses in a matrix or a
                                                               similar format. A template is in the Annex.
        while keeping it in the outcome map; in this
                                                            Once there is sufficient response on all
        case, it would still be required to report that        chosen outcomes, the feedback can be
        substantiation was sought and full                     reviewed to glean lessons and decide next
        agreement not received. This option may be             steps for the program. If insufficient
        appropriate when the team agrees the                   responses are received (not all “fully agree”),
        outcome is significant and/or pivotal.                 a decision should be made whether to reach
     Drop the outcome from the outcome map                    out to a second set of substantiators or to
        completely; this may be considered in the              follow up with the original ones using
        face of disagreement on any part of the                another method, such as by meeting, phone,
                                                               or email from a more influential
        outcome information. If the team agrees
                                                               intermediary, such as a country manager or
        with this decision, this adjustment may be
                                                               field officer.
        left out of public reporting.                       Follow up with each substantiator who
     Follow up with the substantiators to clarify             responded to acknowledge responses, and
        the different perspectives and                         explain briefly how the feedback will be
        disagreements.                                         acted upon, such as whether it is for internal
     Conduct another round of substantiation                  learning or external publication.
        using a different outreach method or with             If significant disagreements occur in the
        additional substantiators.                             feedback, or if a substantiator’s comments
                                                                   appear useful but are hard to understand, a
                                                                   follow-up conversation is recommended.
Reporting Substantiation Responses
                                                                  If you change any part of the outcome
Feedback from substantiators typically includes                    information in response to feedback, you
qualitative scores (such as “fully agree” and                      may need to re-consult with other
“partially agree”) and comments. To assure the                     substantiators on the new description(s).
credibility sought, transparency is desirable and                 Include the substantiation results in any
statistics on responses should be presented in the                 reporting, disclosing the names and titles of
process manager’s documentation, whether good                      substantiators and the reason they were
news or bad news. Tips for sharing substantiation                  chosen for the given outcome information.
results in a report:
     Include a description of the substantiation methodology used.
     Number the outcomes so they can be easily identified. Indicate those outcomes where
         substantiation took place.

Examples
Asterisk the substantiated outcome within the narrative:
….” In November 2012, the Chinese Academy of Governance and Urban Planning Society of China
piloted the course among 120 professionals and officials in charge of urban planning, land management
and infrastructure investment from 18 provinces across China. [10] The Chinese Academy of Governance
later incorporated the course into its eLearning curriculum and currently offers it twice a year. [11*]




                                                     33
Present the results of the substantiation within the main body of the narrative or in a sidebar:
“To verify the accuracy of the outcomes mapped and enrich our understanding of them, the team
selected four outcomes [6*, 7*, 11* and 17*] and asked 9 people independent of the program unit but
knowledgeable about the change to review the outcomes and record whether they agreed with the
outcome description as formulated. 7 people responded. 6 fully agreed and 1 partially agreed. 5
respondents provided additional comments to clarify the descriptions.” Outcomes selected for collection
of evidence can be similarly presented in the body of a report.
Comments within a section of the report or a sidebar:

In selecting comments, it is useful to bring out different perspectives held by different stakeholders for
learning purposes. Consider those that provide significant or new details on a program’s results that
were not captured in the original outcome information. If the comments by substantiators require
further information on the outcome or context to be fully appreciated, record them within the body of
the report. If they can be self-standing, such as about next steps or the potential for replication, they
may be suitable for a sidebar, alongside similar comments from other substantiators.




                                                    34
Tools for Substantiating Outcomes
The following tables, steps, and other support are assembled here to help teams substantiate outcomes:
    A. Sample Tables to Organize Outcome Substantiation
    B. Sample Communication for Email Outreach to Substantiators
    C. Sample Interview for Outreach to Substantiators
    D. Sample Substantiation Form to Collect Stakeholder Feedback
    E. Sample Table to Track Substantiation Responses



A. Sample Tables to Organize Outcome Substantiation
The following are sample tables that could be used to select outcomes for substantiation by stakeholder
feedback and/or the collection of evidence sources.

Outcomes to be substantiated by stakeholder feedback
Suggestions on choosing a subset of outcomes for substantiation by stakeholder feedback:
    Select outcomes that represent a key behavioral, institutional or policy change.
    Select outcomes that have affected follow-up decisions in major ways.
    Select outcomes that reflect a setback or stall in progress or shift in direction of the program.
    Select outcomes with no easy access to evidence.
    Select the most recent outcome in a causal series.
    Select outcomes that may be questioned, or where there may be differences of opinion on its
        significance.

No.   Outcome       Substantiator name     Substantiator        Substantiator         Role s/he played   Comments
                                           title                contact information   in the program
1.    “......”      “.....”                “.....”              “.....”               “.....”            “.....”

2.

3.




Outcomes to be substantiated by evidence collection:
Select outcomes where there is observable evidence, such as a policy document or public statement.

No.   Outcome         Source of evidence         Links to evidence source   Comments
1.    “......”        “.....”                    “.....”                    “.....”

2.

3.




                                                           35
B. Sample Communication for Email Outreach to Substantiators
SUBJECT: Documenting results of the [name of program]: Requesting your assistance

Dear [name of substantiator],
We are seeking your input to learn from and document the changes influenced by the program [name of
activity]. This is to inform decisions on program improvement and next steps. For this purpose, we are
using a tool called “outcome harvesting,” which has been developed and used successfully by
professional evaluators.

The tool calls for feedback from diverse stakeholders who are knowledgeable about aspects of our
program, specifically on the description of selected significant outcomes or milestones identified by the
program team.

For your response to be most helpful, we ask that you send your answers within one week. The
questions should only take 10 minutes of your time.

This is not an anonymous process, since we want to use your feedback to strengthen the credibility
and our understanding of the project. However, we provide the option not to quote your responses
by name or not quote you in any external publication on the project.

We are grateful for your prompt response. You, along with other collaborators who have responded to
similar questions, are contributing valuable perspectives to our team learning.

        Sincerely yours,
        [program lead]




                                                   36
C. Sample Interview for Outreach to Substantiators: individual/group interview
in a phone call/Skype exchange/videoconference/meeting
A. Preparation for the interview
   The following should be completed before the interview:
    Send preliminary emails or have a pre-exchange with the substantiators, explaining the process,
       the primary purpose (such as learning or publication), providing the outcome information to be
       substantiated, including the feedback form for responses, comments and questions. The
       feedback form should be similar to the questionnaire used in the sample email outreach tool.
    Agree on a date and time (and time zone) for the meeting.
    Assign an interviewer (typically a team of two) to conduct the substantiation interviews. Assign
       roles and possibly questions for each team member to ask during the interview.
    Decide whether to audio record the substantiators’ responses, in which case their permission
       must be asked in advance.

B. Beginning of the interview
     Thank the person for participating, and identify any people on the call/
        videoconference/meeting on your side who may be unknown to the interviewee(s).
     Ensure that you have their correct name and title.
     Begin by referring to the previous email and stating the purpose of the interview. “We are using
        a technique called Outcome Harvesting to document and learn from the results of the program
        [activity name] on which we are collaborating. An important part of this process involves
        feedback from stakeholders to learn from their perspective on the program results.”
     Ask if there are any questions before you begin. Be prepared for a range of questions,
        particularly if the program is still ongoing, but try to keep the conversation focused on the
        substantiation at the beginning. You can mention that there will be time at the end for more
        general questions or to share any background information, and that further follow up through
        other means (e-mail, a second call, etc.) is possible.

C. Explain the substantiation
     Explain that we have identified key outcomes for verification by stakeholders. The description of
        these outcomes or milestones is provided to aid understanding of the changes that have been
        influenced by the program. We have identified one key outcome to verify with each
        stakeholder, and we have pre-drafted the description.
     Explain there are three pieces of information being verified for each outcome: Description of the
        outcome (who changed what, where, when); description of the significance of the outcome
        (why does it matter); and description of the program contribution (what, where, when, who).
        There will also be an opportunity for the substantiator to answer a question on the extent
        and/or significance of the program contribution.
     Explain that the purpose of the substantiation is to better understand the outcome, by asking
        the extent to which they agree with the pre-prepared description. They may also give an
        explanation or provide an alternative description. Explain that any comments are welcome to
        learn from and improve the described information. Explain that if they do not wish to be quoted
        by name in the report or in an external publication, they will have that option. They will be listed
        by name and title amongst all the substantiators.




                                                    37
D. Step-by-step through the form
   Overall description of the information on the outcome:
     Say “Let’s start with the overall description of the information on the outcome [this response is
        for the overall accuracy of the three described pieces].” You may remind them that this is only
        one outcome out of many [such as 30]. You may wish to explain why this outcome was chosen
        for their specific feedback.
     Read the description of each piece of the outcome. Ask “Do you fully agree?” Pause for the
        answer. Whether yes, or some other answer, record it. If they do not fully agree, ask for an
        explanation. Explain to the interviewee that the following questions will provide the opportunity
        to explain any disagreement with the accuracy of the information.
     Ask, “Do you wish to comment further on the overall description of the outcome information?”
   Outcome statement:
     Say “Now let’s consider the outcome statement, specifically.”
     Read the description again if helpful. Ask “Does the description accurately explain what
        happened, where, by whom, and when? Are there any other relevant missing elements? Would
        you like to suggest an alternative description of the statement?”
   Significance of outcome:
     Say “Now let’s consider the significance of the outcome, for the progression toward the
        objective of the program.” You may wish to remind the person of the objective of the program.
     Read the description again if helpful. Ask “Is the description accurate? Are there any other
        relevant missing elements (such as the description of the problem addressed by the outcome or
        how it relates to the objective)?” As suitable, ask probing questions, such as “Would you like to
        suggest an alternative description of the significance?”
   Program contribution:
     Say “Now let’s consider the program’s contribution.” You may wish to describe in a broad sense
        the various partners for this program.
     Read the description. Ask “Is the description accurate?” Pause for the answer. Ask for any
        additional details they can provide on the program contribution.
   Extent of program contribution:
     Say “Now let’s consider the extent of significance of the program contribution. The format of
        this question is a little different than those before.”
     Read all four potential answers (negligible contribution, indirect or lagged contribution, some
        contribution, major contribution). Then invite the person to select the response that s/he
        believes is most accurate. Invite them to add comments to explain their answer. For the
        interviewer, note the explanations of these ratings, in case questions arise:
             o Negligible contribution: The program is associated with the whole initiative, but the
                 progression to this outcome step and its significance was not influenced by program
                 input at the stage of achievement of the outcome.
             o Indirect or lagged contribution: progression to this outcome step or its significance may
                 not be directly identified with the program by all stakeholders, but according to the
                 knowledge of this substantiator, it would not have occurred without program input,
                 which may be identified with present or past contributions.
             o Some contribution to this outcome: This substantiator believes, and states some
                 evidence, that the program directly contributed to progression to this outcome step or
                 its significance, but that impact was not solely due to the program. The substantiator
                 may wish to comment on others that contributed. The others could be external partners
                 or the stakeholder organizations and networks themselves, who, given a certain
                 momentum, were mainly responsible for progression to this step or its significance.




                                                   38
            o   Major contribution to this outcome: This substantiator believes and states some
                evidence that the program directly contributed to progression to this outcome step, was
                the main contributor, and in all likelihood, the outcome would not have happened
                without the program contribution. Others may still have contributed, but the program
                was the main contributor, according to this substantiator.

E. Invite further questions and bringing closure
      Thank the interviewee for their contribution and ask if they have any further questions.
      Ask if there is anything they have said they do not want quoted by name and title in the
         evaluation report. Or, if there is anything that they do not want quoted in an external publication.
         If necessary, explain that at the least they will be listed among all of the substantiators.
      Invite the interviewee to still fill out the form and return it within one week. Tell them that they
         will favor the information in the form, if received promptly, but plan to use the oral information
         just collected if the form is not received.
      Ask, if appropriate, if they can suggest colleagues or other stakeholders that could contribute to
         understanding the outcome. If so, obtain the names, titles, and contact information, and/or ask
         for that information to be supplied by email. Also, if appropriate, ask them to send any written
         documentation that they may have cited in the interview.
      Acknowledge any questions that need to be answered in a separate communication. If
         appropriate, ask if they would like a copy of the final report. Before offering this, be clear on
         what form the final report will likely take—will it be an internal set of notes for the team, or will
         it be a published case study.

F. In case of disagreement
In case of significant disagreement, remind the interviewee(s) that Outcome Harvesting is a learning
exercise. Thus, accuracy is important but there may be different views on what happened, its
significance and how the program contributed. Remind the interviewee(s) again that they may further
discuss their views with the program team at a future time and date or follow up to complete the form
in writing, including any comments.




                                                     39
D. Sample Substantiation Form to Collect Stakeholder Feedback
Below is the description of one outcome selected for your review, including information on the outcome
statement, outcome significance and program contribution. Note that, this selected outcome is just one
change influenced by the program.

     A. Outcome Statement                 B. Outcome Significance                   C. Program Contribution
In October 2012, after receiving     The policy demonstrated a            The municipality was one of many urban
input from many local                consensus built between the          teams that applied for and received
stakeholders, a large                municipality and utilities to meet   project support in 2011. The support
municipality in Bijeljina, Bosnia    an 11-month goal set by local city   began with a regional workshop
drafts a new policy to guide solid   stakeholders to improve solid        followed by a laboratory phase to
waste utility operations.            waste management coverage            explore innovative solutions to their
                                     while improving financial            chosen urban problem. The project
                                     sustainability through gradually     provided Rapid Results Coaching support
                                     increased fees. The policy           to facilitate the team to find solutions to
                                     provided guidance that previously    achieve their 11-month goal. The project
                                     was lacking and necessary to         encouraged the inclusion of a diverse set
                                     regulate the utilities and improve   of stakeholders in the team structure to
                                     services to citizens.                strengthen ownership of the solutions
                                                                          that the team identified.

The following are questions for you to answer about this outcome.
1. On the description of the overall outcome information (all three boxes above): To what degree do
you agree that the information is accurate? Please choose only one answer.
[ ] Fully agree
[ ] Partially agree
[ ] Disagree
[ ] No opinion – not knowledgeable enough to answer
[ ] No opinion – prefer not to answer

2. On the outcome statement (A above): Please explain any disagreement you may have with the
accuracy of the description of the outcome, or present an alternative description.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________

3. On the outcome significance (B above): Please explain any disagreement you may have with the
significance of the outcome, or present an alternative description.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________

4. On the program’s contribution (C above): Please explain any disagreement you may have with how
the program contributed to the outcome, or present an alternative description.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________




                                                         40
5. On the extent of the program’s contribution:
[ ] Program unit contributed negligibly to this result
[ ] Program unit’s contribution to this result was indirect, or the result of past actions of the program
unit
[ ] Program unit made some direct, real-time contribution to this result
[ ] Program unit made major direct, real-time contributions to this result.
[ ] No opinion – not knowledgeable
[ ] No opinion – prefer not to answer

Explanation, and/or description of program contribution and its significance
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________

6. Other overall comments or questions:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________

Next Step
As you review your responses to each question and comments, please mark with a * if you wish:
      Not to be quoted by name, although your name and title will be included among the list of
      substantiators for all the outcomes we are substantiating.

      You may also indicate in the final question #6 any names and contact information for others you
      think could provide helpful comments, and if you would like to receive a copy of the final report.

If you would prefer to convey comments or questions by phone, please use the same section (“6. Overall
Comments or Questions” ) to suggest a date, time and best contact information.




                                                     41
E. Sample Table to Track Substantiation Responses
The following is a sample table that could be used to track substantiation feedback from stakeholders. It
would document the feedback on the questions asked of each substantiator in the substantiation form.


 No.   Outcome      Signi-   Program     Substantiator    Agreement with      Outcome     Outcome         Program    Significance      Overall
                   ficance    contri-   name, title and   overall outcome    statement   significance      contri-    of program     comments/
                              bution         contact        information      comment      comment          bution    contribution     questions
                                          information                                                    comment
 1.    “......”   “.....”    “.....”    [Name, title,     [ ] Fully agree    “.....”     “.....”        “....”       [ ] Program     “....”
                                        contact           [ ] Partially                                              unit
                                        information]      agree                                                      contributed
                                                          [ ] Disagree                                               negligibly to
                                                          [ ] No opinion –                                           this result
                                                          not                                                        [ ] Program
                                                          knowledgeable                                              unit’s
                                                          enough to                                                  contribution
                                                          answer                                                     to this
                                                          [ ] No opinion –                                           result was
                                                          prefer not to                                              indirect, or
                                                          answer                                                     the result of
                                                                                                                     past actions
                                                                                                                     of the
                                                                                                                     program
                                                                                                                     unit
                                                                                                                     [ ] Program
                                                                                                                     unit made
                                                                                                                     some direct,
                                                                                                                     real-time
                                                                                                                     contribution
                                                                                                                     to this
                                                                                                                     result
                                                                                                                     [ ] Program
                                                                                                                     unit made
                                                                                                                     major
                                                                                                                     direct, real-
                                                                                                                     time
                                                                                                                     contribution
                                                                                                                     s to this
                                                                                                                     result.
                                                                                                                     [ ] No
                                                                                                                     opinion –
                                                                                                                     not
                                                                                                                     knowledgea
                                                                                                                     ble
                                                                                                                     [ ] No
                                                                                                                     opinion –
                                                                                                                     prefer not
                                                                                                                     to answer
 2.

 3.




                                                                   42
Make Sense of Outcomes with Stakeholders




               43
Guide for Interpreting Outcomes
Making sense of collected outcome information to improve development results

Development processes are complex—multiple actors and agendas influence the paths from inputs to
impact. It is often difficult to identify the changes a program influenced or produced in social actors—
what was achieved and how did it happen. By identifying and monitoring outcomes, practitioners can
understand a program’s contribution toward a development objective and take corrective actions to
strengthen results.

This guide is to help teams make sense of the information they have harvested about the actions,
relationships, practices and other behavioral changes in social actors (also known as change agents) that
have flowed from program activities. Teams can select questions relevant to their learning needs to
analyze the effectiveness and sustainability of outcomes and facilitate a collaborative adaptive learning
process.

One or more questions can be selected from the list below for customized support based on the
program needs.
    Is the quality and quantity of the outcome information sufficient?
    What is the sustainability of the changes to institutionalize results?
    How are the outcomes advancing impact?
    How is the program design advancing what needs to be achieved?
    Which interventions have been most beneficial?
    What are essential “how to” lessons to adapt or inform scale-up?
    What are lessons to overcome critical development challenges?
    How can a results framework be developed to assess the achievement of outcomes?
    What progress has been achieved?
    Which outcomes reflect setbacks or failures?




                                                      44
(Q) Is the quality and quantity of the outcome information sufficient?
The extent to which the harvested information is useful for understanding and communicating results
and guiding program improvements will depend on the
completeness and accuracy of the data collected.                                  Quality Checklist
1. Apply the quality checklist to ensure the information          An effective outcome statement:
    collected is complete. Outcome statements that fall short         Names the change agent (individual or
    on any component(s) should be revisited for accuracy,                group) as the subject of the sentence
    significance, and relevance for the development process.          Explains in detail what the change agent
    Outcomes that are ambiguous should be removed from                   is doing differently
    the harvested information.                                        Specifies the timeframe for the change
2. Review the completeness of the change story. As a                  Identifies where the change took place
    whole the outcomes should describe key results and                Describes the change in qualitative
    represent a story of the program.                                    and/or quantitative terms (How much?
                                                                         How many?)
         Do the outcomes explain the major changes
                                                                      Is based on clear evidence or is widely
             influenced by the program to date?                          agreed upon by stakeholders
         Do outcomes describe who did what during each
             timeframe of the program?
         Are outcomes listed for all key actors, as well as beneficiaries where influenced (such as
             citizen groups)?
3. Map the outcomes. A visual map serves as an effective tool for reflecting on how program
    outcomes link to influence change over time or themes. If a map has not yet been completed:
         Make a grid with change agents along the left and timeline across the top.
         Plot the outcome statements from your harvested information.
         Identify which outcomes influenced other outcomes or came first and mark these on a map
             with numbers and arrows (see example).
         Review the map with stakeholders for wide agreement on the links.

                      Example Outcome Map: Learning from Utility Reform in Bosnia




                                                    45
(Q) What is the sustainability of the changes to institutionalize results?
Outcomes that are most likely to be sustained beyond a project’s implementation period are those that
reflect changes in local capacity. These results go beyond improvements in the behavior or disposition of
specific individuals or groups and are therefore considered “institutional” in nature.

Typically these results are major societal, policy or organizational changes that have significance for the
development objective of a program. Teams can assess each of their outcome statements by using an
established capacity development or knowledge results framework such as the World Bank’s Capacity
Development and Results Framework (CDRF) to explore whether the reported change reflects a
behavioral or learning outcome for individuals or groups or whether it reflects a higher-level
institutional capacity change. For example, the decision tree based on the CDRF below could be used to
determine which changes are key institutional outcomes. Any institutional changes identified should be
reviewed with stakeholders for broad understanding and agreement.

              Decision Tree to Identify Institutional Changes in the Development Process

        Does the outcome statement reflect…




The decision tree is a checklist against which a team member can assess whether an outcome
represents an institutional change—as long as that team member has a good understanding of the local
context in which the program is being or has been implemented.

For example, the signing of a decree or the approval of a new budget could be used to signify increased
commitment by leaders if these actions are not typical in the context and reflect the overcoming of a
key challenge or barrier to the development objective. Examples showing the interpretation of outcome
statements by type of result are listed in the next table.




                                                    46
                    Identifying Institutionalized Results: Examples from Mapped Cases

     Outcome statement describes…                 Type               Example 1                   Example 2

A broad change in the engagement of            Institutional   Colombian Court set       Vice Presidents signed
local stakeholders                                             new precedent to          decree to expand use of
                                                               clarify health rights     results-based management
EX: More participation of citizens/CSOs in                     to citizens by            to implement and scale up
decision-making, better access to                              broadcasting hearing      reforms across
information, commitment from leaders,                          of a judicial ruling.     government.
shifts in local customs or social norms…

New/revised rules, standards, regulations,     Institutional   Municipality drafts       Chinese Academy of
processes or policies to facilitate                            new policy to guide       Governance issues first
achievement of objective                                       utility operations        guidelines for e-learning to
                                                               with input from           network of 451 institutions.
EX: Guidance to clarify roles and                              collection utility and
responsibilities across organizations,                         dump.
procedures that are less costly to
administer, new legislation backed by
broad public support…

The more effective or efficient operation      Institutional   Collection utility        Ministry of Education
of an organization                                             used survey findings      network of volunteers
                                                               to set realistic price    delivered 25,000 textbooks
EX: Delivering better results, operating at                    for citizens to pay for   within 60 days instead of 1
lower cost, communicating better with                          waste collection.         year.
stakeholders, adapting better to changing
demands…

A change in behavior by individual(s) or        Progress       Regional coalition        Nigeria coalition built
group(s) reflecting new knowledge, skills,       marker        formed online             knowledge of observers on
and/or relationships                                           community of              how to use Public
                                                               practice with             Procurement Act, Freedom
EX: Collaboration, performing new job                          broader group of          of Information Act, and
functions, adaptation of knowledge or                          practitioners.            procurement monitoring
innovative solutions, functioning as part of                                             tools.
network…




                                                         47
(Q) How are the outcomes advancing impact?

Outcomes that have been identified through a mapping process can be placed along a results chain to
identify how the program is contributing to higher-level results over time. Examples are provided for
two projects to show how the levels of mapped outcomes can be interpreted. In each case, the lightest
levels are furthest from the project’s “sphere of influence” and closest to the impact. The darkest levels
are more directly under project control.

       Impact is the goal in the line of sight of the project.
       Institutional changes are outcomes that reflect institutionalization or sustainability. Often these
        are more permanent changes in stakeholder engagement/responsiveness, formal
        policy/rules/guidance and organizational effectiveness. Every outcome at the institutional
        change level has an “outcome story” that can be told separately to outline the project’s theory
        of change and inform sustainability.
       Changes in behavior are outcomes that reflect new knowledge, skills, relationships or
        implementation know-how after any intervention or with a different group than the direct
        participants.
       Early outcomes are changes observed during an intervention or directly at the end that
        influence later changes.
       Inputs are key project activities/interventions.

Examples for how mapped outcomes can be placed along a results chain have been provided for two
projects to demonstrate how this technique can be applied for any map, regardless of its complexity.
Some maps reflect a relatively linear progression from inputs to impact, whereas others follow a more
iterative process, gaining “early wins” to trigger additional inputs and/or behavior changes on the way
to longer-term institutional change.


                                Example 1. Mapped Outcomes in a Results Chain:
                                 Reforming Solid Waste Management in Bosnia
          Impact                              Development Goal: Improved solid waste coverage for citizens



                                                 (12) Collection utility team        (10) Municipality                     (9) Citizens in the pilot
                         (13) Municipality       remained operational unit,                                                area expressed
         Institutional   drafted new policy                                          increased collection fee
                                                 adding staff to expand              by 10% and covered                    demand for better
         Changes         to guide utility        household coverage and                                                    waste collection
                         operations                                                  deficit of dump utility
                                                 fee collection                                                            service and paid fees


                                                                                                                                 (6) Collection
                             (14) Collection                  (8) Collection              (7) Collection utility re-
                                                                                                                                 utility obtained
                             utility and dump                 utility used survey         organized field workers so
         Changes in                                                                       they could complete
                                                                                                                                 starter database
                             provided input                   data to set new                                                    from another
         Behavior                                                                         survey with wider
                             into policy                      price for waste                                                    utility, with
                                                              collection                  household coverage
                                                                                                                                 municipal approval

                                                             (3) Reform team agreed to create a
                                                             household database to manage the
                           (1) Reform team                   collection process and met monthly
         Early                                                                                    (4) Reform team struggled to      (5) Pilot team
                           collaborated on 11-month
         outcomes or                                                                              set up a household database       formed and
                           goal to increase solid waste
                                                                (2) Reform team understood        to increase waste collection      decided to
         milestones        collection coverage and fees
                                                                                                  and decided to set up a team
                                                                the deeper problems                                                 conduct citizen
                                                                blocking expanded waste           to pilot a solution in one        survey
                                                                collection                        village and one urban area

        Project
                                                                                                                        Advisory support provided
        activities or     WBI technical support to help
                                                                    GTL Workshop             WBI Rapid Results          to implementation team
        inputs            shape team’s proposal
                                                                                             Coaching                   leader
        (2011-2012)

                                                                      48
               Example 2. Mapped Outcomes in a Results Chain:
Improving Central and Decentralized Public Service Delivery for Citizens in Burundi




                                        49
(Q) How is the program design advancing what needs to be achieved?
The harvested outcome information can be used to determine the theory of change of the program or
change process. This is the “big picture” of how the program’s outcomes come together to advance
progress toward higher-level results. This documented sequence of changes can be compared against
the intended program strategy and any needs of stakeholders to make adjustments in planned
interventions.

The map below shows how outcome information can be organized to describe a program’s change
process, including information on the:

      Development objective
      Specific development problems addressed by the outcomes
      Key change agents or social actors influencing outcomes
      Other partners involved (such as development partner, World Bank teams, other)
      Major outcomes from the harvest—these can be grouped into 3-5 outcome areas that
       demonstrate progress toward existing or new objectives
      Outcomes from the harvest that are linked to the major outcomes—there could be 2-4 key
       intermediate changes or progress markers to highlight in each outcome area
      Key activities that helped to achieve the outcomes


                   Example from Utility Reform Case: Overview of Change Process




Depending on the complexity of the theory of change, teams might find it useful to think through the
overall change process by focusing on one problem or challenge at a time and reflecting on how the
program helped which agent(s) change to address that particular challenge (see next table). Outcome
areas for addressing each of the problems can then be summarized to diagram the program’s overall
change process.


                                                  50
                Example of Focusing on One Challenge to Look at Change Path
Goal            Improve the benefits of public goods and services for citizens
Challenge       Citizens have habit of not paying utility fees
Key change      Citizens in pilot area; implementation team in collection utility; municipality
agent(s)
Institutional   Citizens’ participation in utility price-setting increased; public support increased for
changes         paying higher fees
Intermediate    New understanding of problem led to decision to pilot solution; survey used to
changes         communicate with citizens and increase demand for services
Supporting      Leadership workshop; follow-up Rapid Results Coaching to facilitate experiential
interventions   learning




                                                51
(Q) Which interventions have been most beneficial?

The process of examining the significance of each outcome and the way(s) in which a program appeared
to contribute to the change can allow for a more systematic look at how important or beneficial specific
program components were for advancing progress. If a team has mapped outcomes along a results
chain, for example, an additional useful step is to review the main program activities and their roles in
supporting or leading to advances toward a development objective.

For the case in Burundi, focused on improving the delivery of central and decentralized public services
for citizens, a key project component appears to have been the advisory support provided to the
Steering Committee for conceptualizing the Leadership for Results program in Burundi and analyzing
priorities. As shown below, this single component led to or supported a notable array of outcomes along
the results chain. This simple exercise helps to highlight the critical value of this advisory support,
without which the Steering Committee could have been less effective in driving the needed change.




                                                   52
(Q) What are essential “how to” lessons to adapt or inform scale-up?
Changes within complex programs might occur through multiple paths. However, some outcomes are
more “essential,” meaning that a development objective is unlikely to be achieved without these
changes. The results chain of a project can be analyzed to help teams reflect on which milestones and
outcomes are essential to scale-up the change process or adapt a similar process in another program.

Milestones and outcomes can be identified as “essential” if they serve as critical junctions in the overall
change process, leading to deeper, more transformational changes. Teams can identify these by
considering the role of each milestone and outcome in facilitating progress along the results chain.

For example, in the case related to reforming solid waste management, essential outcomes for scaling
up change are circled in red. These include the collaboration of the municipality and two utilities via a
reform team to understand deeper problems, the direct advisory support provided by the project team
to the team leader in country, the decision to pilot a solution that responded to the deeper problem of
demand from citizens, and the implementation of a citizen survey to set the new price for waste
collection.

                              Example of Essential Outcomes in a Results Chain:
                                Reforming Solid Waste Management in Bosnia



    Impact                              Development Goal: Improved solid waste coverage for citizens



                                           (12) Collection utility team        (10) Municipality                     (9) Citizens in the pilot
                   (13) Municipality       remained operational unit,                                                area expressed
   Institutional   drafted new policy                                          increased collection fee
                                           adding staff to expand              by 10% and covered                    demand for better
   Changes         to guide utility        household coverage and                                                    waste collection
                   operations                                                  deficit of dump utility
                                           fee collection                                                            service and paid fees


                                                                                    (7) Collection utility re-             (6) Collection
                       (14) Collection                  (8) Collection                                                     utility obtained
                       utility and dump                 utility used survey         organized field workers so
   Changes in                                                                       they could complete                    starter database
                       provided input                   data to set new                                                    from another
   Behavior                                                                         survey with wider
                       into policy                      price for waste                                                    utility, with
                                                        collection                  household coverage
                                                                                                                           municipal approval

                                                       (3) Reform team agreed to create a
                                                       household database to manage the
                     (1) Reform team                   collection process and met monthly
   Early                                                                                    (4) Reform team struggled to      (5) Pilot team
                     collaborated on 11-month
   outcomes or       goal to increase solid waste                                           set up a household database       formed and
                                                          (2) Reform team understood        to increase waste collection      decided to
   milestones        collection coverage and fees
                                                          the deeper problems               and decided to set up a team      conduct citizen
                                                          blocking expanded waste           to pilot a solution in one        survey
                                                          collection                        village and one urban area

  Project
                                                                                                                  Advisory support provided
  activities or     WBI technical support to help
                                                              GTL Workshop             WBI Rapid Results          to implementation team
  inputs            shape team’s proposal                                              Coaching                   leader
  (2011-2012)




                                                                 53
(Q) What are lessons to overcome critical development challenges?
Outcome maps provide valuable information about what changes were needed to overcome
bottlenecks or challenges to development goals. Teams can use various approaches to extract lessons
from their mapping experience to inform future replication or improvements.

One technique is to use the map as a visual tool, particularly if the outcomes have been interpreted
along the levels of a results chain (see the question, “How are the outcomes advancing impact?”)
Outcomes that led directly to the next level along the results chain reflect important lessons.

In the example on utility reform, the use of the citizen survey was critical for addressing challenges of
social norms, accountability and legitimacy that blocked advancement of the goal. The survey was used
to communicate with households, increasing both the demand for services and the willingness to pay
the tariff, and it informed the creation of a legitimate policy.

         Pinpointing Lessons in a Results Chain: Reforming Solid Waste Management in Bosnia

    Impact                              Development Goal: Improved solid waste coverage for citizens



                                           (12) Collection utility team        (10) Municipality                     (9) Citizens in the pilot
                   (13) Municipality       remained operational unit,                                                area expressed
   Institutional   drafted new policy                                          increased collection fee
                                           adding staff to expand              by 10% and covered                    demand for better
   Changes         to guide utility        household coverage and                                                    waste collection
                   operations                                                  deficit of dump utility
                                           fee collection                                                            service and paid fees


                                                                                    (7) Collection utility re-             (6) Collection
                       (14) Collection                  (8) Collection                                                     utility obtained
                       utility and dump                 utility used survey         organized field workers so
   Changes in                                                                       they could complete                    starter database
                       provided input                   data to set new                                                    from another
   Behavior                                                                         survey with wider
                       into policy                      price for waste                                                    utility, with
                                                        collection                  household coverage
                                                                                                                           municipal approval

                                                       (3) Reform team agreed to create a
                                                       household database to manage the
                     (1) Reform team                   collection process and met monthly
   Early                                                                                    (4) Reform team struggled to      (5) Pilot team
                     collaborated on 11-month
   outcomes or       goal to increase solid waste                                           set up a household database       formed and
                                                          (2) Reform team understood        to increase waste collection      decided to
   milestones        collection coverage and fees
                                                          the deeper problems               and decided to set up a team      conduct citizen
                                                          blocking expanded waste           to pilot a solution in one        survey
                                                          collection                        village and one urban area

  Project
                                                                                                                  Advisory support provided
  activities or     WBI technical support to help
                                                              GTL Workshop             WBI Rapid Results          to implementation team
  inputs            shape team’s proposal                                              Coaching                   leader
  (2011-2012)




                                                                 54
(Q) How can a results framework be developed to assess the achievement of outcomes?

Teams can develop a results framework to assess progress for key outcomes. The sample below is
modeled after the framework structure used for projects in World Bank operations. Indicators can be
identified and included for measurement as follows:

          Development goal—to assess progress toward the higher-level objective over the longer term.
          Institutional changes—at least one key institutional change should be measured for each
           outcome story. In cases where multiple related institutional changes are part of the same story,
           it might be sufficient to just reflect one in the results framework.
          Major intermediate outcomes—these are major behavioral changes that are useful to track.
           These outcomes often reflect important gateways or bridges to other higher level outcomes and
           therefore reflect critical junctions in the outcome story.

                                      Example of a Results Framework

             Goal                         Indicator(s)                Data Source(s)         Use of Information

Improved solid waste         # of people in urban areas provided     Household survey    Evaluates progress towards
coverage for citizens        with access to regular solid waste      in targeted solid   the achievement of the
                             collection*                             waste               higher-level development
                                                                     management area     objective
                             % of households in target area served
                             by formal waste management system

   Institutional Changes                  Indicator(s)                Data Source(s)         Use of Information

Municipality drafted new     Municipal approval (1) and              Policy document     Assesses increased
policy to guide utility      implementation (2) of new policy for                        legitimacy and local buy-in
operations                   utilities that reflects input from      Municipal records   for policy guiding utility
                             collection utility and dump.                                operations

   Institutional Changes                  Indicator(s)                Data Source(s)         Use of Information

Collection utility team      Formal establishment of unit within     Utility records     Confirms the improved
remained operational         collection utility to scale up waste                        management of solid
unit, adding staff to        collection services to more                                 waste services for
expand household             households [Y/N]                                            improved operational
coverage and fee                                                                         effectiveness
collection

Municipality increased       % of waste generators in targeted       Municipal records   Measures the commitment
collection fee by 10%        area paying new fee                     Utility records     of the municipality and
and covered deficit of                                                                   citizens to a financially
dump utility                 Cost recovery ratio of dump and                             viable waste collection
                             collection utilities                                        system

Citizens in the pilot area   % of surveyed citizens demanding        Household survey    Assesses local citizen
expressed demand for         service                                 in targeted waste   participation in and
better waste collection                                              management area     support for scaling up a
service                                                                                  sustainable solid waste
                                                                                         collection system
*Core sector indicator




                                                         55
Intermediate Outcomes                     Indicator(s)                Data Source(s)         Use of Information

Collection utility used      Completion of household database        Utility records     Confirms innovation in
survey data to set new       (number and location of households)                         price setting
price for waste collection
                             Establishment of new process to align
                             collection prices with survey data

Collection utility           # of field workers authorized to give   Utility records     Confirms new approach to
reorganized field            priority attention to the solid waste                       leveraging resources for
workers so they could        collection reform process                                   broader citizen coverage
complete survey with
wider household
coverage

Pilot implementation         Memorandum of Understanding that        Municipal records   Tracks formation of new
team formed and              accompanied the establishment of the                        structure for key
decided to conduct           implementation team                                         stakeholders to participate
citizen survey                                                                           in decision process for
                                                                                         reforming solid waste
                                                                                         collection



Depending on the time horizon and purpose of the results framework, a monitoring plan can also be
developed to establish baseline and target values for assessing progress.




                                                         56
(Q) What progress has been achieved?
Teams can assign indicators with data sources and/or methods to assess progress and gaps. They can
develop a monitoring table to inform an existing results framework (see the question, “How can a
results framework be developed to assess achievement of outcomes”) or through the following steps:
     State the development goal
     List the outcome statement from harvested information
     Identify the indicator(s) and data source(s) to track the described change
     Describe the baseline situation, current value and target value for each indicator

Through this process, teams will have a monitoring plan that informs the current status of
implementation and also gaps in what changes are still needed to advance the development objective.
Examining the progress toward targets helps teams identify lessons on where adjustments may be
needed and where interventions have had a critical role in advancing progress.

Monitoring Plans for Mapped Outcomes: Examples from Three Cases
   Objective           Outcome               Indicators           Baseline Situation         Current Value       Target Value
                      Statement                                         (Year)                   (Year)             (Year)
Improve the        Citizens in the      % of surveyed             No survey in          61% of surveyed      85% of surveyed
value of           pilot area           citizens in pilot area    place to engage       citizens expressed   citizens express
municipal          expressed            demanding service         citizens              demand for waste     demand for
services for       demand for                                                           collection           waste collection
citizens           better waste
[solid waste       collection service   % of households in        Current fee           46% of households    75% of
collection]                             pilot area paying         system does not       paying new fee       households
                                        new fee                   cover utility costs                        paying new fee
Enhance the        Regional multi-      # of countries with       Only informal         7 countries          8 countries
transparency       stakeholder          formal membership         network
and                coalition formed     in regional coalition
participatory      online community
process for        of practice to       # of practitioners        Online                500 active           750 active
setting            better protect the   active in online          Community of          members              members
priorities to      right to health      community of              Practice does not     (“active”= posting
realize the                             practice                  yet exist             and/or reading/
right to health                                                                         downloading
for all citizens                                                                        resources)
Improve the        Organizations        Days required to          365                   60                   45
delivery of        improved             deliver 25,000
central and        performance          textbooks in target
decentralized      through pilot        province
public services    initiatives
for citizens at                         # of pregnant             71                    482                  600
all levels in                           women tested for
[country]                               HIV within 30 days
                                        in target province
                                                                  12 or more            3                    3
                                        # Months for
                                        teachers to receive
                                        first paychecks

Traditional monitoring and evaluation methods can also be used to complement the collection of
outcome information and help ensure that isolated stories (anecdotal evidence) are combined into
more rigorous bodies of information for systematic use. The monitoring stage presents a critical
opportunity for analyzing the progress to date and assessing whether changes in planned activities or
interventions are needed to better reach a development objective.


                                                                 57
(Q) Which outcomes reflect setbacks or failures?
Programs often contribute to development objectives through a non-linear stream of outcomes, and it
can be a valuable exercise to identify which outcomes did not work well for a project and what actions
or changes are needed to help advance progress. Teams can identify and make sense of project setbacks
or failures by mapping outcomes along a results chain or by assessing progress toward established
targets as described in the case examples below.
EXAMPLE OF A SETBACK
Excerpt from an Outcome Map: Reforming Public Financial Management in the Philippines




   Finding setbacks in an outcome map. Using the results chain map as a visual tool, teams can explore
    how each outcome supported or led to outcomes at the next level. Outcomes that do not appear to
    have supported advances along the results chain should be examined, given that they sometimes
    provide important lessons about challenges in the development process. For example, in the
    Philippines, a team worked to establish an integrated financial management information system
    (FMIS) for a more accountable use of public money. However, it was challenging to motivate
    agencies to use the new online process for their budget submissions even when it was required (see
    red circle in example). It was necessary but not sufficient to make the online budget submissions a
    prerequisite for budget allocations: the first deadline passed with only a handful of agencies
    meeting the new requirements. Additional interventions were needed—including assigning budget
    specialists to assist line ministries and holding another leadership forum to build local ownership—
    before widespread compliance (institutionalized practice) was achieved.



                                                  58
   Using indicators to track progress. Outcome maps do not tell the whole story about expected
    versus actual progress, so teams might also find it useful to monitor progress by assigning indicators
    and targets. The periodic review of results helps to inform implementation decisions. For example,
    the Pay and Performance Project in Sierra Leone is a results-based financing initiative in which
    disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) are used to trigger the flow of project funding based on
    evidence of progress. An inter-agency performance management team made notable progress in
    instituting a performance appraisal system for civil servants, but the team was not on track to
    achieve performance targets due to a systemic problem across rapid results initiatives in which the
    allocated funding for program activities was delayed. Review sessions for teams to discuss results
    and challenges led to a collaborative learning process and a solution for the persistent funding
    delays. The Performance Management Team was then able to expand the number of pilot ministries
    and improve results to meet the target set by the DLI.

A setback might not signal that interventions are on the wrong track but instead often indicates that
additional support or guidance is needed. The use of adaptive management is critical for ensuring that
desired outcomes are achieved. In both examples, the team mapped outcomes to review preliminary
results against expected progress and agree on mid-stream adjustments. The use of team review
sessions to support collaborative adaptive learning can be critical for advancing development impact.




                                                   59
Tools for Interpreting and Monitoring Outcomes
The following checklists, tables, maps, and other support are assembled here to help teams interpret
and monitor outcomes:
    A. Quality Checklist for an Outcome Statement
    B. Decision Tree for Identifying Institutionalized Results
    C. Sample Change Strategy Maps and Template for Organizing Outcome Areas
    D. Sample Results Framework Template
    E. Sample Monitoring Plan Template
    F. Sample Stakeholder Questionnaire for Tracking Progress Toward Targets



A. Quality Checklist for an Outcome Statement

 An effective outcome statement:
    Names the change agent (individual or group) as the subject of the sentence
    Explains in detail what the change agent is doing differently
    Specifies the timeframe for the change
    Identifies where the change took place
    Describes the change in qualitative and/or quantitative terms (How much? How many?)
    Is based on clear evidence or is widely agreed upon by stakeholders




                                                  60
B. Decision Tree for Identifying Institutionalized Results
Applying a framework such as the World Bank’s Capacity Development and Results Framework could be
used to determine which changes are key institutional outcomes. Any institutional changes identified
should be reviewed with stakeholders for broad understanding and agreement.

Does the outcome statement reflect…




                                                 61
C. Sample Change Strategy Maps and Template for Organizing Outcome Areas
The change strategy shows the “big picture”—how the outcomes come together to advance change
toward the goal and development objective. This example shows how the outcomes can be grouped by
common links into areas that show paths for change.




                                               62
63
D. Sample Results Framework Template
A results framework can be developed to assess progress for key outcomes.

Rows can be added or removed as appropriate.
          Goal                       Indicator(s)               Data Source(s)   Use of Information




  Institutional Changes              Indicator(s)               Data Source(s)   Use of Information




Intermediate Outcomes                Indicator(s)               Data Source(s)   Use of Information




                                                    64
E. Sample Monitoring Plan Template

  Objective        Outcome           Indicators            Baseline       Current Value      Target Value
                  Statement                                Situation          (Year)            (Year)
                                                             (Year)

Ex: Improve    Citizens in the   % of surveyed         No survey in      61% of             85% of surveyed
the value of   pilot area        citizens in pilot     place to engage   surveyed           citizens express
municipal      expressed         area demanding        citizens          citizens           demand for
services for   demand for        service                                 expressed          waste collection
citizens       better waste                                              demand for
[solid waste   collection                                                waste collection
collection]    service
                                 % of households in    Current fee       46% of             75% of
                                 pilot area paying     system does not   households         households
                                 new fee               cover utility     paying new fee     paying new fee
                                                       costs




                                                      65
F. Sample Stakeholder Questionnaire for Tracking Progress Toward Targets
It is helpful for stakeholders to record information on significant milestones to track progress on
outcomes as interventions proceed. Monitoring progress (or lack thereof) at regular intervals informs
program adjustments and collaborative learning. A stakeholder questionnaire can capture data on
changes resulting from interventions, as well as the cause and the effect of those changes. (This
questionnaire is based on work by the Open Contracting team from a workshop by Kaia Ambrose.)

A basic questionnaire for stakeholders at regional, country, community levels, etc. can be completed
quarterly or monthly, depending on the pace of the project and when activities take place. The
questionnaire can look at expected outcome areas of the project. These areas may change during
implementation, so new areas can be added. The sample here may be modified based upon your (or
stakeholder) needs.

DATE:
Name and Role:
Organization and Location:
Contact Information:
Outcome Area: Ex. Leadership and transparency among CSOs

Targets               Rating – Scale    Description          Significance      Contribution      Evidence
                      of 1 to 5
KEY TARGETS or        EXTENT the        WHAT                 WHY is this       HOW did this      If available,
milestones to track   target is being   happened,            relevant to the   come about (how   collect
                      met (indicate     WHEN did this        objective or      did the           evidence in
                      1 for low, 3      happen, WHERE        problem in this   intervention      support of the
                      for medium, 5     did this take        context?          support it)?      progress
                      for high)         place?                                                   (meeting
                                                                                                 minutes, press
                                                                                                 release)
Problem: Ex. CSOs are interested in increasing communications and collaboration, but lack the mechanisms and
commitment to do so
Ex. Establishment
of a new online
CSO network

Ex. Monthly
knowledge
exchanges among
CSOs

Ex. CSOs
partnerships for
engagement with
high-level
government
officials




                                                        66
Guide for Identifying Lessons from Mapped Outcomes
Analyzing and mapping the outcomes of a program can help teams learn from their implementation
experience. Lessons from implementation provide important information about how different social
actors influenced change across a timeframe and how some milestones or intermediate steps were
instrumental for overcoming key challenges and supporting institutional changes. Codifying these
lessons and possible indicators to track changes over time can inform learning on a particular program
and others working in the sector and/or region to learn from successes and minimize failures.

Lessons can be gained around various topics:
     What can we learn about the sustainability of the changes to institutionalize results?
     What can we learn about the effectiveness of the program design in advancing what needs to
        be achieved?
     What can we learn about the mix of actors taking action to advance key changes?

The following maps of outcomes are from the Leadership for Results (L4R) program in Burundi, which
contributed to developing capacity and delivering results toward public sector reform. It offered reform
teams a platform for shaping an in-country coalition, converging on a common vision, and working
toward 100-day goals to improve local service delivery. The lessons documented are to demonstrate
how outcome information could be used to draw lessons from a program.

Identify Lessons from Results Chain
A results chain in this case summarizes the different levels of results observed during implementation of
the project. A useful technique for identifying lessons is tracing the progression from inputs and short-
term milestones to intermediate outcomes and institutional changes. Lessons are derived from the
“essential changes” that reflect steps that are deemed necessary for achieving progress toward a
development objective. Such changes could reflect:
     A critical junction—an outcome that stems from or leads to multiple other outcomes or
        milestones to support an integrated, complex change process.
     A gateway or bridge—an outcome or milestone that leads directly to a higher level along the
        results chain.

Figure 1 provides an example results chain in which the lightest levels are furthest from the project’s
“sphere of influence” and closest to the impact. The darkest levels are more directly under project
control.
     Impact is the goal in the line of sight of the project.
     Institutional changes are outcomes that reflect institutionalization or sustainability. Often these
         are more permanent changes in stakeholder engagement/responsiveness, formal
         policy/rules/guidance and organizational effectiveness. Each outcome at this level has an
         “outcome story” that outlines the project’s theory of change and informs sustainability.
     Changes in behavior are outcomes that reflect new knowledge, skills, relationships, or
         implementation know-how after any intervention or with a different group than the direct
         participants.
     Early outputs or milestones are changes observed during an intervention or directly at the end
         that influence later changes.
     Inputs are key project activities/interventions.




                                                   67
The circled outcomes are examples of essential changes observed during implementation. For example,
outcome 6 shows how the Steering Committee initiating a process to build knowledge among civil
servants to use results-based methods for addressing constraints was a key early milestone.

Figure 1. Example of a Results Chain: Improving Public Service Delivery in Burundi




Look at Change Process Map of Project
Diagramming the overall change process or theory of change in terms of the original program inputs,
key change agents, and main change strategies to overcome challenges can help teams think through
how the program design was most effective in advancing needed changes. In some cases, the review of
the main outcome areas helps to highlight lessons that might not immediately surface when examining
the results chain. For example, outcome area 2 in figure 2 shows the importance of the shift to an
adaptive learning culture across government to address reform challenges and advance results.




                                                    68
Figure 2. Example of an Overview of the Change Process: Improving Public Service Delivery in Burundi




EXAMPLE LESSONS
Based on figures 1-3, what lessons can be taken from the public service delivery project in Burundi to
inform the current program and or similar initiatives?

Lesson 1.
Obtaining high-level commitment provided an authorizing environment to demonstrate the benefits of
the results-based L4R approach and transition from limited pilots by champions to the endorsement of
its broad application to improve service delivery across government.
      Government ministries and agencies at all levels faced inefficiencies that hindered service
        delivery, yet there was no system in place to support learning around achieving results.



                                                   69
       The president created a Steering Committee to strengthen results and nominated the second
        vice president as chair. The committee provided leadership across the public administration to
        advance the new culture of delivery and problem solving required for the L4R approach to
        succeed.
       The committee commissioned studies to inform the launching of initial pilot initiatives in the
        health and education sectors. When the Ministries of Education and Health publicized successful
        results of the pilots, the president and vice presidents expressed their buy-in for using a similar
        approach to unblocking problems in other areas of public sector reform.
       The committee provided the leadership commitment to build knowledge in L4R methods to
        strengthen delivery across the public administration.
       The committee monitored progress on pilot initiatives at key points to facilitate problem-solving
        to unblock slowed progress—particularly blocks that spread across different sectors or
        departments. The committee’s oversight role also helped identify follow-up projects to build on
        or scale-up.
       The two vice presidents of Burundi signed a decree recommending the L4R approach be applied
        transversally throughout government to support implementation of the country’s Poverty
        Reduction Strategy Paper. The decree said each ministry should launch results-based initiatives
        every trimester that aligned with priorities in that sector and that progress should be recorded
        (quantitative and qualitative) at the end of each trimester.

    EXAMPLE INDICATORS FOR TRACKING THIS CHANGE PROCESS:
        Establishment of a formal steering committee to manage Burundi’s L4R program (Yes/No)
        % of results-based initiatives the steering committee supported on problem-solving
        # of ministries launching results-based initiatives to pilot solutions for identified challenges
          (ministry records, reports to steering committee)

Lesson 2.
The cyclical implementation of rapid results initiatives provided opportunities for collaborative teams to
adaptively learn how to develop sustainable solutions for overcoming implementation challenges and
bottlenecks. This experience, over time, fostered a culture change across government, with a growing
number of ministries implementing the results based method to achieve development objectives.
     Government ministries and agencies at all levels lacked a results culture, with no system in place
        to support learning around achieving results. This lack of systematic learning supported
        widespread and persistent inefficiencies that hindered service delivery.
     Ministers identified multi-agency stakeholder teams to implement pilot initiatives to advance
        priority results in 100 days.
     The success of the initial pilots in the education and health sectors started a demonstration
        effect, with other ministries perceiving the potential benefits of the rapid results approach and
        piloting similar efforts in their sectors.
     Results based initiatives were cyclically built on to provide lessons to adapt or scale-up across
        government. This momentum led steadily to a culture change, with an increasing number of
        ministries and agencies at all levels recognizing the value of implementing rapid results
        initiatives and using the results data to inform program planning.

    EXAMPLE INDICATORS FOR TRACKING THIS CHANGE PROCESS:
        # of government ministries and agencies applying the rapid results approach to address
          implementation challenges and bottlenecks.
        % of successful initiatives, as demonstrated by customized performance indicator(s) such as:
          a. Days required to deliver 25,000 textbooks in target province


                                                    70
          b. # of pregnant women tested for HIV within 30 days in target province
          c. % of electricity grid customers satisfied with service
         % of initiatives with follow-up actions to scale-up or build on the initiative

Lesson 3.
Using trained coaches that were embedded in ministries helped to institutionalize the results-based
approach across sectors and levels of government. This design feature provided key support for the
ongoing shift to a results culture in public service delivery.
     Individual ministries had limited systems and processes to learn what works and apply lessons.
        Further, no mandate or resources existed that focused on developing leadership and learning
        for results.
     Public servants with coaching capacities were embedded in national ministries to facilitate
        results-based initiatives but their numbers and reach were limited.
     Support to the National School of Administration helped to train civil servants in the results-
        based method and to develop curriculum that could ensure the approach can be used across the
        public administration nationally and sub-nationally.
     Coaches received training in local languages and support from the National School of
        Administration enabling the government to start to use the results- based methods sub-
        nationally.

    EXAMPLE INDICATOR FOR TRACKING THIS CHANGE PROCESS:
        # of trained coaches embedded in ministries and agencies across government
        % of ministries and agencies with trained coach embedded (by sector)

Lesson 4.
Engaging diverse stakeholders during the design of a strategy for scaling up the rapid results approach
was critical for institutionalizing the L4R program. The participatory process led to a strategy that was
broadly supported by government, civil society, and donors.
     Government ministries and agencies at all levels faced severe problems with ineffectiveness and
         inefficiencies that hindered service delivery.
     Limited or no collaboration existed among stakeholders to address service delivery problems.
     The rapid results approach demonstrated success in selected pilots, but there was no strategy to
         scale it up for broader institutional change across agencies.
     Engaging a broad range of stakeholders in strategy design ensured that diverse perspectives and
         needs were considered, increased awareness of the pilots’ results and broader potential of the
         approach, and ultimately fostered buy-in from stakeholder groups for scaling up the L4R
         program.

    EXAMPLE INDICATORS FOR TRACKING THIS CHANGE PROCESS INCLUDE:
        # of stakeholder groups providing input for a new strategy to scale up the L4R program
          (attendance records of forums, administrative records of National School of Administration).
        Development of a formal strategy for scaling up the L4R program (Yes/No, as evidenced by
          National School of Administration strategy documents).
        % of ministries signing strategy; % of donors endorsing strategy; approval of budget to
          implement strategy (National School of Administration strategy documents, L4R program
          records, and administrative data).




                                                    71
  Results Framework Informed by Lessons
  A results framework can also be developed to assess progress for key outcomes. The sample results
  framework below is modeled after the framework structure used for projects in World Bank operations.
  Indicators can be identified and included for measurement as follows:
           Development goal—to assess progress toward higher-level objective over the longer term.
           Institutional changes—at least one key institutional change should be measured for each
               outcome story. In cases where multiple related institutional changes are part of the same
               story, it might be sufficient to just reflect one in the results framework.
           Major intermediate outcomes—major behavioral changes that are useful to track. These
               outcomes often reflect important gateways or bridges to other higher level outcomes and
               therefore reflect critical junctions in the outcome story.

  Figure 3. Example of Part of a Results Framework: Improving Public Service Delivery in Burundi
Development Objective                                Indicator(s)                               Data Source(s)                Use of Information

Improved delivery of         Development objective indicators for key target                 Ministry of Health      Assesses the longer-term impact of
central and                  sectors—for example:                                            Administrative          improving organizational
decentralized public         Health: Coverage of treatment to prevent mother to              Records                 performance through the use of
services for citizens at     child HIV transmission                                                                  Rapid Results Initiatives. Specific
all levels in Burundi        Transport: % of population less than 2km walk from a            Ministry of Transport   indicators can be added and
                             motor able road                                                 and Public Works        monitored over time as initiatives are
                             Water Supply and Sanitation: % of population with                                       implemented and scaled up.
                             reliable access to treated water (disaggregated by rural        Ministry of Water
                             and urban areas)

 Institutional Changes                               Indicator(s)                               Data Source(s)                Use of Information

Organizations improved           MoE—Days required to deliver 25,000 textbooks in           Agency administrative   Demonstrates the success of the pilot
performance through               target province                                            data systems, pilot     initiative in unblocking a barrier for
pilot initiatives                MoH—# of pregnant women tested for HIV within              reports                 improving organizational
                                  30 days in target province                                                         performance.
                                 MoE and Civil Service—# of months for teachers to
                                  receive first paychecks                                                            Indicators are monitored at the pilot
                                 Civil Service—# of fictitious staff within civil service                           level and a subset of initiatives are
                                  receiving salary payments (target is to decrease)          Survey of state         tracked at the program level.
                                 State Electricity Company—% of electricity grid            electricity company     Additional indicators can be added as
                                  customers satisfied with service                           customers               new initiatives are launched.

ENA developed                Development of formal strategy for scaling up the L4R           ENA Strategy            Confirms establishment of a strategy
visioning paper and          Program [Y/N]                                                   Documents; L4R          for scaling up the program that
budget to scale up                                                                           Program records         reflects the inputs of key
program endorsed by          % of ministries validating the strategy                                                 stakeholders, is owned by ministries
ministries and donors        % of donors endorsing strategy                                                          and endorsed by donors
                             Approval of budget to implement strategy [Y/N]

Intermediate Outcomes                                Indicator(s)                               Data Source(s)                Use of Information

A growing number of          # of ministries launching results-based initiatives to pilot    Ministry records;       Assesses new results-based behaviors
ministries implemented       solutions for identified bottleneck                             reports to the L4R      of ministries introduced by embedded
initiatives using results-   % of successful initiatives                                     Steering Committee      coaches and, in the aggregate,
based methods                % of initiatives with follow-up actions to scale-up or                                  reflects growth of a common agenda
                             build on the initiative                                                                 for results-based learning in govt

National network of          # of trained coaches embedded in ministries                     Steering Committee      Examines the decentralization of the
coaches trained in           # of ministries with at least one trained coach embedded        records; Ministry       capability for results-based method
results-based methods        # of teams sharing experiences in the use of the results        records                 and formation of a new network for
                             based methods for project management                                                    promoting/sustaining results culture

  Short-Term Outputs                                 Indicator(s)                               Data Source(s)                Use of Information

2nd VP established L4R       Establishment of L4R Steering Committee, Chaired by             Agreement with L4R      Confirms the presence of both a
Program and headed           Vice President [Y/N]                                            team; program           strong authorizing environment and a
Steering Committee           # of meetings of Steering Committee                             records                 coordination mechanism for the
                             # of Cabinet Retreats                                                                   program’s implementation



                                                                           72
Guide for Communicating Outcomes
Real-time learning on results helps teams to address various communications needs before, during and
after project implementation. External stakeholders and funders can gain a “big picture” understanding
of how inputs are helping to advance a development objective. Outcome stories can spotlight promising
results. Or, results reporting can emphasize lessons learned to inform practitioners working in similar
contexts or to guide decisions for replicating or scaling up program activities.

The example tables and maps in this toolkit are ways of communicating results; some proposed
approaches for intentional results reporting are explored here.

First, for a more comprehensive presentation of a program’s results, teams can develop a map with
interpreted outcomes. As shown in the example below, such a map links outcomes and also can code
major changes. The graphic depiction of sequenced outcomes provides an entry point for exploring
individual outcome stories or for analyzing the overall change process.

                  Example Map with Interpreted Outcomes: Utility Reform in Bosnia




Another effective way to provide stakeholders a sense of what has been achieved is to separate out
individual outcome stories. In this case, the team can focus on one key institutional change that has
been achieved and show the progression of milestones and outcomes that contributed to that change.
Summary text can be presented, as shown in the box below, with as much or as little detail as
appropriate for the intended audience.



                                                  73
                                     EXAMPLE OUTCOME STORY
                     INCREASING THE COMMITMENT OF LEADERSHIP TO IDENTIFYING
                             AND SCALING UP DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES

Outcome
On July 14, 2009, a decree was promulgated and signed by the two then-Vice Presidents of Burundi
recommending that the Rapid Results Approach (RRA) be applied transversally throughout the government to
support implementation of the country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. Signaling high-level leadership and
commitment, the decree prescribed that each ministry should launch initiatives every trimester aligned with the
priorities in that sector and that progress (quantitative and qualitative) should be recorded at the end of each
trimester.

This resolve to apply the RRA reflected the implementation of one of the main recommendations of a
Governmental retreat held earlier in 2009 and marked the culmination of a change process that started in 2006.
Key milestones included the following:
 In 2006, the President of Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza made a commitment to strengthen the capacities of the
     country’s leaders to drive change at the institutional level to accelerate the implementation of national
     programs aimed at delivering results to benefit the country’s population.
 A leadership program was then developed to help leaders tackle national development implementation
     challenges. A President-appointed Steering Committee was created to manage the process, and the Second
     Vice-President was nominated as head of the Steering Committee.
 After commissioning background studies, the Steering Committee supported the launching of pilot projects in
     the health and education sectors. The Ministry of Education (MoE) delivered 25,000 textbooks throughout
     the province of Bubanza within 60 days instead of one year, and the Ministry of Health (MoH) more than
     quadrupled the number of pregnant women being tested for HIV in the province from 71 to 482 within 30
     days.
 When the MoH and MoE publicized the successful results of these pilots, the President and Vice Presidents
     expressed their strong buy-in for a similar approach to unblocking problems in other areas of public sector
     reform.
 The Second Vice-President, as head of the Steering Committee, requested that staff within the sectors for
     which he was responsible be trained in a results-based management methodology that could be used as a
     tool to jumpstart new initiatives.
 In September 2007, several of those how had undergone a five-day training created action plans to launch
     efforts to overcome challenges and bottlenecks in their own ministries.
 The Steering Committee monitored progress and prioritized areas for new initiatives with government
     officials.

Significance
This decree reflected high-level commitment to the RRA process and served as an instrument to ensure the
institutionalization of the capacities developed, with the new practices becoming self-sustaining and applied even
more broadly through government. Despite the fact that the two Vice Presidents who signed this decree are no
longer in their positions and ministers have changed in many ministries since 2009, the decree is still being applied
to support implementation as, even now, there are still rapid results initiatives underway.

Program Contribution
The World Bank provided advisory support to Burundi’s Leadership for Results Steering Committee,
recommended the preparation of background studies to inform the selection of the first pilots, and introduced
the Rapid Results Approach as a tool for jump starting and accelerating project implementation. The Bank also
provided support for the RRA training and acted as the convener and resource for knowledge exchange
throughout this process. In March 2009, the Bank provided technical assistance and guidance in facilitating the
Second Governmental Retreat in March 2009, during which the President and two Vice Presidents expressed their
commitment for working towards the institutionalization of the culture of results by using the RRA more broadly.




                                                     74
Another approach for communicating results is to provide a timeline snapshot of key changes achieved
to catch the attention of busy stakeholders who might not be expected to read a more lengthy text.

     Example Results “Snapshot”—Gaining Leadership Commitment for Rapid Results Initiatives

 Timeline                                  Outcome                                       Program Contribution
               Two Vice Presidents sign public decree that mandates expansion
 July 2009
               of L4R Program across government                                     In March 2009, the program
               More than 400 additional rapid results initiatives launched, with    provided technical assistance and
               demonstrated success                                                 guidance in facilitating the
               Examples                                                             Second Governmental Retreat
              The time required for newly recruited teachers to receive their      during which the President and
               first paychecks in six provinces is reduced from one year to three   two Vice Presidents expressed
 2008 to       months; 717 new teachers received their paychecks without            their commitment for working
  2009         being subset to corrupt fees                                         towards the institutionalization
              The Civil Service reduces fictitious staff, suspending payment of    of the culture of results by using
               728 salaries for “ghost” individuals, reflecting a monthly cost      the RRA more broadly.
               saving of $530,759
              Client satisfaction with the state electricity company increased
               from 18% to 65%
               2,000 coaches were trained and embedded in ministries across
 2007 to       government for implementing additional Rapid Results
  2009         Initiatives. All coaches are linked to regional network of results   The program provided support
               coaches in Africa.                                                   for the RRI training and acted as
               The pilots demonstrate success, reported by the Ministries of        the convener and resource for
               Education and Health—the in the target province decreased            knowledge exchange throughout
May 2007       from one year to                                                     this process.
               Health—the number of pregnant women tested for HIV within
               30 days in the target province increased from 71 to 482
 2006 to       Two initial pilots are implemented in priority sectors (health and   The program provided advisory
  2007         education)                                                           support to Burundi’s Leadership
                                                                                    for Results Steering Committee,
                                                                                    recommended the preparation of
                                                                                    background studies to inform the
               A Steering Committee is formally established, to manage              selection of the first pilots, and
June 2006
               Burundi’s Leadership for Results Program                             introduced the Rapid Results
                                                                                    Approach as a tool for jump
                                                                                    starting and accelerating project
                                                                                    implementation.




                                                         75
Snapshot of External Training Knowledge Services Project Outcomes
The following describes outcomes of selected World Bank External Training (TE) projects in different
sectors/thematic areas in 2013 and 2014. The outcomes present intermediate and deeper institutional
changes reported toward the project’s development objective(s). The outcomes are based on
qualitative outcome information jointly harvested by the project team members and clients. The charts
present progress snapshots to communicate results of the projects.


Case: Strengthening Capacities of Local Governments in South East Europe
Objective: Progress toward more livable and sustainable cities in South East Europe that provide a high
quality of life for citizens
Total number of outcomes harvested: 28 institutional and 14 intermediate changes
Institutional outcomes by actors: 25 by municipalities/local councils, 8 by mayors, 5 by Network of
Associations of Local Authorities of South East Europe, 4 by coalitions/CSOs

             Institutional Changes in Cities and Regions During 2011-13
                                                                Increased commitment,
                                                                transparency and decision-
                                                                making
                     44%                  44%
                                                                Policy/strategy changes to
                                                                combat corruption

                                                                Increased effectiveness of
                               12%
                                                                municipalities and regional
                                                                networks



Case: Strengthening Implementation of Legislation on Access to Information (ATI) across Latin
America
Objective: Progress toward improvement in service delivery for citizens across Latin America
Total number of outcomes harvested: 9 institutional and 12 intermediate changes
Institutional outcomes by actors: 10 by ATI agencies in Bolivia, Colombia, Chile, Mexico, Peru, Brazil and
Uruguay, 10 by formal Latin American network of ATI agencies, 1 by Open Government Partnership

                             Institutional Changes During 2011-13

                                                        Increased commitment of Access to
                                                        Information agencies in Bolivia, Colombia,
                      45%                  46%          Chile, Mexico, Peru, Brazil and Uruguay

                                                        Increased guidance to implement Access to
                                                        Information policy

                                 9%
                                                        Increased effectiveness of Access to
                                                        Information agencies


                                                   76
Case: Scaling up Capacity Development of City Officials and Practitioners across China Through
eLearning
Objective: Progress toward improvement in public service delivery in China’s rapidly growing urban
areas
Total number of outcomes harvested: 7 institutional and 13 intermediate changes
Institutional outcomes by actors: 20 by Chinese Academy of Governance (national institution mandated
to train public officials)

                          Institutional Changes During 2009-12
                                                               Increased government
                                     14%
                                                               commitment to scale-up
                                                               public officials learning
                                           14%
                                                               Policy change to scale-up
                                                               public officials learnin
                      72%

                                                               Increased effectiveness in
                                                               delivering learning



Case: Improving Open Contracting Processes at the Country and Global Level
Objective: Progress toward improvement in the benefits of public goods and services for all citizens
Total number of outcomes harvested: 17 institutional and 16 intermediate changes globally and in the
countries of Uganda, Mongolia, Nigeria and Ghana
Institutional outcomes by actors: 11 by contract monitoring coalitions, 4 by government
ministries/bureau, 4 by CSOs, 4 by Steering Group (became known officially as Open Contracting
Partnership), 2 by national procurement authorities that joined Steering Group, 2 by the World Bank, 2
by Federal courts, 1 by academia, 1 by state power holding company, 1 by government aid agencies, 1
by private sector initiatives


                          Institutional Changes During 2011-13
                                                               Increased commitment,
                                                               transparency and decision-
                                                               making
                    44%                    44%
                                                               Policy/strategy changes to
                                                               combat corruption

                                                               Increased effectiveness of
                               12%
                                                               municipalities and regional
                                                               networks




                                                  77
Case: Strengthening Parliamentary Oversight of National Budgets in Africa
Objective: Progress toward improvement in the benefits of public spending for citizens in Africa
Total number of outcomes harvested: 17 institutional and 12 intermediate changes regionally and in
the countries of Botswana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Swaziland, South Africa, South Sudan, Tanzania,
Uganda and Zambia
Institutional outcomes by actors: 15 by parliaments, 11 by public accounts committees, 3 by public
accounts committee network

                           Institutional Changes During 2009-13

                                   15%                    Increased transparency of
                                                          budget and audit processes
                    45%
                                                          Increased legitimacy of budget
                                                          process and corruption
                                         40%
                                                          mechanisms

                                                          Increased effectiveness of
                                                          parliament and public accounts
                                                          committees



Case: Leadership for Results: Developing Capacity and Delivering Results toward Public Sector Reform
in Burundi
Objective: Progress toward improvement in delivery of central and decentralized public services for
citizens at all levels in Burundi
Total number of outcomes harvested: 26 institutional and 21 intermediate changes
Institutional outcomes by actors: 10 by high-level government officials, 10 by civil service, 10 by
ministries, 6 by state electricity company, 6 by National School of Administration, 3 by steering
committee, 2 by volunteers, 2 by communal administrators

                           Institutional Changes During 2006-13

                                                          Increased public sector
                                                          leadership and priority setting to
                     35%
                                                          strengthen reforms

                                          54%             Increased policy changes to
                                                          combat inefficiencies and
                        11%                               corruption in services

                                                          Increased effectiveness,
                                                          adaptability and responsiveness
                                                          in service delivery




                                                  78
Case: Improving Social Accountability in the Philippines Education Sector
Objective: Progress toward improvement in the quality of services and education performance of public
schools for citizens in the Philippines
Total number of outcomes harvested: 13 institutional and 10 intermediate changes
Institutional outcomes by actors: 8 by infomediaries, 5 by Department of Education, 5 by Affiliated
Network for Social Accountability, 2 by governments (Kenya, Indonesia), 1 by World Bank, 1 by Open
Government Partnership, 1 by academia

                           Institutional Changes During 2008-12

                                                       Increased commitment and innovations
                       25%                             to advance social accountability and
                                                       transparency in public schools

                                                       Increased legitimacy of public school
                     13%                 62%           data


                                                       increased responsiveness of
                                                       government to public education issues




                                                 79
Resources
Guides and tools for outcome-based learning are continuously being developed. For those with access
to the World Bank Intranet, visit http://outcomemapping.

Outcome Mapping Learning Community
www.outcomemapping.ca

The Better Evaluation website
http://betterevaluation.org/blog/drawing_logic_models

Theory of Change Online or “TOCO”
http://www.theoryofchange.org/toco-software

The Capacity Development Results Framework
http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/document/capacity-development-and-results-framework

Designing a Multi-Stakeholder Results Framework
http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/document/designing-multi-stakeholder-results-framework

Cases in Outcome Harvesting (full report of 10 first cases in pilot experiences)
http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/document/cases-outcome-harvesting




                                                    80
                                                                                                     Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia



case study in outcomes evaluation: Mongolia
Showing the value of mapping outcomes to learn from complex programs

SUMMARY                                                            In fall 2013, the World Bank and Mongolia office of
From 2010–2013, the World Bank Governance Part-                SDC decided to use an outcome mapping approach
nership Facility (GPF) and the Swiss Agency for                to evaluate the effectiveness, sustainability, and
Development and Cooperation (SDC) helped build                 relevance of these interventions. Outcome mapping
the capacity of Mongolian civil society organizations          is a participatory methodology useful for evaluating
(CSOs) to promote good governance and an effective             complex programs that involve capacity and coalition
civil society engagement in procurement and service            building, multiple actors, and tacit knowledge. It looks
delivery monitoring. An assessment of results from the         beyond outputs and delivery efficiency to institutional
interventions was needed to satisfy accountability and         behavioral changes that occur in and among social
learning needs and to inform decisions on future pro-          actors influenced by interventions.
grams and funding. However, the short-term, complex                A total of 190 outcomes were collected through
nature of the interventions, numerous CSOs involved,           document analysis, interviews and surveys with perti-
and scarce documentation meant that knowledge                  nent social actors, with nine elaborated as outcome
of results was largely limited to activities and impact        stories. The outcome stories identified what changes
would be difficult to measure.                                 took place, by whom, when and where, why they were


                                                          81
significant, and how the interventions contributed.              Democracy Education Center, and Open Society
Then, independent persons substantiated the out-                 Foundation.
come stories to provide further evidence and cred-                   (3) World Bank—Public Procurement (2012–ongo-
ibility on whether the World Bank and SDC support                ing) to support the development of an effective, self-
advanced development objectives.                                 governing network of CSOs committed to monitoring
    The evaluation provided benefits to the stakehold-           public procurement and supporting government in
ers in several ways: results were packaged into an               creating a framework for CSO participation in public
accessible, narrative format for various communica-              procurement monitoring. Implementing partner: Part-
tion purposes; lessons were identified on what worked            nership for Public Procurement.
and did not work to inform the design of future CSO                  To evaluate the interventions, the team needed to
support, particularly concerning social actors and their         answer three questions:
roles, innovative solutions, and how to adapt or scale           •	 What is the effectiveness of the interventions in
up a program; and the participatory process promoted                 contributing to the intended objectives?
stakeholder learning and ownership of results achieved           •	 What is the sustainability of changes influenced
to date.                                                             by the interventions after donor funding ceases?
    Thus, the evaluation generated robust, locally               •	 What is the relevance of the interventions’
validated data that demonstrated the value of the                    outcomes to the SDC and Bank programs in
interventions to stakeholders and donors and revealed                Mongolia, the Bank’s GPF objectives, and the needs
ways to improve implementation and management for                    of target CSOs?
future efforts. Other teams that need to assess similarly            However, the nature of the interventions presented
complex programs might consider the merits of using              difficulties for assessment. First, they were short in
the outcome mapping approach as well.                            timeframe. For instance, the social accountability
                                                                 project consisted of one workshop and small grants
                                                                 for pilot projects with mentoring, and it ended in 2011.
CONTEXT                                                          Second, little data existed, and tacit knowledge had to
Over the last decade the Mongolian economy has                   be collected to provide evidence of results. Third, and
grown at a rapid pace based on the strength of its               most important, changes in behaviors and relation-
extractive industries sector. Good governance and                ships within and among the CSOs and government
an effective civil society are key to ensure that the            needed to be captured to show the richness of the
wealth produced is used in a way that benefits all               change process. These were the intermediate changes
citizens. Government must develop policies and                   that could lead to longer-term results.
systems that are responsive to citizens and open to
public scrutiny. Wider civil society can contribute to
improved accountability, transparency, and openness              OUTCOME MAPPING
by monitoring government tenders and public fund                 Outcome mapping is an innovative assessment
expenditures.                                                    methodology to learn from complex development
    To this end, the World Bank and SDC supported                processes that involve behavioral changes, multiple
Mongolian civil society in three interventions:                  social actors, and profound development challenges.
    (1) SDC—Local NGO Capacity Building (2011–2013)              Although more commonly used at the design stage of
to improve internal governance, oversight, financial             an intervention, here it was used retrospectively in the
and operational management of Mongolia’s most                    evaluation.
active local CSOs. Implementing partner: Mongolian                  Outcome harvesting is one of the tools from the
Center for Development Studies.                                  Outcome Mapping Learning Community.1 In this
    (2) World Bank—Social Accountability (2010–2011)             approach, an outcome is defined as a change in
to strengthen the skills of CSOs to work with and moni-          the behavior, relationships, activities, or actions of
tor public sector organizations and service delivery             the people, groups, and organizations with whom a
and willingness of public sector organizations to work           program works directly. For interventions promoting
with CSOs. Implementing partners: Affiliated Network             learning, this approach implies that participant learn-
for Social Accountability in East Asia and the Pacific,          ing outcomes are demonstrated when they apply the
                                                                 concepts and tools from their learning in their work.

                                                            82
    Through collecting—or harvesting—bites of                    that interventions influence and/or contribute to but
detailed outcome information from colleagues,                    cannot lay sole claim to results was therefore valu-
partners, and stakeholders, one can identify, monitor,           able. Further, the approach fitted with the evaluation’s
and learn from changes in social actors. The collected           purpose—that it was as much about learning with the
information describes what changed, for whom, when               local implementers of the project and informing future
and where, why it matters to the development objec-              work as it was about accountability.
tive and particular development challenge(s)—the
significance of the change—and how the program
contributed to the change.                                       PROCESS
    The harvesting process is stakeholder-centered               Specifically, this was an outcomes evaluation of the
and captures qualitative, tacit knowledge. It includes           World Bank GPF and SDC CSO/NGO capacity build-
tools to substantiate and analyze this knowledge col-            ing interventions that took place in Mongolia, August
laboratively and communicate progress toward impact              2010–September 2013. Richard D Smith (team leader),
to clients, management, and partners. The method is              Jeremy Gross, and Amarbayasgalan Dorj conducted
flexible to adapt to a program’s design and comple-              the evaluation from September–November 2013.
ment other monitoring and evaluation and knowledge                  Using the outcome harvesting tool, the evaluators
management tools.                                                identified outcomes with the social actors the interven-
    Outcome mapping approaches follow the principle              tions had been seeking to influence directly. They col-
that evaluations should be focused on use and users.             lected outcomes by means of one-on-one and group
Use-focused evaluations seek to engage users of the              interviews, focus groups, and surveys (see annex for
evaluation from the outset in defining the scope and             sample questions). The evaluators looked for observ-
questions, and agreeing on information and substanti-            able evidence that participants had applied concepts
ation sources. In addition, the evaluation process itself        and tools introduced by the interventions.
engages users in generating or verifying data. Such                 Each outcome was precisely described so it is clear
engagement may help users have more confidence in                and verifiable who changed in what way, when and
evaluation findings.                                             where, and how the intervention contributed (see
                                                                 figure 1 on the next page for examples of outcome
                                                                 descriptions). Outcome harvesting includes a specifi-
DECISION TO USE OUTCOME MAPPING                                  cation for optional contribution descriptions for each
The World Bank GPF and SDC commissioned a joint                  outcome; these were vital for understanding how the
evaluation using the outcome mapping approach.                   interventions had contributed to outcomes, directly or
The team decided outcome mapping was well suited                 indirectly.
because the objectives of the interventions being                   The outcome definition used2 set a high bar for
evaluated involved areas—capacity development, net-              assessing the effectiveness and sustainability of Bank
work building, and accountability—that meshed with               and SDC contributions to capacity and coalition-build-
the methodology.                                                 ing changes. Informants were given the opportunity to
    The effectiveness of network building and network-           verify outcome descriptions.
ing is demonstrated by behavior changes that can                    The evaluators entered the outcomes in a database
be found through collected outcome information.                  and coded them by type of change to provide for a
For example, outcome information on the voluntary                program-level reflection of the outcomes to date. The
association of organizations or individuals and their            resulting findings were then interpreted to address the
changes represent new ways of working collectively,              evaluation questions as follows:
such as cooperating to plan work, sharing knowledge,             •	 Effectiveness was assessed against the pre-defined
strategizing, and securing resources. The realization of            objectives and theory of change to identify whether
social accountability is also demonstrated by behavior              intended outcomes were met, and any unintended
changes, in this case of government, business, citizens,            outcomes outside the intended scope.
and CSOs.                                                        •	 Sustainability was assessed by whether institutional
    The effectiveness of the Bank and SDC interven-                 changes had been realized.
tions depended on the extent to which they were able             •	 Relevance was assessed by whether the outcomes
to influence others. The outcome mapping concept                    aligned to local needs and program priorities.


                                                            83
   In addition, the evaluators highlighted key out-
comes in outcome stories to communicate specific
                                                                   Figure 1. Sample Outcome Descriptions
achievements or lessons in a narrative format (see
                                                                   SDC—Local NGO Capacity Building
annex for a sample story). They produced nine out-
                                                                   Outcome 11: Between 2012 and 2013, after the
come stories, each with sufficient detail to allow
                                                                   project training, six organizations developed a written
independent sources to substantiate the outcome,
                                                                   charter defining, for example, the organization’s
the contribution of the intervention, and the claimed              purpose; beneficiaries; activities; role of the board;
significance of the outcome.3                                      elections; how meetings are run.
                                                                   Contribution: The lead implementor of the SDC
                                                                   project appointed the team of trainers, contributed to
CHALLENGES                                                         the development of the modules and organized and
The evaluators faced several challenges during the                 facilitated the trainings.
harvesting process, which included:
   Limited documentation of outcomes—Lack of                       World Bank—Social Accountability
existing monitoring data caused a high dependence                  Outcome 86: In March 2013, the Democracy
on collecting data during the evaluation. For two                  Education Center (DEMO) was able to expand its
interventions, there was limited knowledge of                      Check My Service program when the Asia Foundation
outcomes from serving staff of the Bank, SDC, and                  awarded it a grant for the Check My School and
                                                                   Check My Clinic projects.
their contracting implementing partners due to
high staff turnover and lack of a strong monitoring                Contribution: DEMO’s leading role in implementing
framework for outcomes.                                            the Social Accountability Learning-in-Action (SAcLAP)
                                                                   program enhanced its reputation and expertise in the
   Lack of experience in methodology—Local con-
                                                                   area so it could develop a convincing proposal for the
sultants were not well versed in outcome mapping,
                                                                   Asia Foundation.
but this was looked at as an opportunity to build up
their capacity in outcome mapping and evaluations for              World Bank—Public Procurement
future work. The lead evaluator coached co-evaluators
                                                                   Outcome 11: In April 2013, the Public-Private
on the necessary concepts and provided guiding ques-               Partnerships Board and review committee adopted
tions for interviews. The co-evaluators were willing and           its first five-year strategic plan with an initial focus on
able to learn and also brought complementary experi-               shaping new procurement law implementation.
ence and skills to the team.                                       Contribution: The World Bank Institute and the
   Perceptions of methodology—Initially there was                  Affiliated Network for Social Accountability in East
some hesitation from Bank and SDC staff about using                Asia and the Pacific (ANSA-EAP) designed and
outcome mapping given that it can be a time-con-                   facilitated the strategic planning working with the
suming process. The evaluators overcame this notion                board, and WBI provided feedback on drafts of
by using key concepts of outcome mapping rather                    the plan.
than all of the steps. The Bank also voiced concern
about having clear evaluation criteria. The evaluators
addressed this by using outcome mapping to answer               FINDINGS
questions solely on effectiveness, sustainability, and          The 190 outcomes collected demonstrate that each
relevance. Efficiency could be assessed with a more             intervention met or exceeded its pre-defined objec-
appropriate evaluation tool.                                    tives (see table 1). This represents impressive results
   Shortened timeframe—The short timeframe                      for short-term interventions, two of which were ongo-
limited travel time to engage with actors influenced by         ing, leading to the conclusion that the interventions
the interventions. This restricted the ability to engage        have been effective and relevant.
with those most knowledgeable when describing and
substantiating outcomes. However, the local consul-             SDC—Local NGO Capacity Building
tant was able to stay and conduct these interviews at           69 outcomes in total
later and more suitable times.
                                                                Against the central objective of building the capac-
                                                                ity of CSOs, outcomes show improved organizational


                                                           84
performance of CSOs even over a limited time. The                Judged strictly against the mining (or extractive indus-
greatest effect came when, beyond improving internal             try) value chain, however, the intervention has not been
organizational abilities, CSOs were empowered to be              fully effective since it has almost without exception only
active in their community and involved in activities that        strengthened CSO capacity at the end of the value
supported such endeavors, including local govern-                chain farthest from the extractive industry.
ment monitoring, providing data for community needs,                 A further benefit of assessing the program two years
or acting as service provider.                                   after it concluded is that it has been possible to inter-
                                                                 pret the extent to which the results are sustainable.
World Bank—Social Accountability                                 After the intervention, 71 of the outcomes materialized,
93 outcomes from all 13 pilot project grantees and               many of which demonstrate organizational ownership of
some from those who only participated in one training            concepts and tools introduced.
workshop
                                                                 World Bank—Public Procurement	
Against the objective to strengthen monitoring capac-            28 outcomes total
ity of CSOs on the mining value chain and related
economy outcomes, the intervention was successful at             Against the objectives of support to the Ministry of
introducing or significantly enhancing social account-           Finance and CSOs, the intervention was successful at
ability knowledge and skills in several organizations.           supporting the ministry and the development of a self-


Table 1. At a Glance: 190 Outcomes Collected from the Three Interventions

 SDC—Local NGO Capacity Buiding
  69   Outcomes in total, each relevant to or exceed SDC’s pre-defined objectives
  51   Outcomes demonstrate the application of knowledge from the intervention
   7   Outcomes suggest a sustained influence of the intervention
   5   Outcomes cite engagement between CSOs and their community

 World Bank—Social Accountability
  93   Outcomes in total, each relevant to or exceed the Bank’s pre-defined objectives
  71   Outcomes suggest a sustained influence of the intervention
  59   Outcomes demonstrate the application of social accountability knowledge gained through the intervention
  29   Outcomes show dissemination of social accountability
  24   Outcomes cite constructive engagement, demonstrating a deepening awareness of social accountability
  14   Outcomes show successful fundraising for implementation of social accountability activities after the intervention
  11   Outcomes show demand for support in using social accountability concepts and tools
  11   Outcomes show networking of practitioners
   9   Outcomes directly relevant to the mining value chain
   7   Outcomes describe working with the private sector
   7   Outcomes demonstrate advocacy of social accountability
   5   Outcomes involve engaging the media

 World Bank—Public Procurement
  28   Outcomes in total, each relevant to or exceed the Bank’s pre-defined objectives
  25   Outcomes suggest the potential sustainability of the Partnership for Public Procurement
  14   Outcomes are at the aimag (provincial) level
  12   Outcomes are at the national level
  11   Outcomes demonstrate strengthened capacity of CSOs in procurement monitoring
   8   Outcomes show influence on road maintenance, specifications and planning
   7   Outcomes show support for self-governing CSO networks
   5   Outcomes show support for Ministry of Finance in its development of implementing rules and guidelines on CSO
       participation and oversight
   2   Outcomes at the Ulaanbaatar level



                                                               85
governing CSO network. But it had not yet succeeded             outcome is the impact that empowered newly trained
in developing monitoring tools for the network, and             CSOs can have in their community. Six outcomes prove
the extent of capacity strengthening of CSOs has                this occurred because of the intervention. A local
been limited to the few participants in two pilots. The         trainer, motivated by what she learned, took it upon
intervention was still young and continued for months           herself to find resources and train a further 22 organi-
more. While some objectives remain unachieved,                  zations. This unintended outcome that normally would
the outcomes indicate progress in influencing rules             not have been discovered adds to an appreciation of
and guidelines and formal establishment of the                  the effectiveness and sustainability of the intervention.
partnership.
                                                                Engage stakeholders
                                                                Outcome mapping encourages reflection and dia-
BENEFITS                                                        logue—it is a truly participatory method in which
Several benefits for the evaluators, Bank, and SDC              counterparts are engaged, thereby giving them owner-
came about from using outcome mapping as an                     ship over the process and ensuing results. It offers
evaluative methodology in this particular case. Teams           an opportunity to get at the collaborative theory of
might want to consider these benefits when deciding             change.
on a methodology for assessing similarly complex                   In this particular case, the SDC and World Bank
programs.                                                       worked together as a team to design the evaluation
                                                                questions and in the process built a stronger relation-
Examine multiple actors                                         ship. Once data collection was completed, the evalu-
Traditional evaluations tend to give credit to a single         ators sent key informants their individual findings and
contributor, when in complex development programs               asked them to confirm whether the information was
multiple actors drive change. It is important to dis-           correct. This step enabled informants to play a main
cover how and which actors worked together or built             role and express their views, and added credibility as
on each other’s actions over time to create results so          well.
future programs can maximize their potential and use
the “right” mix of actors.                                      Inform next steps
   For example, in the findings from the Bank—Social            Outcome mapping enabled the evaluators to identify
Accountability pilot in community monitoring of a               links between multiple outcomes to uncover latent/
family hospital’s services and conditions, outcomes             emerging knowledge, innovative solutions, and how to
showed how multiple social actors brought about                 scale up the program. All of this helps to detect pieces
change: patients, doctors, and hospital management.             for prospective program design or further phases.
Based on the engagement of patients, the hospital                   For example, in the area of NGO capacity building,
changed its policy so all patients can use toilets that         the outcome data provides a rich source for identify-
were previously “staff only”; the hospital appointed a          ing organizations that could fulfill particular roles in
guide nurse to help patients arriving for treatment; and        a new phase of funding support. Based on this data,
the chief doctor appointed two additional doctors.              the recommendation is that the SDC and the Bank,
                                                                with selected stakeholders with firsthand knowledge
Learn from the complete picture                                 of relevant institutions in Mongolia, may review the
Harvesting outcomes allows the exploration of sig-              outcome data and other sources and, according to the
nificant outcomes—whether intended or unintended,               focus of any new intervention, identify potential actors
negative, or tacit/unrecorded—to get a complete pic-            for particular roles.
ture of what went right or wrong and how to learn from
the change process to inform future thematic areas.             Communicate results
Taking a narrow approach that considers only those              Outcome mapping allows evaluators to go deeper
outcomes that had immediate or direct contributions             into what, why, and how changes happened than using
from the interventions could miss stories of change             more traditional methods, which can often rely on hard
connecting related outcomes.                                    numbers and indicators. Harvesting detailed outcome
    For example, in the findings from the SDC—Local             information led to the writing of nine outcome sto-
NGO Capacity Building intervention, an unintended               ries that describe changes in people—how the roles


                                                           86
of actors affect results—to capture the flavor of what
occurred.
    SDC wanted to have evidence of results presented
in a storytelling format, and the outcome stories
ended up being shared the most. The outcome map-
ping methodology proved useful for reconstructing
the storyline of change for the three interventions. n




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The case study is a collaborative effort based on
documentation from the evaluation and interviews and
feedback with:
•	 Evaluation team—Richard D. Smith (leader), Jeremy
   Gross and Amarbayasgalan Dorj
•	 World Bank—Marcela Rozo and Kathrin Frauscher
   from the Open Contracting team, and Governance
   Partnership Facility team members
•	 Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
   team members

Jenny Gold and Sharon Fisher, World Bank, led the
case study team. Dawn Roberts provided input.

Published by The World Bank, May 2014

FOOTNOTES
1 See    www.outcomemapping.ca
2 Thisoutcomes evaluation followed the definition of “outcome”
used in the outcome mapping methodology: a change in the
behavior, relationships, activities, or actions of the people, groups,
and organizations with whom a program works directly.
3 It is up to the principal evaluation user to decide what

substantiation is needed to make the results credible. In this
case, outcome data was provided nearly exclusively by those the
interventions were seeking to influence and not by the World Bank
or SDC staff. Thus, the outcomes were assumed to be credible,
which substantiation of the nine outcome stories confirmed.




                                                                         87
ANNEX
Example of an Outcome Story: World Bank—Public Procurement Intervention


The evaluators highlighted key outcomes in outcome stories to communicate specific achievements or lessons in
a narrative format. They produced nine outcome stories.

OUTCOME STORY 6—The Ministry of Finance adopted Implementing Rules and Regulations for the monitoring
of public procurement that reflected suggestions from Civil Society Organizations (CSOs).

Outcome
In late 2012, the Ministry of Finance adopted new Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) for CSO participation
in bid evaluation committees that included several requests of the Partnership for Public Procurement (PPP), such
as the use of specific reporting templates and creation of a web portal for CSOs to use when reporting on the
performance of bid evaluation committees.

Significance
The IRR are significant for being a necessary implementation instrument for the 2011 amendment to the Public
Procurement Law, which mandated the involvement of civil society in public procurement for the first time. This
was the first time that CSOs working on procurement in Mongolia successfully collaborated to advocate for regu-
latory changes as a partnership network.

Contribution
Financial and technical support for the creation and strategic development of the PPP has been provided by the
World Bank since 2012 through the Governance Partnership Facility it administers.
   The PPP provided coordinated inputs during the policy dialogue with the Ministry of Finance over the summer
and autumn of 2012. N. Otgonjargal, chair of the PPP, led and coordinated the contributions of PPP members to
the drafting of the rules and regulations. The Bank supported the Governance Partnership Facility in developing a
united message to engage constructively with the government. Bank support included coaching, network build-
ing and technical advice on procurement monitoring.




                                                       88
ANNEX
Interview Guide: World Bank—Social Accountability Intervention Informants

Purpose of Interview
•	 We are conducting an evaluation of the work the World Bank and SDC have supported since 2009 on civil
   society/NGO strengthening and CSO engagement in procurement.
•	 Specifically, we are assessing the Social Accountability Learning-in-Action (SAcLAP) and PPP projects of the
   Bank and the NGO Effectiveness Project of SDC.
•	 The main focus of the evaluation is to learn what did and didn’t work. We are not looking at how the money
   was used.

Key Facts
  Name:
  Position now:
  Position during SAcLAP:
  Participated in SAcLAP training/pilot?
  Others from your organization who participated in SAcLAP ?
  How many workshops/events were there? What were they on? Who hosted,
  participated?

SAcLAP
  1.	 What did you/your organization gain from the SAcLAP project ideas/tools?
  2.	 Were the tools/ideas appropriate and tailored for the Mongolian context?
  3.	 Have there been any effects/benefits because of the work you did during the pilot project? Any changes in
      policies, practices, relationships, or activities of those you have been trying to influence?
  4.	 If yes, who changed, what, when and where? How, exactly, did the SAcLAP ideas/tools contribute?

Before SAcLAP
  1.	 Before your involvement in SAcLAP, had you heard of social accountability?
  2.	 If yes, had you done any social accountability work/used social accountability tools?
  3.	 If yes, what was the project and who funded it?
  4.	 If yes, from where/which organizations did you receive materials/tools/trainings to understand the subject?

After SAcLAP
   1.	 Have you used the ideas/tools from SAcLAP in any other work?
   2.	 Have there been any effects/benefits because of the work you did during the pilot project? Any changes in
       policies, practices, relationships, or activities of those you have been trying to influence?
   3.	 If yes, who changed, what, when and where? How, exactly, did the SAcLAP ideas/tools contribute? Who
       funded it?




                                                        89
ANNEX
Survey Questions: SDC—Local NGO Capacity Building Intervention

 1.	 A clear mission statements that reflects your organization’s purpose? Y/N

 2.	 A written charter defining, for example, the organization’s purpose, beneficiaries, activities, role of the
     board, elections, how meetings are run? Y/N

 3.	 An active board that meets regularly in accordance with the organization’s rules? Y/N

 4.	 A mechanism to review and update your organization’s strategic plan and annual work plan regularly? Y/N

 5.	 An annual workplan? Y/N

 6.	 A human resource policy for staff development? Y/N

 7.	 Clear roles and responsibilities for staff members and/or volunteers? Y/N

 8.	 A staff member capable of submitting a financial report to the tax office? Y/N

 9.	 Capacity to raise funds from members, donations or government funds? Y/N

 10.	 The capacity to write a funding proposal? Y/N

 11.	 Mechanisms for beneficiary, partner and stakeholder feedback? Y/N

 12.	 Sustainable activities to achieve your mission and vision statement? Y/N

 13.	 The ability to partner with other NGO’s to benefit from pooled resources? Y/N

 14.	 What have been the specific benefits of each internal management change your organization has made
      following your participation in the SDC funded training on Capacity Building and Training for Local NGOs.

 15.	 As a result of changes to your organization’s internal management, has your organization carried out new
      types of actions or activities? Please describe.




                                                         90
3
    Methods such as outcome harvesting offer approaches to manage
    knowledge and learn from complex and difficult-to-monitor
    development processes. From 2012–2014, the World Bank
    undertook pilot experiences to identify how outcome harvesting
    could be integrated with its results management approach.

    The guides and tools customized in the pilot experiences were
    brought together in this field guide to be a collaborative vehicle
    for staff, clients, partners, and other stakeholders to harvest,
    substantiate, interpret, monitor, and learn from outcomes across
    the project cycle to improve effectiveness and results.

    It is hoped that these first outputs of the pilot experiences will
    continue to be adapted in different ways and improved upon
    through ongoing application and learning.




2
