                                                                                                          90170
                                          PRDP-TF: Quarterly Review
                                              April-June 2014



1.      Overall Palestinian economic growth has slowed considerably. After a period of sustained
economic recovery between 2007 and 2011 when average yearly growth exceeded 8 percent, the
economy has significantly slowed down since 2012. It is estimated that growth fell to around 2 percent in
2013, and even though official estimates by the Palestine Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS) are not
available yet, it is expected that economic activity has further slowed down in 2014. Furthermore, about
26 percent of the Palestinian workforce remains unemployed and a quarter of the population lives in
poverty.

2.      The PA continues to deal with a difficult fiscal situation. The PA’s expenditures were about 5
percent above the notional budget target for the first half of 2014 due to increased spending on goods and
services and net lending. Strong growth in clearance revenues and front loaded domestic tax payments
caused the PA’s revenues to be 9 percent above their forecast. Consequently, the recurrent deficit was
almost 2 percent below its half year target amounting to NIS2.3 billion. The PA also reported
development expenditures of NIS0.5 billion in the first half of 2014, and therefore, the overall deficit
totaled NIS2.8 billion. Total external financing received was less than needed to cover the overall deficit
and amounted to NIS1.6 billion, resulting in a financing gap of NIS1.2 billion. The PA had accumulated
more than NIS1.4 billion in domestic arrears during the first half of 2014, more than what was needed to
cover the gap. Excess financing enabled the PA to reduce its net domestic bank financing by almost
NIS115 million.

Revenues

3.     The PA’s total net revenues for the first half of 2014 exceeded the prorated budget target
and were 23 percent higher compared to the same period last year. This is due to a significant
growth in clearance revenues and front-loaded domestic revenues driven by financial incentives to
pre-pay taxes.1

4.       The performance of clearance revenues has been impressive in 2014. Between January–June
2014, they were more than 30 percent higher than in the first half of 2013 and they have also exceeded
their midyear budget target by 12 percent. This is mainly due to higher collections from customs, VAT
and petroleum excise which grew by 26, 22 and 40 percent, respectively, in the first half of 2014.
Increased receipts from customs and VAT are due to field campaigns conducted by the PA’s cus toms
officials to go after Palestinian merchants that undervalue their import declarations. As for collections
from petroleum excise, their growth is mainly related to larger imports of Israeli fuel to Gaza as access to
the cheaper Egyptian fuel was interrupted following the destruction of the tunnels connecting Gaza to
Egypt. Based on historical trends, growth in clearance revenues is usually higher in the second half of the
year which suggests that they will continue to exceed their budget target throughout the year. It is highly

1
 Normally, frontloaded revenues would not be counted in fiscal accounts produced on commitment basis using the Government
Finance Statistics (GFS) 2001 methodology. The PA uses a hybrid version of this methodology and adds advance revenue
payments to its budget execution reports.

                                                           1
important that the transfer of these revenues by the GoI continues to be consistent and on time in order to
avoid additional stress on an already tight fiscal situation.

5.      Despite a strong performance earlier in the year, domestic tax collection has recently slowed
down. In Q1 2014, domestic tax revenues grew by 24 percent in comparison to the same period in 2013.
The PA introduced an 8 percent discount on early VAT payments in 2014 on top of the property and
income tax incentives that apply to tax receipts in the first 90 days of the year. As a result, a number of
large companies and major banks pre-paid their tax duties. Growth in domestic tax revenues in Q1 can
therefore be mainly attributed to advance payments rather than a significant widening or deepening of the
tax base. In fact, starting April and following the expiration of the early payment tax invectives, domestic
revenue started to slow down. Q2 collections were 49 percent less than in Q1 and they were also 27
percent lower than their prorated budget. This is an indication that stronger effort needs to be carried out
by the PA to widen the tax base and enhance compliance.

6.       The PA’s tax refund payments exceeded their prorated budget target by 32 percent during
the first half of 2014 mainly due to an increase in fuel tax refunds (subsidies). These subsidies are
probably the largest source of inefficiency in the PA’s budget. They are provided as tax rebates to gas
stations when they purchase liquid fuels from the Palestinian Petroleum Authority, which is the only
entity authorized by the PA to import fuel into the West Bank and Gaza. The purpose of fuel subsidies has
been to offset the impact of high fuel prices on Palestinian citizens. While the incidence analysis for this
particular subsidy has not been done, numerous studies from the region have shown that fuel subsidies
not only have distortionary effects on economic activity, but they also disproportionally benefit better-off
segments of the population and are therefore a very inefficient poverty reduction instrument. The PA has
gradually reduced these subsidies from about NIS70 million per month in the beginning of 2014 to about
NIS50 million in June. Ultimately, the PA should aim to fully eliminate these subsidies and rely on the
existing well-targeted cash transfer system to offset the impact of any price increases on living standards
of the poor.

Expenditures

7.     The PA’s recurrent expenditures increased by 11 percent year-on-year through June and
exceeded their mid-year budget target on the account of strong nonwage expenditures and net
lending, while wage spending was kept within its budget target.

8.      The wage bill, which represents around half of the PA’s recurrent spending, was kept below
its midyear forecast due to a delay in some allowance payments. It was 1.4 percent below its prorated
budget target mainly because the payment of the cost-of-living allowance has been postponed to the end
of the year. In addition, increases in professional allowances for doctors have not been paid so far. The
delay in allowance payments offset the increase in the wage bill that resulted from the growth in the net
number of employees which totaled 830 new hires, Between January – June 2014. Specifically, 1100
employees were hired in the West Bank while 289 departed from the public labor force in Gaza2. The


2
  In addition, employment in the national fund and in the number of deputies was reduced by 326 while it was increased by 345
in the embassies.

                                                             2
number of employees in the security and health sectors grew by 293 and 295, respectively, while the net
increase in the education sector was lower at 103.

9.      Transfers, the second biggest spending item under recurrent expenditures, were also kept
below the prorated budget. They were about 12 percent below expectations due to savings at the
Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA). The PA reports that this is because the number of new households
that MoSA added to the National Cash Transfer Program (NCTP) during the first half of 2014 was lower
than expected. Therefore, cash assistance payments recorded under transfers were below their target.

10.      Spending on the use of goods and services significantly exceeded the prorated budget. It was
48 percent above expectations due to major overspending at the Ministry of Health. This is mainly a result
of the growing cost of outside health referrals. In addition, some of the arrears previously accumulated by
the MoH on its operational spending were cleared in 2014. These arrear repayments were not anticipated
by the 2014 budget, which explains the jump in this item compared to its prorated budget target. 3

11.      Net lending has continuously been exceeding forecasts. In the first half of 2014, it was 71
percent above its prorated target and it grew by 59 percent when compared to the same period last year.
Reforming the electricity sector and reducing net lending is essential for fiscal consolidation. A recent
study conducted by the World Bank reveals that this complex problem is the result of increasing
electricity losses, decreasing collection from customers and deteriorating efficiency of the electricity
distributors. According to the Israeli Electricity Company (IEC), debt owed by the PA on the account of
unpaid electricity bills amounted to NIS 1.5 billion, as of May 2014. Addressing the net lending problem
will not only reduce the fiscal burden it imposes on the PA, it would also substantially improve the
viability of the Palestinian electricity sector. Recently intensified reform efforts by the PA such as (i) the
creation of an inter-ministerial special committee to monitor and address net lending issues; and (ii) the
adoption of a decision to impose penalties on electricity distributors not paying their bills to IEC are
encouraging and deserve strong support from the international community. It is critical to note that
effective and direct collaboration from the GoI is important to ensure a successful and sustainable
implementation of some of these reforms.

12.      Arrears continue to be a major source of PA financing. The PA’s total deficit during the first
half of 2014 amounted to NIS2.8 billion while total aid received during that period amounted to NIS1.6
billion (NIS1.32 billion in budget support and NIS243 million in development financing)4. Even though
the PA has been making efforts to repay its arrears, net arrears accumulated during the first half of 2014
amounted to NIS1.4 billion - more than what was needed to close the financing gap that remained after
accounting for external aid receipts. Almost NIS761 million or 54 percent of these arrears are owed to the
private sector, while the majority of the rest is to the pension fund. Arrear accumulation, in excess of what
was needed to cover the financing gap, enabled the PA to reduce its net domestic bank financing by
almost NIS115 million, yielding a stock of debt to local banks of USD1.25 billion, as of end-June 2014.
This indicates that the PA, since 2013, has continued implementing a policy that prioritizes the reduction


3
  Notably, these arrear repayments show as commitments in the PA’s monthly fiscal tables when they should have been recorded
as cash expenditures.
4
  Aid for 2014 is projected to be around its 2013 at USD1.3 billion but it is expected to be back loaded, and hence the majority
has not been disbursed yet.

                                                               3
of domestic debt over the repayment of arrears. While this policy saves some interest costs and might
enable the PA to create a buffer for future domestic bank borrowing, it could very likely have negative
consequences on private sector liquidity and growth, which could ultimately reduce public revenue
generation and weaken the PA’s fiscal position.

13.      Fiscal projections for the remainder of the year indicate that a crisis scenario is unlikely,
but a number of risks remain strong. Even though clearance revenues are expected to be higher than
budgeted, total revenues are projected to be slightly below forecast mainly due to higher fuel subsidies.
Expenditures will exceed budget projections on the account of higher net lending and spending on goods
and services. Overall donor financing is assumed to reach USD1.3 billion5 and the resulting financing gap
will amount to about USD0.36 billion. However, this gap has already been financed through arrears
accumulated between January and June 2013 exceeding USD400 million. Thus, the PA is expected to
have sufficient financing to cover all of its expenditures in the second half of the year, if current trends
continue. However, several fiscal risks and eventualities could arise and widen the financing gap. These
include spending pressures following the recent conflict in Gaza, additional expenditures related to
expanding the PA’s payroll in Gaza, increased Israeli deductions from clearance revenues due to the
rising electricity debt to IEC, and a shortfall in donor aid.

Structural reforms

14.      The PA has continued to push forward its reform agenda. As part of the World Bank’s new
budget support operation (DPGVI), the PA has committed to a reform program that supports the goals of
its National Development Plan (NDP) 2014-2016. The program builds on previous DPGs and focuses on
three main pillars: 1) Reducing the PA’s recurrent fiscal deficit; 2) Improving the effectiveness and
transparency of public finances; 3) Improving the business climate.

15.      Enhancing domestic tax revenues continues to be a priority for the PA. Domestic tax
revenues at 5 percent of GDP are low in comparison to other lower middle income countries. Thus, the
PA has been focusing efforts to increase collections primarily by eliminating different loopholes in the
system and strengthening tax enforcement. Several laws and procedures are being revised and specific
plans are being put in place to increase tax registration, as well as to detect and penalize non-payers
especially since only 30 percent of the potential tax base is currently covered. The PA has already reduced
the size and scope of tax incentives provided in the Investment Promotion Law, as advised by the IMF.
Assessments showed that these incentives have been ineffective instruments of encouraging new
investments and have benefited few profitable companies at a significant cost in terms of lost tax
revenues. Recent amendments to the Investment Promotion Law have narrowed the scope and duration
of those tax incentives. The PA also adopted amendments to the Income Tax Law to introduce a 10
percent tax on distributed dividends, which reduces opportunities for tax arbitrage and broadens the tax
base. First time revenues generated from this new tax will be collected by the PA in early 2015 once
publically listed companies distribute dividends on profits earned in 2014.

16.   The PA has continued to implement measures to try and control the growth of the wage bill.
At 17 percent of GDP, the public sector wage bill in the West Bank and Gaza remains high by
5
    Including USD100 million earmarked for arrears repayment and USD100 million for development financing.

                                                              4
international standards. Addressing this issue requires both short-term measures to contain the growth of
wages and the number of staff on the PA’s payroll, but also deeper structural reforms. The precarious
fiscal and political situation is most probably the reason why the PA has so far been addressing this issue
through short-term measures. Specifically, the PA has reformed its policy on transportation allowance in
2014 to ensure that staff who are temporarily not coming to work do not receive this allowance and that
the amount paid is based on staff’s current residences, regardless of where they resided when they joined
the civil service. Leadership allowance to security staff in Gaza was also cancelled as of May 1, 2014.
The PA also continues to place a freeze on salary payments for all employees that reside outside the
Palestinian territories for non-work related reasons. The PA has put in place a zero net hiring policy in
late 2012 and has maintained it since. Even though employment figures for June indicate that there has
been a net increase in the number of PA employees in 2014 (see paragraph 8), the PA reports that this
increase is only temporary and it is caused by the fact that new recruitments usually take place in the
beginning of the year while most retirements and other departures occur towards the end.

17.      Public procurement reform is another area where the PA has been making good progress.
In December 2011, the PA had enacted a new Public Procurement Law (PPL) which represents a good
balance between the current capacity to conduct procurement in the Palestinian territories and
internationally accepted practices. As part of developing the supporting institutional infrastructure to
implement the PPL, the Higher Council for Public Procurement Policies was established in September
2012, with representation from the public and private sectors. Work was then conducted to introduce
several amendments to the law to fill some gaps and remove certain inconsistencies on the basis of inputs
from various stakeholders. In parallel, work was also conducted to finalize the Regulation for the
implementation of the amended Law. The amended law was signed by the President and the Regulation
was adopted by the Cabinet in April 2014. The new legal framework for public procurement will come
into effect upon publishing the PPL and its Regulation in the National Gazette. Currently, with the Bank’s
support, the Council is working on finalizing essential actions to launch the implementation of the PPL
including: 1) finalizing the Cabinet’s approval of the Council’s organization structure and subsequent
hiring of key staff 2) preparing the National Standard Bidding Documents, 3) training the procurement
workforce, and 4) establishing a single portal procurement website where all procurement plans and
contract award notices would be published.

18.      Progress in strengthening the PA’s PFM systems has been uneven. In the area of cash
management, the PA has made significant improvement in regards to its cash planning system. This was
done through establishing a cash committee that is in charge of the cash forecasting and management
process. The Committee is headed by the Minister of Finance, and includes the Accountant General and
the Budget Director. The Secretariat is held by the Cash and Debt Management Department. Based on a
template developed with World Bank assistance, the MoF has produced an annual cash plan for 2014 that
is adjusted on monthly basis. This has reduced uncertainty related to cash availability and has also helped
identify monthly spending priorities. In the area of arrear management, however, there has been no
progress. As part of prior actions supported by DPG VI, the MoF committed to implement new functions
of the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) to strengthen arrears management.
These reforms have not been implemented as of yet. Consequently, the system for recording and reporting
arrears remains weak as the PA is unable to provide a reliable calculation and a presentation of arrears
automatically extracted from the IFMIS. The inability to properly account for arrears represents a major

                                                    5
weakness in PFM systems and needs to be urgently addressed. In addition, the PA has continued to
accumulate large arrears in 2014 mainly due to weak commitment controls and insufficient budget
discipline.

19.      The PA has recently implemented some important reforms to improve the business
environment, particularly access to finance. In January 2014, the President promulgated the Leasing
Law which is expected to encourage new forms of business financing through leasing companies.
Furthermore, an asset registry has been developed with the support of IFC where leased assets can be
formally registered and used for public notice. The asset registry will become particularly important once
the Secured Transactions Law, which has been adopted by the Cabinet, is promulgated by the President.
The Secured Transactions Law will formalize the use of different asset classes as collateral, including
contractual future income streams and create a way to formally register pledges of assets used as
collateral.




                                                    6
