                                                                                                          90252


    REVENUE SHARING OF NATURAL RESOURCES IN AFRICA:
      REFLECTIONS FROM A REVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL
                      PRACTICES1




                                                  Giorgio Brosio
                                                 Turin University
                                                           &
                                                  Raju Jan Singh
                                                 The World Bank




                                              Background Paper
                                                    April 2014


                                               The World Bank



1
 Research was supported with funding from the World Bank’s Africa Region. The authors are grateful to Carlos Prieto
Balbuena, Andres Lajer Baron, Abel Bove, Richard Damania, Shanta Devarajan, Anton Dobronogov, Francisco
Ferreira, Birgit Hansl, Kirsten Lori Hund, Alexander Johannes Huurdeman, Philip Keefer, Bryan Land, Julio Ricardo
Loayza, Magda Lovei, Lars Christian Molle, Maria Bru Munoz, Phindile Abigail Ngwenya, Catriona Purfield, Anand
Rajaram, Carolina Renteria, Apurva Sanghi, Peter Siegenthaler, Patricia Vasquez and Julio Velasco for their helpful
comments. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They
do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

                                                           1
Introduction

The African continent is one of the world richest regions in oil, gas and minerals. Proven reserves
have expanded and prospects improved recently making the continent an important player on the
world stage. The share of natural resources in GDP is increasing rapidly. Exports of minerals and
hydrocarbons account for more than a quarter of total exports in half of the sub-Saharan economies
and the share of natural resources revenue (NRR) on total government revenue is expected to
become dominant for an increasing number of countries.

Wealth of natural resources offers opportunities but it also brings in challenges. Natural resources
have generally been linked to a series of negative outcomes like economic decline, corruption and
autocratic rule (McNeish, 2010). Oil and minerals reserves are often “point source” natural
resources, being usually very spatially concentrated. Their discovery becomes almost inevitably a
potential source of conflict between the governments, the people of the producing areas and those of
the rest of the country (Fearon and Laitin, 2003). In other words, intergovernmental sharing is a big
issue that needs a solution when natural resources are discovered and exploited.

Full centralization of NNR is the exception rather than the rule, as we will observe in the paper. It is
practiced for oil and gas by both autocratic regimes (such as Saudi Arabia and other Middle East
countries), and fully fledged democratic systems, such as Norway and the UK. Full centralization
does not imply, however, the absence of compensating mechanisms, or of indirect transfers in favor
of the governments of the producing areas. In the UK, for example, Scotland receives no share of
oil taxes, but is compensated with a larger share of block grants to local governments (the “Barnett
formula”). Norway rewards the local governments closer to the producing areas with generous
infrastructure projects, such as tunnels and bridges linking very sparsely populated areas and
islands. Autocratic countries may also use repression to quench the request for a share of NRR from
their producing areas.

The governments in Kenya and Uganda, for example, will have to determine how to share their new
resources across different regions and levels of governments. For Kenya, the issue will be how the
newly discovered hydrocarbon wealth should be distributed between Turkana (where the production
will take place), the other districts, and the central government. How should Uganda distribute the
wealth found in oil fields around Lake Albert between neighboring communities, the rest of the
country and the central government? As an alternative, individuals could ask that the funds be
directly transferred to them. Growing dissatisfaction with the frequent misuse of NRR by all levels
of government make direct transfers to individuals an increasingly attractive solution.

Acute developing needs and ethnic fragmentation in a weak institutional environment may make
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa even more vulnerable to an increase in risk of conflict. Urgent
development needs may make savings for future generations less realistic and the need to show
concrete improvements in outcome more pressing. At the same time, the ethnically fragmented
nature and weak institutions create an environment of distrust with respect to the central
government, leading to higher risks of conflict/secession and constraining the options of the central
government in regard to natural resource-revenue sharing.

In many African countries the legal discipline that regulates the assignment of revenue from oil and
gas among distinct claimants – levels of government and individuals – is still missing, however, or
needs deep reform in view of the new discoveries. Most constitutions are silent or vague about NRR

                                                   2
assignments, and devolve the issue to ordinary legislation that is frequently missing and is replaced
by government decrees that have a much lower level of transparency.

Against this backdrop, could the international experience in sharing natural resource revenue
suggest options for Africa? Could some mechanisms be more workable than others in the African
context? The first step in answering these questions is to review the international practices. In so
doing, this paper intends to provide a contribution to NRR assignment in Africa by considering not
only the merits and the problems associated with assignment of NRR to subnational governments,
which is typical of the intergovernmental sharing literature, but also the issues associated with the
assignment of the fiscal instruments that serve to extract and allocate NRR.

In most countries these instruments are under the control of the central government, and the issues
deriving from this assignment are frequently neglected by the literature on intergovernmental
sharing. This neglect is, however, a severe limitation of analysis and of policy elaboration, since the
way NRR are collected can have a huge influence on intergovernmental relations. Mismanagement
leading to substantial revenue losses contributes to conflict, undermines intergovernmental
relations, and makes direct transfers to individuals increasingly popular.

The paper is articulated into three main sections, articulated around the two big arenas – allocation
and extraction – in which the politics of NNR is fought. The first section examines the issues
connected with the access of subnational governments to NRR. Its subsections summarize the
normative theory of NRR assignments, and include a detailed illustration of sharing schemes used
across the world and in Africa.

The main conclusions of this section are that allocation of NRR to the subnational governments of
the producing areas is justified as a compensation of the damages done to their physical and socio-
economic environment. As a consequence, the allocation has to reflect closely the size of these
damages. Allocation to all subnational governments – including non-producing areas – is more
debatable, but the strength of the main arguments against it is reduced by context-specific factors
(such as corruption), and by the availability of policy instruments (such as stabilization funds
against volatility of revenue), that can solve most of the problems deriving from sharing. Allocation
to all areas may also contribute to reduce inequalities from exclusive allocation to producing areas
thus dampening the potential of conflicts.

The second section examines, in an intergovernmental framework, the instruments used for the
extraction of NRR. There is logic to this sequence: if no NRR are recognized to subnational
governments there is almost no ground for an analysis of the assignment of the instruments for their
extraction. The section starts with a review of the legal regimes governing exploration and
exploitation of NRR and of the fiscal instruments for the extraction of the rent, and is followed by
the analysis of the intergovernmental assignment. Consideration of administration skills and
capacity is a strong argument for centralization of extraction (with the exception of big subnational
governments). Paradoxically, to some extent, the analysis of extraction issues and in particular the
recognition that corruption is possibly even higher in the extraction than in the expenditure of NRR
gives strength to the argument for extending allocation of NRR to all levels of government. In this
case, the increased number of stakeholders would exert greater pressure for more public scrutiny
and transparence.

The third section explores the allocation of direct transfers to individuals financed out of NRR. This
is a partial, and for some experts a total, alternative to intergovernmental sharing. Transfers to
                                                  3
individuals, in alternative to government services, could reduce poverty, stimulate public scrutiny of
NRR use and improve service delivery and, consequently, the overall well-being of citizens.

1. THE ALLOCATION OF NRR AMONG LEVELS OF GOVERNMENTS

1.1. Normative arguments against subnational assignment of NRR
Why should revenues from natural resources be transferred to subnational governments? In general,
economic theory stresses the potential of inefficiency in the assignment of (part of) the NRR to
subnational governments, particularly to those of the non-producing areas. The arguments used
refer both to the macroeconomic impact (as in the case of revenue volatility) and to the
microeconomic impact (mobility of factors). The theory also focuses on the likely misspending of
the rent by subnational governments and on their potential for corruption.

Volatility of revenue
This is a strong argument against assignment of NRR to subnational governments, based on higher
central government capacity to face revenue fluctuations, in view of its access to a wider range of
financial instruments. When their revenue diminishes abruptly, subnational units would have to
resort to expenditure cuts, endangering the provision of essential services, such as education and
health. During upturns in prices, subnational jurisdictions would be literally awash with money they
are unable to spend efficiently, or have to enter into spending commitments that might not be
sustainable in the longer run.
Another, more specific argument about the impact of volatility says that price fluctuations make
non-renewable NRR an “unreliable” source of revenue. The consequence is that funding “reliable”
expenditure, such as salaries and other current expenditures, with volatile revenues carries higher
risk for which subnational governments are not equipped, implying higher cost.
The argument loses strength when NRR are used for investment, or debt redemption. Reliability
would matter much less in those cases. As a matter of fact, a number of countries, particularly in
Latin America, use constraints on the use of NRR by subnational governments, requiring in general
that this revenue be used for investment. These constraints can create, however, other problems,
such as rigidity and delays in spending.
Volatility can be substantially eased, however, with the introduction of stabilization funds managed
either at the central, or at the local level. Administration weakness and capacity constrains suggest
for developing countries central government management with subnational oversight. North
America, states and municipalities in the US (rainy days funds), and provinces in Canada, provide a
number of quite interesting experiences worth replication in the developed world and as capacity
expands in the developing world.

Mobility of factors
This is the main efficiency-based argument against subnational allocation. A simple illustration
(Boadway and Flatters, 1993) refers to inefficient migration of labor. Local jurisdictions that benefit
from the allocation of substantial NRR can use them to enhance the quality of their public services,
or to reduce taxes, inducing firm and individuals to move to them attracted by the higher net fiscal
benefit. This would lead to an inefficient spatial allocation of labor, because this allocation is not
induced by location efficiency considerations. In other words, resource rich regions could be
tempted to start inefficient industry attraction policies by using their rent. The factor mobility
                                                  4
argument may be relevant for densely populated areas. It looks less relevant for most African
countries, where natural resources are frequently located in very remote, and sometimes even
inhospitable, areas.

Misspending of NRR
Substantial efficiency losses can derive from misspending originated from insufficient absorption
capacity. Non-economic investments can be made, subnational bureaucracies may indulge in slack
and the capacity of controlling costs may decline. Misspending includes the use of NRR for
patronage and clientelistic purposes. Barma, Kaiser, Le and Viñuela (2012) provide an exhaustive
review of the literature and analysis of the issues associated with four different, typical political
regimes, ranking from pure patrimonial to full-fledged democracies.
In some of the literature (Kolstad and Soreide, 2009), clientelistic practices are associated with
corruption, which in strict legal terms is not correct, because clientelism does not lead necessarily to
the illegal appropriation of the rent by public officials. Rather, patronage and clientelism may
contribute to undermining the working of political and social fabrics.2 The literature on the
resources curse and on Petrostates (Soares de Oliveira, 2007) provides a very comprehensive
review with reference also to a number of African states (see also Sacks and Warner, 2001).
The normative theory stresses that the huge sums involved (particularly when local beneficiary
governments are very small) and the possibility of capture of the spending mechanisms by local
élites – of factions, in Madisonian terms – increase the chances of corruption at the local level.
However, other strains of the literature – Bardhan and Mokerjee (2005) are the reference work on
capture – argue that patronage and clientelism are not the prerogative of a distinct layer of
government, depending on the distinct political and social context of each country.
This is confirmed by the empirical literature. The main indication emerging from it – surveys are
provided by Bardhan and Mockerjee (2005); Lin and Triesman (2009); Rose Ackerman (1999);
Shah (2006) – is that corruption is a context specific phenomenon. It depends, as in the case of
patronage and clientelism, on the level of information, on the peculiarities of the political system,
on administrative traditions, on the homogeneity of local jurisdictions, and on sector allocation of
expenditure at the national and local level.3

While these problems are usually context-specific, meaning that the central government is not
inherently superior in administering funds, the sheer size of revenue may constitute a greater
challenge for smaller governments. This is especially true in developing countries with generally
weak or incipient traditions of local self- administration.4 When the imbalance between the size of

2 In this sense the reference to corruption is justified; surely, it is justified according to the original Latin root of
the word, where corruption means literally getting rot.
3 These indications are confirmed by a recent report by the World Bank on local development projects:

“Outcomes from interventions are highly variable across communities; local inequality, history, geography, the
nature of social interactions, networks, and political systems all have a strong influence. The variability of these
contexts is sometimes so large, and their effect so unpredictable, that projects that function well usually do so
because they have strong built-in systems of learning and great sensitivity and adaptability to variations in
context.” (World Bank, 2012).
4
  A World Bank study on Casanare, one of the two Colombian oil producing departments, illustrates the risk of
wasting fiscal funds when they reach huge levels in a short period of time. Casanare is one of the newest
departments in Colombia. It was created in 1991. Oil royalties were negligible until 1994, and then came to
represent 73 of the department total income by 1997. According to the law, local governments must invest 100
percent of royalties in high priority projects in the sectors of education, public health, sewage systems and water
                                                           5
the rent, which can be very large because of spatial concentration, and the administration capacity
of the receiving governments is too high, corrections in the assignment are clearly needed, such as
moving the allocation of NRR to higher levels of subnational government, e.g. federated states, or
regions.
As a matter of fact, historically the assignment to local governments of the rent from traditional
natural resources, such as water, timber and aggregates (stone, gravel and sand) has never been
questioned and is the common practice in most developed and developing countries. For example,
in Europe and most Asian countries local governments are allowed to levy taxes on aggregates. The
rationales are the limited amount of the rent, the much dispersed spatial distribution of the
resources, and the local impact of extraction operations.

1.2. The practice of intergovernmental sharing of NRR: international experience compared
with African countries

Actual assignments conform only partially with the normative arguments, going from complete
decentralization to overall centralization, as it can be observed in Table 1 summarizing the main
characteristics of intergovernmental sharing with reference to a relative large sample of producing
countries. A few salient features can be noted.

A dominant practice worldwide is the assignment of a part of NRR to subnational governments of
the producing areas. The assignment is settled, particularly in the non-federal countries, not by the
constitution, but rather by ordinary legislation (mostly the mining code, or the decentralization law).

Practically every African country conforms with this practice recognizing a share of NRR to their
producing areas. This is the case of Cameroon for minerals and forests revenue. Uganda shares
royalties on minerals, and, as Kenya, the country is still debating the issue of oil sharing. Similar
schemes are used in Chad and Tanzania. Since some entitlement of the producing areas to oil seems
to be granted by the existing discipline of sharing of minerals, it is likely that Uganda’s ordinary
legislation – and possibly also that of Kenya - will have to decide if only the producing areas, or
also the non-producing ones, will have access to a share of oil and gas, and how big this share will
have to be.
Coming back to the worldwide practice, in a more limited number of countries the governments of
non-producing areas are also entitled to a share of the NRR. This is the case of Indonesia, Bolivia
and Colombia. There are similar cases in Africa, the outstanding ones being the RDC and Nigeria.




supply. However, in 1996 expenditure in these sectors financed out of oil royalty income did amount to less than
40 percent (Davy, McPhail and Sandoval Moreno, 1999). Similar evidence for mismanagement of NNR at the very
local level refers to Cameroon where local districts receiving forest fees show corrupt practices and spending for
projects non demanded local people. Also and very important there is no correspondence between the amounts
of NNR registered in the national budget and the amount registered in the budgets of recipient governments
(Morrison, Cerutti, Oyono, and Steil, 2009).
                                                        6
                            Table 1: Assignment of NNR Among Level on Government: Legal and Fiscal Instruments


                                                                   Taxes                  Sharing System with Subnational           Transfers to
                   Ownership of        Legal regime for                                            governments                  individuals through     Constrains on use of
Country and                                                      National/
                  NRR according to     exploration and                                                                            low fuel prices/      NNR by subnational
  system
                    Constitution         production                                                           Based on                                     governments
                                                                Subnational           Based on origin
                                                                                                              derivation           cash transfers

                  Oil and gas
  Argentina                                                Export taxes;
                  Provincial                                                                              Included in general   Fuel price through
                                       Concession regime   Corporation income        None                                                              None
                                                                                                          transfers             export duty
  (Federal)                                                tax/
                                                           Royalties and canon


                                                           Off-shore: royalty,
                  Not defined in the
                                                           crude oil excise (often
                  federal
                                                           described as the crude    Royalty on
  Australia       constitution:
                                                           oil levy) and             offshore projects    Included in general
                  States’              Concession regime                                                                        None                   None
                                                           petroleum resource        (shared with         transfers
  (Federal)       constitutions
                                                           rent tax (PRRT)/ On-      producing States).
                  assign to
                                                           shore royalty and
                  themselves
                                                           excise tax


                                                                                                          1 percentage point
                                                                                                          of royalties to two
                                                                                                          non-producing
                                                                                                          departments. 6%
                                                                                     11 percentage        of royalties to
                                                                                     points of Royalty    central
                                                                                                                                                       85 percent of royalties
   Bolivia                                                                           to Producing         government.           Fuel price through
                                       NOC contracts       IDH (32%)/ Royalties                                                                        for public investment
                  People                                                             Departments. 12.5                          low domestic price
                                       with NIOCs          (18%)
(Unitary state)                                                                      % of IDH revenue     31.25% of IDH         of oil/ Pension Fund
                                                                                     to producing         revenue going to
                                                                                     Departments          non producing
                                                                                                          departments and
                                                                                                          56.25% to the
                                                                                                          Central
                                                                                                          Government


                                                                                      7
                                                                                     Royalties and         A fraction of direct
                                                                                     special               taxes and royalties
                                                            Royalties
                                       Concession                                    contribution on       from off-shore
    Brazil
                                       onshore                                       profits are shared    production is
                  Federal                                   Signature bonuses                                                                        Local development and
                                                                                     between the federal   shared with all        None
   (Federal       Government                                                                                                                         environmental projects
                                       Contractual                                   (39.4%), states       states and
    system)                                                 Social contribution on
                                       offshore                                      (33.9%) and           municipalities
                                                            profits
                                                                                     municipalities        through a special
                                                                                     (26%)                 fund


                                                                                     Royalties on
                                                            Sales of oil
                                                                                     minerals: 75% to
                                                                                     central government
  Cameroon                                                  Profit tax
                                                                                     25% to local.         Included in general    On fuel through    80% for investment (but
                  State                Contractual regime
                                                                                     Royalties on          transfers              subsidy to price   largely non-enforced)
(Unitary state)                                             Signature
                                                                                     forests 50% to
                                                            bonuses/Royalties on
                                                                                     central and 50% to
                                                            minerals and forests
                                                                                     local government

                  Not defined
                                                                                     Off-shore oil: A
                                                            Corporation income
                                                                                     sharing system
   Canada         Oil: Provincial on                        tax/Royalties;
                                                                                     with the provinces    Included in general
                  onshore;                                                                                                        None               None
                                                                                     of Labrador and       transfers
  (Federal)                                                 Corporation income
                                                                                     Newfoundland is
                  Federal on                                tax, signature bonuses
                                                                                     in operation.
                  offshore

                                                                                                                                                     Projects in the social
  Colombia                                                                                                                                           sectors may include
                                                                                                           Regional
                                                            Corporation income       Substantial part of                                             current and capital
                  State                                                                                    Compensation           None
(Unitary state                                              tax /Royalties           royalties                                                       expenditure, but must be
                                                                                                           Fund
with regions)                                                                                                                                        vetted by special
                                                                                                                                                     supranational boards




                                                                                      8
                                                                       One dollar tax per
                                                                       barrel of oil                                                          Small amount to
  Ecuador
                                                                       extracted in the                                                       development projects in
                                               Extraordinary profits                          Included in general    On fuel through
                State                                                  Amazon region                                                          the Amazon region
(Unitary with                                  tax                                            transfers              subsidy to price
                                                                       goes to the                                                            (where oil is produced)
  regions)
                                                                       Amazonian                                                              –
                                                                       Development Fund

                                                                       Forestry and
                                                                       mining: 20% to
                                                                       CG t; 16 %             For forestry and
                                                                       Provinces; 32% to      mining 32 % to
                                                                       Districts. For oil:    Districts. For oil
 Indonesia
                                                                       84, % to CG; 3,
                                               Corporation income
                State                                                  1% to Provinces; 6,    6, 2 % to Districts.                            None
(Unitary with                                  tax, royalties
                                                                       2% to Districts; for   For gas 12, 2% to
  regions)
                                                                       gas: 69, 5% to         Districts... For
                                                                       CG; 6, 1% to           fishery 80% to
                                                                       Provinces; 12, 2%      Districts.
                                                                       to Districts. For
                                                                       fishery: 20% to CG

                                                                       Onshore: royalties
                                                                       up to 7%: 55% to
                                                                       producing regions,
                                                                       15% to producing
    Italy                                                              municipalities,
                                                                                                                     Cash: royalties of 3%    Regional growth,
                                               Corporate income        30% to CG.
                Undefined                                                                     None                   go to the residents of   environmental
(Unitary with                                  tax/Royalties
                                                                                                                     producing regions        protection
  regions)                                                             Off-shore and
                                                                       territorial waters:
                                                                       Royalties of 4%
                                                                       are paid to coastal
                                                                       regions.

   Mexico                                                                                     Part of oil revenue    On fuel through
                            Contractual with                                                                                                  Infrastructure and
                Federal                        Profit taxes on Pemex   None                   from above             subsidy to price , via
                            NOC (Pemex)                                                                                                       equipment
  (Federal)                                                                                   budgeted price         the excise tax




                                                                        9
                                                         Sales of crude oil and                                                Through subsidized
   Nigeria        Federal                                gas. Signature             13 % of all NRR      Included in general   sale of crude oil to
                                                                                                                                                      None
  (Federal)       Government                             bonuses, royalties,        revenues.            transfers             refineries and
                                                         Petroleum profit tax                                                  subsidies to import

                                         Concession on
                                                                                    Royalties and part
  Pakistan                               onshore and     Excise tax, royalty, gas                        Included in general
                  Not specified                                                     of gas development                                                None
  (Federal)                              contractual     development surcharge                           transfers
                                                                                    surcharge
                                         offshore

                                                                                    Fifty per cent of
     Peru                                                                                                                                             75% or more on capital
                                                         Royalties, signature       income tax and
                                                                                                         Included in general                          spending; at most 20%
                  The Nation                             bonus, excise and          royalties on
(Unitary with                                                                                            transfers                                    on maintenance and 5%
                                                         corporation income tax     minerals on oil
  regions)                                                                                                                                            on feasibility studies
                                                                                    and gas

                                                                                    40% of all NRR
                                                         Royalties,                 are allocated to
                                                                                    SBNGs (20% to
                                                                                                         Included in general
 Philippines      State                  Contractual     Corporation income         the Province, 45%                                                 None
                                                                                                         transfers
                                                         tax, minimum               to Local
                                                         tax/Business tax           governments; 35%
                                                                                    do Barangays)

                                                                                    Mineral extraction
                                                         Minerals and oil           tax and part of
  Russian         Federation and                         extraction tax,            royalties levied     Included in general   On natural gas and
                                         Concession                                                                                                   Does not apply
 Federation       Regions                                                           with concessional    transfers             electricity prices
                                                         export duty                agreements go to
                                                                                    the Regions

 South Africa                                            Royalties and                                   Included in general
                  State                                                             None                                       None                   Does not apply
(quasi federal)                                          corporation income tax                          transfers

     U.K.
                  State owns oil, gas,
                                                                                                         Included in general
                  gold, silver and                       Resource rent tax          None                                       None                   Does not apply
Unitary with                                                                                             transfers
                  coal
  Regions




                                                                                    10
The federal system of government influences assignments favoring the producing areas. All
federations, with the exception only of Mexico (and Venezuela, if this country can be classified
as a federation) do this. Brazil recognizes directly a share of NRR also to its municipalities,
whereas in other federations the assignment to the local governments is decided at the state level.
Also highly decentralized states recognize a share of NRR to the producing regions. Hence,
presence of natural resources increases the potential for inequality built in federal and/or highly
decentralized systems. In general, however, federal states are better equipped for handling
conflicts between their various areas than unitary/centralized states and also ready to accept
wider inequalities between their constituent units.

The geographical location of the resource is a factor influencing assignments. The
onshore/offshore split is a main determinant for oil and gas. With one important exception –
Brazil – NRR found offshore are reserved to the central government.5 This can help explaining
while relatively decentralized countries, such as Norway and the UK, have a full centralization of
oil revenues, since their oil is extracted in the North Sea. This is an important element to note
also for Africa. Offshore fields have no relations with subnational governments; hence there is
no rationale for sharing with the producing areas.

The prevailing international practice is that NRR are assigned to local governments when their
economic importance is small and the resources are evenly geographically distributed, as in the
case of quarries. This applies also to water used for irrigation and for production of electricity.
This can explain, for example, why in the UK the proceeds of oil are fully centralized, while the
proceeds of taxes on aggregates, such as sand, gravel and stone, are fully decentralized. In
Europe revenues from forests are typically fully assigned to the municipalities, while in tropical
countries, where forests are a prominent sources of NRR, these revenues are only partially shared
with subnational governments. This is again an important feature with clear indications of policy,
suggesting the assignment to subnational governments of NRR of small value, while when
substantial resources are at stake countries have to focus their attention on the risks of sharing.

Political institutions also matter. Very recent constitutions, following the return of their countries
to democracy, tend to replace a previous totally centralized system of allocation of NRR with a
decentralized one. This is the case of Iraq and the DR Congo and could possibly also be that of
Libya. The constitutional assignment of NRR to subnational governments is partly the
restoration of the status quo ante and the reflection of the present worldwide trend towards
decentralization. It can also be understood as a reaction to the previous abuses (including wars)
of centralized management. Dictatorial regimes usually eliminate self-government and the
allocation of NRR to them (if that was the case before) and make generally terrible use of NRR.
Governments have to be conscious that with democratic institutions, and especially with
enhanced decentralization, subnational governments will become more vocal and that consensus
on sharing will have to be generated.
In all the systems based on three layers of government, all levels – regional as well as local – are
entitled to some allocation of the rent (when NRR are allocated to subnational governments).
The allocation of NRR to local governments – municipalities and even their subdivisions –
reflects the intent of governments to compensate the producing areas for the negative impact on
them of production. This is clearly a practice that gives indications for solving conflicts, because
allocations to all levels help to smooth strident inequalities.

5
  Offshore has, unfortunately, different meanings in different countries. Coastal waters, whose extension varies from
country to country, are not considered as offshore and are typically property of adjoining local governments.
                                                         11
                         Box 1. Recentralization of NRR: a few examples
In the midst of the 2005, Bolivia introduced, on top of the existing royalty going to Provinces, a centrally
administered royalty on gas and oil (IDH) with a much higher tax rate and whose revenue is shared
between the central and all the local governments. With the increase of the revenues stemming from
higher international prices, 30 percent of the share of IDH received by each Department and Municipality
was re-assigned to fund Renta Dignidad (a non-contributory pension scheme). This led to a considerable
recentralization of revenue.

Colombia has also recently (July 2011) increased the rates of royalties levied on minerals and oil and
brought about a recentralization of the revenue from natural resources through the creation of a new fund
managed at the central level. This is the Science, Technology and Innovation Fund that will receive 10
percent of those revenues. Moreover, the allocation to the already existing Fund for Pension Savings has
been increased from 5 percent to 10 percent of the total amount of royalties, while the Savings and
Stabilization Fund will receive up the 30 percent of revenue. The financing of these new funds will be
paid by the producing departments and local governments, whose share of the royalties has entered a
process of reduction that will bring it, after 2015, to 10 percent of the total down from the pre-reform one
of about 25 percent.

Argentina provides a third interesting case. According to the constitution, the Provinces have ownership
over the natural resources in their territory. On this basis Provinces negotiate and sign contracts with
private firms for exploration and exploitation and levy royalties. At the same time, the federal government
is assigned the power to: i) regulate the sector and domestic markets; ii) set internal prices; iii) has
exclusive power over import and export taxes; and, iv) has control over the corporate income tax. In 2002,
the federal government expanded its access to NRR by levying export taxes ( retenciones) on oil and gas,
taking advantage of the increase in their international price. Retenciones have a progressive tax rates
schedule now reaching 100 percent when the oil price exceeds 80 US dollars and the price paid to
producers exceeds 70 US dollars. The new tax has brought considerable revenue to the federal
government and a ceiling on the domestic price of oil and gas, which is basically equal to the difference
between the international price and the export tax, hence benefitting domestic consumers through low
prices of fuels. High taxation has also presumably contributed to stagnation of oil production that in turn
has worked to reduce disparities among producing and non-producing provinces.

A similar process is taking place in Brazil. Since 1997, when the oil industry was opened to NIOCs, the
lion’s share of royalties—around 10 percent of sales revenue—has gone to the states and municipalities
where production facilities are located. The federal government gets just over a quarter (in addition to
other oil taxes), with local governments elsewhere making do with less than a tenth. With the new law of
November 2012, a part of which has been vetoed by the President and need further approval by Congress,
the producing states and municipalities will receive no more than 35 percent of the royalties onshore,
while the share of the non-producing subnational governments increase up to 25 percent. Royalties from
already-auctioned fields will still be shared out according to the old rules. New concessions will pay
higher overall royalties of 15 percent. Revenues derived from the exploitation of the continental platform
(pre-sal) will be allocated with a greater share to the federal government and to the non-producing states
and municipalities.

Canada’s federal government has been in the 1970’s a precursor of recentralization during oil price
increases. More specifically, to counteract the excessive shift of fiscal revenue in favor of the province of
Alberta (the owner of oil) after the first oil shock, the federal government resorted to the instruments it
was allowed use according to the constitution, such as holding domestic fuel prices below market prices
for the benefit of all domestic consumers; levying export taxes on foreign sales of oil (reducing the room
for subnational taxes); eliminating deductions for subnational taxes and royalties in the calculation of
federal income (company) taxes; and modifying the equalization transfer formula to penalize oil
producing subnational governments (or those who tax more).


                                                     12
Some recentralization of the revenue is, however, taking place since the early years of this
century.6 This is happening in concomitance with the increase in the international price of
commodities. Higher prices lead to an increase of the economic rent on NRR and stimulate the
public sector to increase the government’s take. Central government ownership of most fiscal
instruments explains easily the recentralization, which was done with the introduction of new
taxing instruments, rather than with the increase of tax rates on existing instruments.
Recentralization does not take place necessarily with a concomitant reduction of the share going
to subnational governments. Bolivia, Colombia, Argentina and Brazil provide recent
illustrations, reported in Box 1, of this reversal of trend. Canada has been a forerunner in the
1970s. This trend provides relevant suggestions also for Africa suggesting that the central
government take can be increased without damaging subnational governments.

An also very recent pattern, of which there is evidence especially in Latin America, is towards
more inclusive schemes of NRR assignment. These schemes include increases in the share going
to all non-producing jurisdictions and, above all, an expanded concept of affected areas. The aim
of these schemes is to compensate effectively for damages and costs.

Examples of inclusion of all subnational governments into the sharing schemes are provided by
Bolivia, where, since 2006, non-producing departments have been entitled to receive a
substantial share of the collections of the newly created IDH, and Colombia, where under the
new system, 40 percent of total revenue will accrue to two distinct national funds, the Regional
Development Fund and the Regional Compensation Fund, both to be distributed to all
subnational governments. (Gaitan, Martinez, Perez, Velasquez, 2011).
Examples of use of an expanded concept of affected areas are provided by Brazil and, again,
Colombia. These countries allocate a share of NRR to their subnational governments affected by
transportation. Colombia recognizes a sharing rate only to municipalities, while Brazil extends
the range of beneficiaries also to states and municipalities facing offshore oil fields, which may
be an excessive expansion of the meaning of the concept of affected areas.
In most African countries, ownership and assignment are seldom defined in the constitution,
countries preferring ordinary legislation, which is easier to change. This is not necessarily a
wrong solution, but clarity of discipline is essential. This is not a frequent case in Africa, where
as reported in table 2 most constitutions vest vaguely ownership in the State, meaning the
national government. The constitution of South Africa exemplifies the vagueness of a
constitutional mandate recognizing the entitlement of all the people of South Africa to good use
of natural resources. In some cases, such as Ghana, Kenya and Ethiopia, mention is also made of
the people as the owner, although usually through the intermediation of the State, or even of the
President (as in Ghana).




6
    See, for the case of oil countries, Vale Columbia Center, (2012).
                                                            13
           Table 2: Ownership, regulation and sharing of natural resources in selected
                                       African countries
                 Assignment of ownership in the
                                                               Regulation of management and sharing in the constitution or
Country                  constitution
                                                                                  ordinary legislation
Uganda       Ownership is vested in the “Government         Minerals and oil are exploited “taking into account the interest of th e
             of behalf of the Republic of Uganda”.          individual landowners, local governments and the Government”. Art.
             Art. 244.                                      244 of the Constitution. According to the Mining Act of 2003 the
                                                            central government is entitled to 80 percent of the mining royalties,
                                                            the local government of the producing areas are entitled to 17 percent
                                                            and the owner of the land gets 3 percent.

Ethiopia     “…the right to ownership... to all natural
             resources is exclusively vested in the
             State and the people of Ethiopia”. Art. 40.
Kenya        “All land in Kenya belongs to the people       “All minerals and mineral oils as defined as public mad e by law”. Art.
             of Kenya collectively as a nation, as          62.“The State (a) ensures sustainable exploitation, utilization,
             communities and as individuals”. Art .61       management and conservation of the environment and natural
             (f)                                            resources, and ensures the equitable sharing of the accruing benefits”.
                                                            Art. 69 of the Constitution.
DR Congo     “The State has permanent sovereignty           The mining law of 2002 sets the sharing rates for NRR: 60 per cent to
             over soil, subsoil, waters, forests,           the national government and 40 per cent goes to the provinces, from
             airspace, lakes, rivers, sea, coastal and      which 10 per cent is allocated to their local communities.
             continental shelf”. Art. 9.
Ghana        “Every mineral in its natural state is         The Mineral Development Fund established in 1993 receives 20% of
             under or upon land in Ghana is the             the mining royalty payments. Half of the fund is distributed in the
             property of the republic as is vested in the   mining areas for projects to mitigate the effects of mining: 25% via
             President in trust of the people of Ghana”.    the district assemblies and the rest to local communities.
             Art.257.6
South        All citizens have the right of to have a       Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act of 2002:
Africa       “secure ecologically sustainable               “Mineral and petroleum resources are the common heritage of all the
             development and use of natural                 people of South Africa and the State is the custodian thereof for the
             resources”. Section 24.                        benefit of all South Africans”.
                                                            The Public Finance Management Act of 1999 establishes that the
                                                            Minister of Minerals and Energy may determine that any community
                                                            or local government may receive a payment from mining royalties.
                                                            The payment goes to the Local Economic Development Fund
                                                            managed by the national Department of Provincial and Local
                                                            Government.

Nigeria      Federal government is owner and has            “The principle of derivation shall be constantly reflected in any
             “control of all minerals, mineral oils and     approved formula, as being not less that 13 per cent of the revenue
             natural gas.’’ Section 162,1                   accruing to the Federation Account directly from any natural
                                                            resources”. Section 162.2 of the Constitution.
Chad         “The state exercises its complete and          According to the 1999 Petroleum Revenue Management Law, Eastern
             permanent sovereignty over all national        Logone, the country’s oil-producing region, receives 4.5 percent of the
             wealth and natural resources for the well-     royalties.
             being of the whole national community”.
             Article 57.
Cameroon     Mining and natural resources are subject       According to the application decree of the mining code of 2002
             to national parliament legislation. Article    royalties on minerals (an ad valorem tax): 75 percent to central
             26.                                            government 25 percent to riparian local councils and communities.
                                                            According to the 1999 Law of Forestry, royalties on forests are shared
                                                            50 percent to central and 50 percent to local government.
Angola       “The solid, liquid and gaseous natural         The state “shall determine the conditions for concessions, surveys and
             resources existing in the soil, subsoil,       exploitation”. Article 16 of the Constitution.
             territorial waters, in the exclusive
             economic zone, and in the continental
             shelf shall be the propriety of the State”.
             Article 16.




                                                                14
At the constitutional level centralization of NRR seems to prevail over decentralization.7 With
the exception of Nigeria, there is not a single constitution mentioning explicitly that subnational
governments are entitled to receive the rent. The constitutions of Ethiopia, the other federal
African country, and South Africa, a quasi-federal system, do not attribute entitlements on
natural resources to their subnational governments. The constitutions of new oil-producing
countries, such as Uganda and Kenya, recognize a vague entitlement of local governments to
NRR. Vagueness of constitutional mandates may become a problem, by starting conflicts on
their interpretation. For example, in Nigeria the share – 13 percent of all NRR – allocated to the
States is net of a number of deductions that have each an economic rationale, such as the service
of national external debt, but can be subject to obfuscation and improper practices.
Some countries, such as Ghana and South Africa, have a somewhat complicated system for
channeling resources to their subnational governments. In both countries, part of the royalties
goes to a special fund that finances projects to the benefit of local governments or implemented
by them. In South Africa, there is some central government discretion in the determination of the
size of the royalties; in Ghana, a given percentage of collections is used. Both countries seem to
be cautious, but at the same time have put in place non-transparent systems to start the
experimentation of devolution of NRR to their subnational governments.
There are also in Africa some non-statutory systems of allocation, such as the system that
benefits the regions of Angola to the exclusion of Cabinda. This latter - the Angolan enclave
producing more than 50 percent of national oil - has a formal arrangement allowing it to receive
10 percent of taxes on oil levied in the enclave, but it remains unclear if this is the central
government spending in the region, or if it is a transfer to the Cabinda government (EITI, 2006).
In non-statutory systems, the allocations are done through completely discretionary and non-
transparent decisions of the executive branch. This is an expediency that can create serious
problems and hence has to be avoided.
1.3. Filling gaps between prescriptions and practice: the determination of pure economic
rent
The gap between normative theory and the observed reality narrows, particularly for the
assignment to the producing areas, if we fully develop the implication of economic theory,
particularly the theory of the remunerations of production factors (Scott, 1975, and Brosio and
Jimenez, 2012, for an illustration). This theory makes a neat distinction between payments of
revenue that are specific remunerations of production factors, including those provided by
governments at all levels, and payments that correspond to the allocation of the pure economic
rent.
In addition, the theory also allows adequate consideration of the compensation for environmental
damages. If countries would follow its prescriptions, allocations to subnational government
would not create the problems stressed by the normative theory because, being linked to costs

7
   Emphasis on central government ownership reflects more the antithesis between national versus foreign
ownership, than central versus subnational entitlement. Given the colonial legacy of dominance by foreign firms of
the natural resources sector, it was/is deemed essential for developing and African new independent countries to
stress above and first of all national ownership in their constitutions. Emphasis on State ownership also reflects the
centralized system of government that has prevailed in Africa until the 1990s, but has been recently reversed,
leading to high sharing rate with subnational governments. This is done, for example, in the DR Congo with the
mining law that shares NRR 60/40 between the central and the producing subnational governments.


                                                         15
and repair of damages, they would not create problems with fluctuation, insufficient absorption
and misuse.
The economic rent – which is the return on a resource whose total supply is fixed – is measured
as the difference between the revenue derived from the sale of the resource and all the economic
costs needed for its production. When total costs do not add up to the value of the production, an
economic rent is generated and it accrues to the owner of the resource. To determine it, a
complete and accurate identification of all costs is needed.
Production means both exploration and exploitation activities, and costs consist of remunerations
to all factors of production needed. They include typically labor, material and non-material
inputs and capital. The cost of capital includes also a premium for risk that in the case of mining
and oil production can be substantially high, due to the uncertainties about the effective size of
mines and oil fields, about trends in costs and, most of all, about fluctuations in the price of the
commodities.
Costs include also the use of the environment, hence the necessity of compensating those,
individuals or firms that bear the cost. The environmental consequences related to the production
of oil, gas and minerals contribute to the potential for conflict. The impact on the local
environment (on the producing and/or affected areas) could be very intense and immediate, as in
the case of the lighting effect of gas flaring and the number of toxic substances burned and
released.
In this regard, the way environmental policy is designed and implemented is crucial. When, as in
most countries, the environmental policy is based on regulation – more precisely, through
standards on maximum levels of allowed emissions – and it is actually implemented, the cost of
complying with the regulation is borne by the producing firms and is accounted for in the
remuneration they receive. Higher and implemented standards imply higher production costs
and, consequently, a smaller rent. Costs also include insurance against unpredictable damages,
when firms subscribe policies voluntarily, or by effect of regulation.
However, regulations may not be fully enforced and/or unpredictable damages may take place,
such as oil spills. Furthermore, regulation cannot completely eliminate all environmental
damage. Damages occurring despite of regulations have to be compensated to account fully for
the cost of production. If the environmental impact is local, compensation is paid locally to
governments and/or to individuals. If damages are nationwide, compensation is paid to the
national government and/or to all residents. In all these cases, the payment of compensation does
not amount to the allocation of the economic rent, but takes place during the process that leads to
the determination of the rent.
The same principle applies also to costs other than environmental ones imposed by mining or oil
activities on the local populations. Examples are displacement of people, disruptions in
transportation, or pecuniary externalities deriving from increasing price of food and other
commodities.8 Again, regulations can force the producing companies to pay appropriate
compensation to the local population. When enforced, regulations expand the production costs
absorbing another part of the value of production.

8
  In the Tete region of northern Mozambique, a huge open field coal mine led to the resettlement of more than 1,000
local people in a far less attractive area, 40 km away, and to huge disappointment in terms of new jobs creation.
International Herald Tribune 10 November 2012, As Coal Boosts Mozambique, the Rural Poor Are Left Behind, The
Economist, Brazil in Africa, November 10th, 2012.
                                                        16
When governments provide services that contribute effectively to the production, they will be
considered as additional production factors or inputs being entitled to receive compensation.
Although most of the investment for the exploitation of oil and other natural resources is made
directly by the producing companies, additional investment in local infrastructure is usually
required. Roads to the producing mines and fields have to be built, airports and ports may have
to be upgraded, and schools, health and social services have to be expanded to serve the growing
population attracted to the area. To the extent to which the demand for these services exceeds the
demand that would have prevailed in the absence of extraction, the governments of the
producing jurisdictions are entitled, as partners in production, to have these additional costs
funded.
The theory of the remuneration of production factors recognizes in economic terms the
contribution of all levels of government to the production process and their entitlement, on
efficiency grounds, to receive a share of these resources as compensation, and not as recognition
of a property title, or of some other entitlement. In other words, subnational governments
situated in the producing areas are entitled on efficiency grounds to receive a share of NRR,
whose amount has to be in strict correspondence with their contribution to production.
Its implementation requires proper costing with reference to all affected areas. These areas
include those affected by transportation, since transport activities may create costs not only for
the environment, but also for individuals and businesses. Pipelines spoil the landscape, may
generate spills, or obstruct transportation and economic activities. Transport of minerals on roads
affects, through higher maintenance costs, congestion and other nuisances, an area that extends
beyond the producing one. Workers employed in mining may commute from other areas and
require services from the local governments situated there. Even when they are residents of the
producing areas, they will affect other areas when the mine closes and they are forced to move.
Workers will generate new costs to their destination governments by demanding services and
thus creating a demand for new infrastructure. Sometimes, especially with open mines,
extraction requires resettlement of residents to new areas whose governments will have to face
an increased demand of services, as in the case of Mozambique (see footnote 7).


2. EXPLORING, PRODUCING AND APPROPRIATING NRR: THE LEGAL AND
FISCAL FRAMEWORK

NRR have to materialize before being allocated and used. Oil and gas have to be extracted and
minerals mined.9 Decisions about production are up to the owner of the resource: usually the
government or, in very rare cases, a private individual.

The way the relationship between the government and the investor is shaped has a strong impact
on intergovernmental relations. The choice of the fiscal regime can influence the rate of
production and, as a consequence, the amount to be shared (if sharing is envisaged). Secondly,
the choice of the regime is far from neutral in terms of transparence, obfuscation and corruption.
Contractual regimes – particularly when implemented with the help of a national oil company –
have largely discretional components that are prone to obfuscation and may lead to suspicions
that can poison intergovernmental relations.


9
  We focus here primarily on hydrocarbons, but most arguments apply also too minerals and also renewable
resources, such as forests.
                                                       17
2.1. The legal framework

There are two main instruments available: concession regimes and contractual regimes. A third
instrument, the use of publicly owned companies (NOCs, in the case of oil and gas) is not a
completely separate alternative, since NOCs can be and are used to implement both concession
and contractual regimes, and the relationship between the government and the company has to be
contractually defined.10

According to the concession regime, the investing firm is the owner of the resource once it is
extracted and is responsible for all the decisions concerning exploration, development,
production, transport and sale of the resource. It has the obligation to pay the appropriate taxes
(see later). In some cases, it has the obligation to sell a share of the production on the domestic
market at some agreed price.

In a contractual regime, the government is responsible for the decisions concerning the
exploration and production of the resource, and it contracts an investor to implement them. There
are different variants of these contracts, going from production-sharing agreements to risk
service contracts. The difference lies in the range of decisions for which the government takes
the responsibility.

In risk service contracts, the government takes all the decisions including those about the sale of
the product and remunerates the investor with a fee, assuming all the risks itself. In the more
popular production-sharing agreements, the managing of the production, including the sale, is the
responsibility of the investor that is remunerated with a share of the production and fully
reimbursed of all costs. The more interventionist is the contract, the more it demands in terms of
capacity from the government.

Historically, concession regimes have preceded contractual regimes. They are still prevalent in
the industrial countries, while developing countries tend to use mostly production-sharing
instruments. These agreements were initially (i.e. at the time of independence of the countries)
considered as a radical alternative to concessions, allowing the government a much closer control
of production. Among African countries Angola has been a precursor in this kind of contracts
and they are widely used for oil and gas in countries, such as Kenya, Niger, Nigeria and
Mauritania. Concession regimes are used in most countries for minerals.

In reality, however, the demarcation between concession and contractual regimes is much
weaker than thought. For production-sharing agreements include also the payment of royalties
and other taxes. The difference lays mostly in the control of production. With concession
regimes the investor determines the amount of production that suits him better, while the
government can influence investor’s decisions through taxes, since they impact on the
profitability of mines and oil fields. With contractual regimes the government could restrict
production or, as in the case of OPEC countries, to increase the price, or also to expand
production to fund its expenditure (as it is happening with Venezuela and Iraq).


10
  As a matter of fact, NOCs operate, and have even a big role, under both concession regimes (as in Norway,
Ryggvik, 2010) and under production sharing agreements, as in most of African countries, Brazil and Venezuela.


                                                     18
From the point of view of the producing countries no regime has en evident superiority on the
other. The choice should depend, technically, on the administration capacity of the government;
or, more in general, on the governance structure. For example, service contracts, where the
investor acts under instructions of the government and is remunerated with a fee, require a much
higher administration capacity and acceptation of risk than concession regimes. Governments
have to rely more heavily on their NOCs for the implementation of these contracts. This can
creates problems, since NOCs managers are faced with different incentives than those facing
civil servants. The international practice shows, however, a different, paradoxical, trend.
Developed countries that have more administration capacity tend to rely mostly on concession
regimes, while developing countries use contractual regimes that are more difficult to manage.

2.2. Fiscal instruments to extract NRR

There are five main sets of fiscal instruments for collecting NRR. They are presented in table 3.
To a substantial extent they complement and substitute each other. Governments in the real
world use a combination of them.
A distinction is between ex ante instruments and ex-post instruments. With ex ante instruments
the government collects the NNR before the starting of the exploration and exploitation. In other
words, ex ante instruments are targeted to collect expected NRR, while ex post instruments will
collect realized, actual NRR. Typical ex ante instruments are auctioning of rights and payment of
fixed fees and bonuses for exploration and development.


                 Table 3: Main methods for collecting rent from natural resources

                           Ex ante instruments                                         Ex post instruments

Method            Auctioning             Concession         Government                   Production             Taxation
                  Exploration and        fees, signature    equity in project            Sharing       and      Instruments
                  Exploitation           fees        and                                 other contracts
                  Rights                 bonuses

                  Allows, when           Administrative     Allows the                   Contracts for          There is choice of
                  properly done, the     simplicity.        government to share          sharing of             instruments, but
Advantages and    government to          Possible           any upside of the            production can be      even simple
problems          obtain a substantial   obfuscation and    projects (e.g.,              relatively simple,     taxation schemes
                  up-front payment.      corrupted deals    transfers of                 but their              present
                  Requires, however,     through            technology). It is           implementation is      implementation
                  a fully competitive    lowering of fees   likely to be a source        a demanding            and control
                  setting, this might                       of conflict of interest:     activity in terms of   difficulties.
                  be difficult to                           government as a              information and
                  ensure.                                   shareholder versus           control.
                                                            government as a
                                                            regulator.



Auctioning exploration and exploitation rights with cash payments bidding

This is a development of the more traditional instrument consisting of imposing a fixed fee –
called signature fee, or bonus – for exploration and/or exploitation. Auctioning consists of asking



                                                            19
firms to submit cash payment bids and choosing the procedure for the selection of the best bid. 11
Potential investors will make their own evaluation.
The literature considers generally auctioning of rights as the potentially preferable system for
capturing rent.12 It serves a dual function: a) to allocate the right to the most efficient bidder; and
b) to capture efficiently the expected value of the rent. It is also neutral on extraction choices,
since the winner’s decision during the development of the resource will not be influenced by th e
up-front payment.13
In the real world, auctioning is never a complete substitute of taxes and other instruments, but
rather complements them. Auctioning is used in concession regimes for the assignment of
ownership of fields and mines and replaces other ex ante tax instruments, such as signature
bonuses. Investors will then pay royalties and other taxes. In contractual regimes, auctioning
refers to a share of production – profit oil – attributed to the investor: the best bid is the lowest
one. In Africa, Libya and Nigeria have made use of this instrument in the framework of
production sharing agreements, auctioning the share of production left to the investor. However,
the procedures followed in the practice have been frequently quite distant from those needed to
insure the results expected from the mechanism.14 A frequent practice of improper auctioning is
the use of “right of first refusal”. This is the right for the winning company to sell (at a much
higher price) the concession to another, more capable, company. The first one is usually linked to
officials and does not possess the capacity for exploration/exploitation.

Acquisition of equity in mining and oil enterprises
This system is used in many developing and industrial economies. It is typically a central
government instrument, although in principle subnational government could also use it if they
have the ownership of natural resources. Its impact on NRR collections depends on the terms
under which the equity is acquired by the government, i.e. paying the corresponding share of the
cost, or without charge.
In the first case, the government contributes to a given share of the total cost of the investment in
return of an equivalent share of the flow of revenues. This system is used in Nigeria, where the
national oil company (NNPC) has set up joint ventures with a small number of foreign firms for
the exploration and the production of oil onshore. To pay its share of investment (and operation)
costs, NNPC takes loans from its partner companies and repays them in kind (i.e. with oil). The
profits from the venture, made of residual oil, are shared between NNPC and its partners. These
partners pay their taxes – royalties, signature bonuses and the profit tax – to the government.
This system is complex and prone to obfuscation.


11
   In fact, bids may refer, in addition to cash payments, to work programs, royalties and shares of profits (see
Sunnevåg, 2000).
12
   The main contributions are: Boadway and Flatters (1993, Heaps and Helliwell (1985), Garnaut (1995), Garnaut
and Ross (1975 and 1983), Nellor (1987), Otto, (1995); Sunley and Baunsgaard (2001), Sunley, Baunsgaard and
Simard (2003).
13
   Some authors (Garnaut and Ross, 1975) raise doubts on the effectiveness of the instrument and consider it inferior
to ex post instruments, particularly to a resource rent tax (see below). This is because of the risk aversion of
investors, who have limited information on the value of the project and may be deterred from bidding because of
sovereign risk. This is the risk that the government will renegotiate the terms, or take arbitrary action against the
investor (”second bite of the cherry”). Moreover, in the case of large mineral/oil fields the huge scale of costs and
the large up-scale payment, that will be required to equal ex-post taxes, will limit the number of real bidders.
14
   For the case of Nigeria, see Barma, Kaiser, Tuan Minh and Viñuela (2012).
                                                         20
In the second case, the government obtains a share of equity for free and is entitled to receive a
certain share of the net revenues of the investor. This amounts to a tax on the investor’s return on
capital or to a tax on the resource rent. For example, if the government acquires fifty per cent of
the equity, it will appropriate fifty percent of investment returns and fifty per cent of the resource
rent. The vehicle used for the acquisition of the government’s share is usually a NOC. In addition
to the provision of revenue, acquisition of equity allows the government to control directly the
mining or oil operations. It is also considered as an instrument to gain experience in running
enterprises.
Africa provides a number of examples. In Angola, Sonangol (the local NOC) is entitled by law to
acquire free a share of all contracting projects, once they have reached the production phase.
This means that foreign companies bear the costs of exploration, while Sonangol enters safely in
the projects, regulated by production sharing agreements, once the exploration stage is completed
(AUPEC, 2009).
There are, at the same time, also disadvantages with acquisition of equity that can lead to a
reduction of the rent. In particular, when the government holds an important equity, it can be
tempted to use its power to influence corporate decisions according to its political needs and
orientations (for example, to overstaff the company or to accelerate the extraction rate beyond
the optimal one). A second, potentially relevant, disadvantage derives from the assignment, quite
frequent especially in developing countries, of regulatory powers to NOCs and from the possible
conflict of interest between NOC managers and government goals. Overlapping of regulatory
powers with direct operations of NOCs in Cameroon and Nigeria are illustrated in Table 4.

Production sharing arrangements
Under this very popular arrangement, a company is contracted to extract the resource and is first
refunded of all costs sustained (cost oil). The remaining product (profit oil) is shared between the
government and the company. Very often, a ceiling is imposed on the share of production
returned to the company to recover the cost in order to ensure that the government is able to
collect its revenue as soon as production is started. Non-recovered costs are carried over to
subsequent years with an interest factor.
In its simplest form, which consists of paying a fixed proportional share of the physical output, a
production sharing agreement has virtually the same effects of a specific royalty (see below). If
the share is calculated on the value of output, the sharing agreement has the same effects of an ad
valorem royalty.
Frequently, complex sharing contracts are used. For the contract could specify that the investor
retain a portion of the production to recover capital and exploration cost. Usually also the
company has to pay royalties and income tax. Royalties are deducted from production before the
sharing, while the income tax impinges on the share of the production received by the company.




                                                 21
      Table 4: Example of NRR regulatory and fiscal frameworks: Cameroon and Nigeria
                                     Cameroon                                                         Nigeria

Regulatory                                                                   Ministry of Petroleum oversees NNPC and formulates
               The Ministry of Energy and Water and the Ministry of
agencies                                                                     policy. President used to be minister of petroleum.
               Industry, Mines and Technological
                                                                             Department of Petroleum Resources (within the Ministry
               Development are responsible for the issuance of titles
                                                                             of Petroleum) allocates oil block concessions, collects
               for the extraction of minerals and oil.
                                                                             royalties, and enforces regulations (the environmental
               SNH has also wide regulatory powers
                                                                             ones included).
National Oil   SNH participates in joint ventures with total equity
Company        share of 60%. It has overall responsibility for               NNPC main operator. Has six joint ventures with IOCs,
               management of the sector and for the                          with a controlling share between 55 and 60 %.
               commercialization of the government’s share of crude          Commercializes the government’s share of crude oil.
               oil. The State has a 20% share.
Fiscal                                                                       Joint ventures between NNPC and IOCs onshore.
               Joint ventures between SNH and IOCs offshore. IOCS
regimes                                                                      NNPC provides its share of investment. Production
               have to sign PSAs.
                                                                             sharing contracts off shore
Main sources   Sale of crude oil. Land royalties and flat fees.
                                                                             Sales of crude oils and gas. Signature bonuses, royalties,
of revenue     Corporate income tax with rate of 57.5%. Production
                                                                             Petroleum profit tax with a tax rate of 85% (65,75% in
instruments    royalties with tax rate of 12.5%.
                                                                             the 5 first years of production)
Estimates of   Around US$10.7 billion or fifty-four percent of oil rent
missing        have not been disclosed or transferred to the budget and For the 2002-2011 period: 4,6 billion US$ are missing
revenues       privately appropriated by oil companies and                  from oil sales; 560 millions from signature bonuses;
               government officials during 1977 - 2006. (Gauthier and 3,027 US$ from royalties (Ribadu Report, 2012).
               Zeufac, 2009).
Structure of                                             2008                                                 2008         as %
revenue                                                                 as %
(millions of                                                                  Royalties                     5,478,000          9.1
dollars)        Total tax revenues                    321,281         17.8
                of which: Corporate                                           Profit tax                   10,961,400         18.2
                income tax                            278,357         15.4
                                                                              Signature bonuses              28,200           0.00
                Royalties and other                    42,923           2.4
                Direct transfers from                                         Sales of oil                 41,217,000         68.3
                SNH                                 1,225,909         67.8
                Other transfers from                                          Other taxes                   2,680,300          4.5
                SNH                                   259,618         14.4
                                                                              Total revenues                60,364,500         100.0
                Total revenue                      1,806,809        100,00




 Tax instruments
 Fixed fees, called also signature fees, or bonuses, are, as mentioned before, ex-ante instruments
 and consist in charging a fixed amount of money to the investor, independently of the outcome
 of the investment, or even of the making of the investment. When the government has no idea of
 the value of the actual rent and/or is totally risk averse, fixed fees could be attractive. Hence,
 these fees are more appropriate for the sale of exploration rights, rather than of exploitation
 rights. Fixed fees are very easy to administer, ensure an upfront payment in the earliest phase of
 the production process, but raise the difficult issue of determining their appropriate amount. This
 suggests that auctioning fees might be appropriate.
 Fixed fees, being one-time payments and being determined at the discretion of the government,
 present a high potential for corruption. In most countries, they are not considered and reported as
 taxes and are managed and collected by the competent sector ministry – oil and/or mines – but

                                                               22
not by the ministry of finance. Their management suffers from a considerable amount of
obfuscation.15 The practice in the DRC and Nigeria shows, for example, that the level of fees
asked for exploration blocks of similar size and potentiality can be hugely different, leading to
suspicions of mismanagement and corruption (International Crisis Group, 2012; and Michelsen
Institute, 2009).16

Specific, or ad valorem, royalties are the most popular form of taxation of natural resources.
Specific royalties are levied at a constant monetary value (for example, x dollars) per unit of
output. Ad valorem royalties are determined as a constant percentage of the value of the output.
By increasing the unit costs of extraction, royalties have distorting effects, which do not allow
the maximization of revenue for the beneficiary government.

The main advantage of royalties, and the reason for their popularity, is early timing of payments
– as soon as the production starts – and simplicity of administration. It is easy to determine the
volume of the output (for specific royalties). Ad valorem royalties require knowledge of the
market price. This can be difficult and has to be approximated, e.g. with the use of some formula.
Royalties are levied almost everywhere. Only the UK and Norway, and to some extent Canada,
have eliminated them by subsuming royalties in the income/rent taxes, as advance and deductible
payments. However, even royalties are not fraud proof: measuring physical production can be
easily subject to manipulation: meters can be tempered, and losses can take place between the oil
well or the mine and the shipping point (EITI, 2006).
Levying an income/profit tax with a higher-than-normal rate is less distorting than royalties. In
countries where an income tax is already established, tax administration can build on this tax to
impose an additional levy on natural resources. The higher than normal rate can be adapted, in
principle, to the specificity of the project; as a consequence, it can generate greater revenue than
fees, or royalties. In practice, however, the determination of the rate raises problems. If it is too
high, the tax rate will deter investments. If too low, the government will unnecessarily forgo
revenue.
The progressive income/profit tax amounts to tax, at additional rates, additional profits calculated
as a percentage of the value of the accumulated investment.17 The burden of the progressive
profit tax can be adapted to the profitability of the project better than with the previous
instruments, thus generating larger revenue for the government. Also in this case the tax can be
superimposed on the existing profit tax, using the same rules for determining the taxable income
and the existing tax administration. It requires, however, the definition of the accumulated
investment.
The resource rent tax aims at capturing the total rent of project. There are different versions of
rent taxes, proposed by scholars and implemented in the real world. For each period, the value of
the current rent is the value of the production sold less all the opportunity costs incurred by the
firm. Cost is both current and capital. Current costs refer to inputs that are used in the same

15
   The DRC provides an amazing example of mismanagement of natural resources using upfront payments.
According to research carried out the African Progress Panel, among the mining assets that were sold to offshore
companies during 2010-12 USD 1.26 billion were lost to the public purse. This is equivalent to USD 27 per
inhabitant and to the twice the national public expenditure in education and health.
16
   The frequent mentioning of these countries is due mostly to the large availability of data and not necessarily to
their worst practices.
17
   For example, a rate of 30 percent is levied on taxable profits that amount up to 20 percent of the accumulated
investment. Profits in excess of this threshold are taxed at a rate of 40 percent.
                                                        23
period in which they are purchased. Capital costs refer to inputs that extend their use beyond the
period of acquisition. While costing of current inputs presents relatively minor problems, capital
inputs raise conceptual issues in attributing total capital costs to each period. Capital costs
consist of three different sorts: depreciation, financing costs and capital losses. Some of these
costs raise problems in the case of natural resources. To value depreciation one has to measure
the present value of future rents, which requires specifying the time-horizon and choosing a
proper discount rate.
To solve the difficulties of costing capital inputs, the theory proposes a cash flow tax. The
structure of the tax can be better illustrated when the tax is assessed with reference to a single
project, rather than to a firm. In each period of the project, the cash flow is the net value of all
real transactions of the project and is calculated by subtracting from cash receipts from sales all
expenses made for the purchase of inputs (both operating and capital). It means, for example,
that all capital costs are deducted immediately from cash receipts in the period the capital items
are purchased. There is no need to calculate depreciation, cost of finance and capital losses.
If the resulting amount is positive, a tax is levied. If the cash flow is negative, the loss is carried
forward to the next period at a rate of interest, until a cumulative positive value is attained.
Positive cash flow is taxed at the specified tax rate. Should cash flows become negative in the
future, losses are offset against future tax liabilities. Typically, with a cash flow tax there will be
no tax liability for the project (or the firm) for several years after the commencement of the
project, due to the necessary investment outlays. The cash flow tax reduces the risk to investors,
but it increases the revenue risk to government.
Administration capacity should be given a high weight in the selection of the appropriate tax
instruments, as illustrated in the next subsection 2.3. Income and resource taxes are difficult to
collect in developing countries, whose tax administration has to deal on unequal conditions with
international companies with huge experience in tax-erosion practices. However, the actual
practice is frequently at odds with these considerations, with developing countries using complex
tax instruments (see Barma, Kaiser, Tuan Minh and Viñuela, 2012). The more complex is the
tax, the lesser the transparency surrounding the operation of the tax administration and the
greater the opportunities for corrupted deals.
When production sharing agreements or other contractual instruments are used, the proceeds
from the sale of the share of oil, gas, and minerals going to government dominate in terms of size
of revenues, as reported in Table 4 with reference to Nigeria and Cameroon. Sale of oil is a
relatively simple instrument. It requires an agency, usually the national oil company, able to
organize the transport and the sale of the resources. In practice, however, sales may be made
without transparency and becomes a vehicle for theft of funds as illustrated in sub-section 2.5.

2.3. Systems for sharing revenue from natural resources among layers of government

When countries recognize the entitlement of their subnational governments to receive a share of
NRR, they have to select the instrument for the allocation. A number of overlapping fiscal
systems are available for intergovernmental sharing. Most of them apply to the producing areas
only, being applications of the origin principle.
Ideally, all rent collecting instruments are available to any level of government. The central
government is viewed, however, as better equipped to use most of them than subnational
government units. This is because of problems of capacity that in turn derive from size. Hence

                                                  24
the literature suggests to extract the rent at the central level and to make it available to sub-
national governments, when it is the case, through transfers or revenue sharing schemes (see, for
example, Ahmad and Mottu, 2003).
Separation of (own) taxes. With this system the national and the subnational governments are
entitled to levy separate (own) natural resources taxes on firms or projects located within their
jurisdiction. For example, royalties might be assigned to subnational governments, whereas
profit, or resource rent taxes are assigned to the central government. This system is typical of
federal states and it is found in the US, Argentina, Brazil, Canada and Australia. In Africa,
separation of taxes is practically unknown since the centralization of tax instruments on natural
resources is the dominant pattern.
Concurrence of taxes (tax-base sharing). The difference between this instrument and the
previous one is that in this case two, or more, levels of government use the same tax instrument.
A typical case is local surcharges on royalties. In federal countries the tax bases and the tax rates
of the surcharges can, usually, be determined freely, while in non-federal decentralized states the
tax base is nationally determined, while sub-national tax rates can be fixed within nationally
determined brackets. Again, this instrument is not in use in Africa.
Concurrency of natural resource taxes brings in vertical externalities, meaning that the overall
burden of a tax assigned concurrently to different layers of government is greater than the burden
that would arise, if the tax instrument were assigned to one level of government only. There is a
common worry in the literature that concurrency of taxes could lead to an excessive government
take – the share of the rent appropriated by the public sector – and that this could lead to a
retrenchment of investors and hence to a decrease of production. The argument is valid mostly
for royalties that are levied jointly by the central and the subnational government in a number of
countries (Otto, 2001).
Tax revenue sharing. In this system, the tax bases, the tax rates and the revenue shares are
determined by the central government and the revenue are allocated according to the principle of
origin. What each region receives is a nationally determined share of the total revenue of the tax
collected within its jurisdiction. Sharing of sales of oil has very similar characteristics, since it is
done under central government responsibility, while the proceeds can be shared among all (or a
fraction of) local government units. Nigeria provides an example of both tax and sale of oil
revenue sharing, whereby not less than 13 per cent of all revenue from natural resources has to
be allocated to the producing states (Wumi and Suberu, 2011), while all subnational
governments benefit from a varying share of oil, and non-oil, proceeds (after the deduction for
producing states).
In-kind revenue sharing (infrastructure tax credit schemes). According to this system,
subnational governments have access to a share of NRR generated within their jurisdiction via
the provision of infrastructure and services by the companies that exploit these resources, and on
the basis of an explicit national regulation.18 This is not to be confused with the common practice
followed by the producing companies of providing, on a voluntary basis, infrastructure and
services to the areas affected by their operations in order to alleviate the problems created by


18
  The most quoted example is the “Infrastructure Tax Credit Scheme” of Papua New Guinea, whereby up to 2
percent of a developer’s total tax obligation can be spent on infrastructure within the province in a given year,
providing the infrastructure is approved by the Department of Mining and Petroleum, the Provincial Government
and the Taxation Office (Andrews-Speed and Rogers, 1999).
                                                       25
their activity and to promote better relations with local communities and local governments.19 In
kind revenue is provided by firms both in developing and industrial countries and frequently it
replaces delayed or missing action by the government.20 Revenue in kind is in principle suited to
very small size governments and local informal communities, with weak administrative capacity.
In practice, however, there are frequently information problems. The provision of revenue in
kind is regulated in the framework of the production sharing agreements or similar contracts that
are usually signed between the firms and the central governments. In some cases, as in the DRC,
the central government does not provide the relevant information with the consequence that local
governments are not involved in the decision-making process and cannot monitor the execution
of projects (International Crisis Group, 2012).

          Table 5: Instruments for sharing NRR with subnational levels of government
                                    Concurrence of     Sharing of      Sharing of
                    Separation of                                                       Intergovernmental
                                    taxes (Sharing     tax and oil     revenue in
      Method          tax bases                                                           transfers out of
                                     of tax bases)      revenue           kind
                     (Own taxes)                                                               NRR
Determination      Sub national     National          National       Mostly           National
of the tax base                                                      national

Determination      Sub national     Sub national      National       Mostly           National
of the tax rates                    (within limits)                  national

Administration     Sub national     Mostly national   National       By t h e         Mostly national
                                                                     producing firm
Criterion for      Origin           Origin            Origin         Origin           Need, equity or
determination of                                                                      Other
the beneficiary
jurisdiction



Share of equity of the national oil company. With this system a share of the equity calculated
with reference to the incidence of the local reserves on total national reserves is attributed to the
local governments of the producing areas. Local governments will then be entitled to receive the
corresponding share of dividends. This system is infrequently used: an example is provided by
Brazil before the constitution of 1988, when States and Municipalities were entitled to receive a
share of equity of Petrobras corresponding to 8 percent and 2 percent of the estimated value of
newly discovered reserved of oil and gas (article 10 of Law 2.044/53).

Intergovernmental transfers based on the revenue from natural resources revenue. In a number
of countries, such as Bolivia and Colombia, a share of revenue from natural resources goes to a
national fund used for allocations to all local jurisdictions (including the producing areas).
Specific systems for transfers of revenue from natural resources to indigenous communities have
also been set up.




19
  Illustrations are provided by Filer (1995) and Labonne (1995).
20
  Sometimes, even the replacement, i.e. revenue in kind from firms is, sometimes, missing and/or delayed, as
shown by the dismal experience of the Delta River in Nigeria and of the DR Congo
(World Bank, 2008).
                                                      26
2.4. Intergovernmental sharing and the rate of exploitation of NRR
The impact of intergovernmental sharing on production is a crucial issue that is very hard to
answer in general terms. The skeptical view about sharing of NRR with subnational governments
may reflect the preoccupation, particularly popular in consumer countries that the sharing will
result in a higher government take leading to reduction in investment and production. But this is
not granted.
An excessive government is likely to result, at least according to theory, only with concurrence
of taxes and other extraction instruments between the central and the local governments. In such
a setting, concurrence will lead to vertical externalities, each level of government taking into
consideration only its needs when setting the tax rates.
When, as in Canada and other federal states, the constituents units of the federation have the
power of determining the production rate through their choice of fiscal instruments, the level of
production will depend on the difference between the discount rates of the concerned
governments. For example, if Alberta is richer than the rest of Canada, its discount rate will,
quite likely, be lower than that of Canada, leading to lower production. The booming production
of shale oil and gas in North Dakota and other American states may reflect the opposite situation,
where subnational autonomy leads to more production.
At the same time, production rates are part of national oil and mineral strategies, where the
central government has the main responsibility in all systems and where it can act to foster
national interests by using the panoply of policy instruments available to it, going from taxation,
to foreign trade and all kinds of regulatory powers. Possibly legal and fiscal regimes may matter
more than intergovernmental sharing. The concession regime used for extraction of oil in the UK
has led to a very rapid depletion of reserves, despite the full centralization of extraction and the
level of wealth of the country.
The case of indigenous communities (and of their opposition to exploration and exploitation of
natural resources) is quite different and should not be confused with intergovernmental sharing.
Here, geological hazards may really create problems, as where an exploration area overlaps with
a sacred area. But the problem will remain the same, whether a subnational government, such as
a province or a region, or the central government is legally entitled to determine the
exploration/exploitation policy.

2.5. Corruption in the extraction of the rent
We focus in this sub-section on the risks of corruption during extraction. Corruption is one of the
biggest public policy problems associated with the extraction and not only the spending of NRR.
Contractual regimes are more prone to corruption than concession regimes. To understand this
one has to think to their idiosyncratic character, being they intended to extract to the profit of the
government the maximum share of the rent that is compatible with the achievement of other
policy objectives, contractual regimes are necessarily tailored to the characteristics of individual
oil fields and mines. More specifically, the two main components of production sharing
agreements - the determination of cost oil and the payment of profit oil - are prone to corruption
on a day-by-day basis. Table 6 provides a comparison of corruption potentials built into the two
different schemes and in tax instruments.
Cost oil determination should be based on rules similar to those used for tax purposes, but
usually production-sharing agreements impose specific rules. Determination of these rules and
                                                 27
the daily control of their compliance impose an additional burden on the usually scarce
administration resources available to producing countries, especially in the developing world.
They also open avenues for corruption in consideration of the huge amount of resources
involved.21 Huge corruption possibilities reside also in the profit oil component. Not specifically
in the determination of the share, since it is the complement to cost oil, but rather corruption
opportunities reside, as illustrated above, in the selling of oil and channeling the proceeds to the
Treasurer (usually through the central bank, since most of profit oil is sold abroad). Proceeds of
sales and hence revenue depend on: a) the measurement of quantity (where the point of
measurement is of strategic importance); b) the determination of the price applied to individual
selling operations and, c) the exchange rate applied to the transactions: oil is priced in dollars,
but revenues are labelled in the national currency.
Corruption in rent extraction has a big potential of conflict generation, also from an
intergovernmental point of view, particularly when NRR are shared with the producing, but also
with the non-producing subnational governments. Corruption creates potential of conflicts also
when NRR are reserved to the central government, being concentrated to the benefit of small
circles of politicians, civil servants and public managers.
As in any other field, corruption can be kept in control by appropriate governance institutions,
starting from complete transparency over government operations. International and non-
governmental agencies have developed considerable activities in this respect in the recent years,
such as EITI or the Kimberly Process. It is crucial to have a system of checks and balances,
where there is no exclusivity of assignments in revenue extracting operations, but where, rather,
the operation of an agency is subject to control by another agency. For example, the ministry of
oil and mine cannot operate sales of crude oil and, at the same time, be responsible for their
control. One relevant implication of this argument, for example, is that the potential for
corruption originated by concentration of responsibility for extraction in only one level of
government can be mitigated by the simultaneous allocation of NRR to more than one level of
government, because this allocation creates a divergence of interests between inside the public
sector that stimulates control.




21For example in Nigeria, oil companies pay the cost of training abroad of employees of the NNPC that
will tasked also of controlling compliance and of determination of the rules. (Ribadu Report, 2012).


                                                28
                  Table 6: Where corruption takes place in the extraction of NRR

               Legal frame          Fiscal
  Stages                                               Corruption potential                    Intergovernmental impact
                  work           Instruments

                                                                                         Decentralized governments have
              Awarding of
                                                                                         higher stakes in the process,
              license:
                                                                                         particularly on environmental issues.
              establishes area
                                 Signature      Very high because of discretion of       But may lack skills and suffer from
Exploration   and duration of
                                 bonuses        authorities                              local capture. Information at the local
              process and
                                                                                         level may be higher, than when bonus
              environmental
                                                                                         for a remote area is paid in the capital
              constraints
                                                                                         city.
                                 Signature      Very high because of discretion of
                                                                                         Same as before.
                                 bonuses        authorities concerning their size.

                                                Relatively low, if government has        Lack of skills, mostly associated to
                                 Auction bids   the appropriate skills and knowledge     small size, is a big obstacle to local
                                                and uses appropriate procedures.         government organization of bids.

              Concessionary      Signature      High because of discretion of
Production                                                                               Same as for exploration.
              regimes            bonus          government.

                                                                                         Lack of skills, mostly associated with
                                 Corporate      Relatively high, when preferential
                                                                                         small size of government, may
                                 income tax     regime may be granted
                                                                                         facilitate corruption.

                                                Quite high especially in
                                 Royalties                                               Skills are somewhat less determinant.
                                                determination and payment.

                                 Other taxes    Same as before.                          Depends on complexity.

                                                Very high, given the stakes, the use
                                                of specific rules and the disparity of
              Production                                                                 Lack of skills, mostly associated to
                                                information between firms and
              sharing            Cost oil                                                small size of government, may
                                                government. Becomes even higher
              agreements                                                                 facilitate corruption.
                                                when NOCs are involved in joint
                                                ventures.

                                                Very high. Done usually by NOCs,
                                                sometimes with help of private
                                 Profit oil                                              Same as for cost oil.
                                                traders. Fostered by obfuscation in
                                                prices and exchange rates.

                                 Taxes          As with concessionary regimes.           Same as for concessionary regimes.

                                                Same as with profit oil in, or even
              Joint
                                 Sharing of     higher considering possible              Same as with production sharing
              ventures/equity
                                 production     collusion between NOCs and foreign       agreements.
              share
                                                firms.

                                                Same as with cost oil in production
                                 Sharing of     sharing agreements, or even higher
                                                                                         Same as above.
                                 cost           considering possible collusion
                                                between NOCs and foreign firms.



                                                           29
3. TRANSFERS TO INDIVIDUALS
Replacing governments with citizens as beneficiaries of NRR through the distribution of direct
cash transfers to them is an increasing popular suggestion by experts, especially with reference to
African countries (Gelb, 2011; Moss, 2011; Segal, 2011, Devarajan and Giugale, 2013). A
specific literature that started with Sala i Martin and Subramanian (2003) is emerging. Actual
practice is still quite small and includes only a very few cases: Alaska, Italy and Bolivia among
them. This section will review the arguments in favor and against such a proposal, and discuss
the experience of the few existing cases.

3.1. Some arguments
Some proponents of direct allocation of NRR to individuals claim that it is grounded on a
universally recognized entitlement. Wenar (2008) argues: “The fact that the people of a country
own its natural resources is part of a common-sense understanding of today’s world. It is
therefore no surprise to find that the nations of the world have embedded this fact deep within
international law” (page 15). He quotes a few constitutions, such as in Bolivia and Iraq,
prescribing that NRR “pertain to the people” and the major treaties on human, civil and political
rights which have perfectly analogous principles.22 Other proponents advance political and
economic reasons.

Accountability

Cash transfers are viewed as a mechanism for addressing government failures and even improve
the equity of the tax/expenditure combination (Devarajan and Singh, 2012). To be more precise,
these transfers would be non-conditional, at least according to all proposals and the current
limited practice of implementation. They would provide revenue to individuals, or families, that
would then decide how to allocate them between public and private services and goods.
According to many proposals (Moss, 2011, Devarajan, Le, and Raballand, 2010) transfers to
individuals would be liable to income tax, as ordinary income. This would force the central, or
the local governments in the case the transfer are paid directly by them, to build a tax
administration in order to collect part – according to the established tax rates – of the NRR
transferred. Henceforth, the state would be forced to show the (good) use of these resources and
to become more accountable to citizens. There is a huge recent literature starting with the work
of Moore (2007) on earned revenue that tries to demonstrate how the need of relying on tax
revenue improves the working of the public sector. Recent research on African countries shows
that when governments ask new taxes to their citizens and/or firms and are resisted because
taxpayers cannot see the benefits of their payments, the same governments are forced to improve
service delivery (Institute for Development Studies, 2010; Bodea and LeBas, 2013).



22 For example, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, says at article 2: “All peoples may, for
their own ends, freely dispose of their natural wealth and resources”. Similarly, Article 2 of the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights States: “All peoples shall freely dispose of their wealth and natural resources. This right
shall be exercised in the exclusive interest of the people. In no case shall a people be deprived of it.” Article 2 of the
other major human rights treaty, the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, is identical.
Similarly, Article 21 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights states: “All peoples shall freely dispose
of their wealth and natural resources. This right shall be exercised in the exclusive interest of the people. In no case
shall a people be deprived of it.”
                                                           30
Possibly, there could be some overstatement in the argument of increased accountability of
turning oil revenue into earned revenue via the income tax. In developing countries, usually only
a minority of taxpayers actually fill a tax return. This means that a majority of citizens will
receive from the state a transfer net of tax without much possibility of checking the amount
withhold and the transfer.
Other authors argue, however, that direct cash transfers by themselves would give citizens
enough of an incentive to increase transparency in the management of NRR. Even if they are not
taxed, citizens as direct beneficiaries would be more interested to monitor carefully the various
steps through which the NRR are allocated to them starting from payment of taxes and royalties
from extracting companies to the final disbursement to them.23
Devarajan and Giugale (2013) provide a basic model – that pioneers the analytical literature on
allocations to citizens – that clarifies the incentive role that direct transfers play for citizens
inducing them to scrutinize the use of NRR by governments. According to this model, once
individuals receive transfers they become better conscious of the existence of NRR and are
stimulated to oversee the provision of public goods with the aim of controlling diversion by
politicians. When NRR are substantial, direct transfers can increase the total well-being of
people, while reduced diversion can result in the provision of the same quantity of public good,
as before, while allowing at the same time for the transfers.
A similar argument has been advanced in Canada for starting the distribution of cash transfers
from the Alberta’s Heritage Fund. According to Warrack (2007), for instance, the distribution
would have enhanced public scrutiny of the management of the Fund that – in his view – had
been rather disappointing. The main goal – saving for future generations – had been practically
put aside in favor of distributions to the provincial government. Direct distribution to citizens of
the income of the Heritage Fund, as it is made with the Permanent Fund of Alaska, would have
made the advantages of the instrument clearer, and given new strength to its original purpose, i.e.
saving for future generations.

Poverty reduction
Cash transfers could have an immediate and significant economic impact on poor households
and for economic development. For example, estimates for Uganda show that with an oil
production amounting to 10 percent of GDP, a full and uniform distribution of the rent would
provide 50 US$ per year per capita. Such an amount could double the income of large families at
the bottom of the income scale. This would make a huge difference for these households,
allowing their members to increase investment in nutrition, health, education and even set up
microenterprises (Gelb and Majerowicz, 2011). The poverty reduction power of direct transfers
is constrained by the size of a country’s population. Devarajan and Giugale (2013) show that
this would be the case for Tanzania, while in Angola, Gabon and the Republic of Congo direct
transfers could be quite effective in reducing poverty, given the importance of NRR compared to
the population.



23
   One has also to consider, as a partial counter argument, the development, under the impulse of a group of
governments and of NGOs of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) aimed at insuring
transparency in all the management stages of the NRR, whose performance is considered to be satisfactory in a
number of countries and reduces the need of direct popular watch.

                                                     31
Neglect of future generations
If NRR were to be transferred directly to individuals of the present generation, one could argue
that this could be at the detriment of future generations. One could also argue that direct cash
transfers are likely to be spent only for consumption with full neglect of investment. These
objections have clearly some ground per se, but they have to be evaluated with reference to the
alternative: channeling NRR through public budgets. Here evidence does not provide cases for
the superiority of public budgets.
Hamilton, Ruta and Tajibaeva (2006), for example, compare the investment behavior in both
NRR rich and non-rich countries, and show that investment is not the dominant pattern in the
former. Their analysis is based on the estimate of what would have happened to their capital
stock if NRR rich countries had constantly followed the Hartwick rule by using their NRR for
physical investment.24
Sayne and Gillies (2011) provide Nigeria context-specific arguments against direct allocation to
individuals. They argue that cash transfers are a low value policy option for the Niger Delta, for
two main reasons. First, “while cash transfers might generate some marginal developmental
gains—especially over the weak record of current spending—structural obstacles to growth in
the region would limit their positive effects”. Second, “introducing transfers poses risks, above
all of violent conflict and heightened rentier politics”. However, the authors do not provide a
convincing analysis and evidence in support of their arguments, particularly on the heightened
rentier policy argument. As a matter of fact, it is hard to imagine how rentier politics could
become worse in the Niger Delta area.

Volatility
Volatility of transfers can become a serious problem in poor countries. If households become
dependable on transfers, sharp and unexpected reductions could impact heavily on their well-
being. This could also raise political problems, as it would be difficult to explain/justify


24
  The evidence they provide shows that no country with resource rents higher than 15 percent of GDP has followed
the rule. In many cases the differences are huge. For example, Nigeria, a major oil exporter, could have had a year
2000 stock of produced capital five times higher than the actual stock. The authors also remark that, if these
investments had taken place, oil would play a much smaller role in the Nigerian economy of today, with likely
beneficial impacts on policies affecting other sectors of the economy. Venezuela, another big producer, could have
four times as much produced capital. Use of NRR for consumption rather than for investment is common in
resource-rich countries, with few exceptions to the trend. This is the case of Indonesia, China, Malaysia stand out in
the group of consumption-oriented countries, while Chile and Mexico have effectively followed the Hartwick rule in
the aggregate – growth in produced capital is completely offset by resource depletion over a 30-year span. Some
countries, such as Madagascar, Cameroon, and Argentina, have invested more than their resource rents, but have
failed to maintain constant genuine investment levels of at least 5 percent of 1987 GDP (the initial year of the
observed period). Hartwick rule-non-compliant countries include also industrialized economies, such as Sweden
could that have a stock of capital 36 percent higher if it had maintained constant genuine investment levels at the
specified target. The corresponding difference for Norway is 25 percent, and for Denmark 22 percent. The generally
low capital accumulation and resource depletion level in the Nordic countries could be surprising. It shows that the
Scandinavian countries have traded off inter-generational equity against intra-generational equity, which is
reasonable to do in view of likely higher level of future GDP. Developing countries may have even more inter-
generational equity arguments than the Scandinavian countries to weigh more the present than the future
generations, although this would never imply that they are free to squander their NRR as it too frequently happens.



                                                         32
downward changes. This issue suggests the need for the creation of a stabilization fund before
the distribution starts.

3.2 Some Evidence
Alaska
The better-known scheme is the Permanent Fund of Alaska, where dividends from this oil fund
are distributed annually to Alaska residents. The dividend is paid in equal amounts to every
resident who indicates an intention to remain in the state, regardless of age. Parents receive
dividends in trust for their children. The total annual dividend is calculated as the five-year
average of the net income to the Fund. This total is then divided by the number of eligible
applicants.
For part of the 1980s, a different system was in place, according to which citizens received an
annual payment from the earnings of the fund, with the size of the payment based on the length
of residence in Alaska up to a maximum of 25 years. A one-year resident was entitled to one
share; a two-year resident to two shares, and so forth. Hence, since the size of each payment
depended upon how long a person had lived in the state, it was both an incentive to stay in the
state and a reward for long-term residents, addressing the problem of high population turnover.
The old system also gave a larger share of the wealth to older Alaskans, with a view to arriving
at an appropriate intergenerational distribution of wealth.
This previous arrangement was, however, turned down by the Supreme Court, as discriminatory.
The new policy has helped garner support for the oil fund, but has also created a strong
constituency against any reforms to Alaska’s rigid oil revenue management framework. In fact,
the fund has to receive at least 25 percent of oil revenue inflows no matter what (Goldsmith,
2002).
Despite the recourse to a five-year average in calculating the dividends, their volatility and their
size have been substantial, particularly for income of rural families. Annual dividends distributed
– reported in Table 7 – have ranged in the thirteen years of this century from a minimum of USD
845 in 2005 to a maximum of USD 3’269 in 2008, when a special allocation of USD 1’200 was
added to the ordinary one of USD 2’060 (Alaska Department of Revenue).
For a family of modest means of four, USD 5’000 in the form of four dividend checks represent
the equivalent of two or three months of regular income. Hence, one of the main impacts of the
dividend has been reduction of poverty and inequality of income distribution. As a matter of fact,
Alaska has the second lowest Gini coefficient among the American States.
Since there are no studies about how households spend their dividends, nothing much can be said
about the effect of this volatility or about the type of goods households tend to purchase with
their dividends. The timing of payments could also influence the choice between consumption
and investment. With 12 monthly payments spread over the course of the year, households may
be more tempted to use the proceeds for non-durable goods, while the present annual payment
could encourage their use for durable goods.




                                                33
   Table 7: Annual per capita dividends from the Alaska’s Permanent Fund. 1982-2012
            1982        $1,000.00 1993        $949.46      2004       $919.84

            1983        $386.15     1994      $983.90      2005       $845.76

            1984        $331.29     1995      $990.30      2006       $1,106.96

            1985        $404.00     1996      $1,130.68    2007       $1,654.00

            1986        $556.26     1997      $1,296.54    2008       $2,069.00

            1987        $708.19     1998      $1,540.88    2009       $1,305.00

            1988        $826.93     1999      $1,769.84    2010       $1,281.00

            1989        $873.16     2000       $1,963.86   2011       $1,174.00

            1990        $ 952.63    2001      $1,850.28    2012       $878.00

            1991        $931.34     2002      $1,540.76

            1992        $915.84     2003      $1,107.56

                         Source: Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation


Mongolia
A Human Development Fund (PDF) financed by mineral revenue has been set, aimed at funding
a universal child benefit scheme. In the end, however, and in response to political pressure, the
universal benefit was extended to the whole population and the HDF had to “borrow” from the
budget, as there was not enough mineral revenue to cover those transfers.

Bolivia
Bolivia is the only country in Latin America to have a universal non-contributory pension.
Introduced in 1996, the Bonosol was a social program resulting from the privatization of
Bolivia’s utility companies. It provided an annual pension of Bs1800 (then US$220) to every
man and woman over the age of 65. Even though the amount was small and the money was paid
only once a year, it had a substantial impact on the quality of the lives of the elderly. The
Bonosol is also credited to have helped generate economic activity, contributing to the incomes
of entire families, especially vulnerable children in the care of their grandparents.

The rapidly shrinking resources of the privatization fund left Bolivia no choice, however, but to
make changes to the Bonosol. In November 2007, Bolivia’s government introduced the Renta
Dignidad, moving its financing source to the hydrocarbons tax, reducing the eligible age to 60,
and increasing the amount of the pension to Bs2400 for those without any pension whilst
maintaining the amount of Bs 1,800 for those with some kind of contributory pension. Pensions
were also now paid monthly, giving the elderly a more regular and secure income source from
which to support their livelihoods and continue contributing to the family economy.
                                               34
Challenges remain, however, including how to deal with revenue volatility. The Renta
Dignidad’s funding base relies heavily on the current high international oil and gas prices. In the
case of a huge, sudden drop of prices, the central government may have to intervene to provide
the missing funds in the most difficult circumstances.

There are also problems concerning the effective payment of these transfers. Many elderly still
lack identity papers or have incorrect papers, and are not registered in the database to receive this
benefit. Furthermore, the military are currently the delivery mechanism to rural areas, something
that in the long term should be replaced with better banking infrastructure and new technologies
to ensure easy access to poor rural older people.

Italy
Italy is a modest producer of hydrocarbons. However, the incidence of nationally produced oil
and gas on domestic consumption is not negligible: about 6 percent for oil and 10 percent for
gas. A royalty is levied at a rate of 10 percent on oil and gas produced. Italian oil and gas
producing Regions and Municipalities are assigned with a share of the rent collected by the
public sector. More precisely, seven tenths of the royalty on oil and the entirety of the royalty on
gas are allocated to regional and local governments.
According to decision of 2009, the remaining three tenths of the royalties levied on shore are
channeled to a fund (Fuel Price Reduction Fund), managed by the central government, whose
proceeds are used to fund transfers to car drivers in all the producing regions.25 More
specifically, every possessor of a driving license, who is a resident of a region where its share of
the royalties amounts to more than 30 Euros per capita, will receive an electronic card
expendable at the gas stations. If the per capita entitlement is less than 30 Euros, the
corresponding sum will be channeled directly to the regional budget.
The allocation started in 2011 with reference to royalties earned in 2010. Only one region –
Basilicata – did reach the prescribed threshold of 30 Euros per capita. In order to benefit from
this transfer, one needed to be a resident of the Region Basilicata, possess a valid driving license,
and apply.26 The number of applicants is estimated to have been around 270’000 with 91 percent
applications considered as possessing the requisites.
The scheme could be criticized for its lack of equity, because it limits the range of beneficiaries
to drivers only and to its conditionality. In the Italian context, however, given the widespread
ownership of vehicles there seems to be an almost perfect overlap between adult population and
holders of a driving license.
Because of its small size (relative to the per capita income of the region), the transfer is not likely
to create problems in terms of absorptive capacity and volatility. On the other hand, also because
of its small size, the transfer has a limited effect on poverty and on the accountability for public
services: individuals being only able to make a very partial substitution of publicly provided
services with private services (Brosio and Vannini, 2011).



25The royalty has been increased from 7 to 10 percent in 2009 by Law N.99 of July 23.
26
   The allocation for 2012 has increased to 140 euros. However, its disbursement has been stopped following a
ruling of administrative court of Lazio according to which the demand coming from other two Regions claiming
their right to a share of the royalties paid to the Basilicata region has an acceptable legal ground.
                                                     35
Iran
Also Iran appears to be in the process of adopting a policy of cash transfers to individuals. In
January 2010, Iran’s Parliament adopted a law to phase out price subsidies and replace them with
universal cash transfers to the population, phased in over five years (Tabatabai, 2010). At this
stage, it is not clear, however, whether the total amount of the new transfers will be linked to oil
revenue or to the volume of past subsidies (Dominique G., R. Zytek and M. Farzin, 2011).


CONCLUSIONS
We have analyzed in this paper the problems connected with the assignment of NRR to levels of
government and to individuals. In addition to the analysis of the allocation, i.e. the spending of
NNR, we have devoted a considerable attention to the fiscal instruments for extracting the rent.
This is frequently the locus for huge mismanagement and fraud.
There is a rationale to fully compensate the (subnational government of the) producing areas for
the negative environmental, social and economic impact of production activities. In fact, sharing
NRR with subnational governments of the producing areas is the prevailing practice worldwide.
However, this impact has to be accurately measured to determine the compensatory allocation.
Assignment to all – including the non-producing – subnational governments may create
problems in view of the volatility of revenue and the low absorption capacity of small
government units. In fact, it is less frequently found worldwide, although it is increasingly used
(particularly in Latin America) as an instrument to correct inequalities deriving from allocation
of NRR to the producing areas and defuse conflicts. The problems related to the sharing with all
governments can be attenuated with the use of proper instruments.
The obfuscation that very frequently permeates the centralized process of extracting NRR
originates a number of problems, starting with corruption, and continuing with misspending and
conflict. In this regard, the allocation of NRR to all subnational levels and individuals increases
the number stakeholders and gives them incentives to exert control. This is a relevant argument
against full centralization of NRR assignment, particularly in countries with a weak capacity of
public scrutiny of government activities.
Allocation of NRR to individuals with direct transfers is not, necessarily, a full alternative, but
rather a complement to the intergovernmental allocation. This option, which is increasingly
suggested for Africa, in view of the prevailing poor governance of NRR, could increase the
welfare of citizens by increasing their scrutiny of NRR use by government. The reduction of
misspending that scrutiny implies could maintain the existing level of public goods provision
even in presence of transfers, hence providing a substantial gain.




                                                36
References
Africa Progress Panel, Equity in Extractives Stewarding Africa’s Natural Resources For All,
2013

Ahmad Ethisham and Eric Mottu, Oil Assignments: Country Experiences and Issues, Revenue
from the Oil and the Gas Sector: Issues and Country Experience”, in Fiscal Policy Formulation
and Implementation in Oil-Producing Countries, Davis, J.M:, Ossowski, R. and Fedelino A.
editors, International Monetary Fund, 2003.

Andrews-Speed, Philip and Rogers, Christopher D., Mining Taxation Issues for the Future,
Resource Policy, 25, 221-227, 1999.

Aupec, Evaluation of the Petroleum Tax and Licencing Regime of New Zealand. Final Report to
the Ministry of Economic Development. 2009.

Bardhan Pranab and Dilip Mockerjee, Decentralization, Corruption and Government
Accountability: an Overview, in S Rose Ackerman Handbook of Economic Corruption Elgar
2005.

Barma Naazneen H., Kai Kaiser, Tuan Minh Le and Lorena Viñuela, Rents to Riches? The
Political Economy of Natural Resource–Led Development, The World Bank, 2012.

Boadway Robin and Frank Flatters, The Taxation of Natural Resources. Principles and Policy
Issues. World Bank Working Papers, 1993.

Bodea Cristina and Adrienne LeBas, The Origins of Social Contracts: Attitudes toward Taxation
in Urban Nigeria, 2013

Brosio Giorgio and Juan Pablo Jiménez, The intergovernmental allocation of revenue from
natural resources: finding a balance between centripetal and centrifugal pressure. Brosio and
Jimenez (eds.), Decentralization and Reform In Latin America. Chapt. 10. Edward Elgar, 2012.

Brosio Giorgio and Aldo Vannini. The federalism of oil and environmental policy in Italy,
Politica economica 2011.

Collier, P. and A. Hoeffler, Greed and Grievance in Civil War, World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper, 2000;

Davy Aidan, Kathryn McPhail and Favian Sandoval Moreno, BPXC’s Operations in Casanare,
Colombia: Factoring social concerns into development decision-making. World Bank. Social
Development Papers, 1999.

Devarajan, Shantayanan and Marcelo Giugale, The Case for Direct Transfers of Resource
Revenues in Africa, World Bank Working Paper, 2013.




                                              37
Devarajan, Shantayanan and Raju Jan Singh, “Government Failure and Poverty Reduction in the
CEMAC” in B. Akitoby and S. Coorey (eds.) Oil Wealth in Central Africa: Policies for Inclusive
Growth, 2012, International Monetary Fund

Dominique G., R. Zytek and M. Farzin, Iran- the Chronicle of DSusidy Reform, IMF Working
pPaper, 2011

Economic Commission for Africa, Minerals and Africa’s Development. The International Study
Group Report on Africa’s Mineral Regime, 2011.

EITI Secretariat, Sub-National Implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative Issue Paper, May 2006 .

Fearon James and David D. Laitin. Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War, American Political
Science Review 97, 1 pp.75-90. 2003.

Filer Colin, Participation, Governance and Social Impact: the Planning of the Lihir Gold Mine,
Mining and Mineral Resource Policy Issues in Asia- Pacific. Prospects for the 21st Century,
Australian National University, Canberra, 1995.

Gaitan, Laura, Mario Martinez, Paulo Perez, Fabio Velasquez, El sector extractivo en
Colombia, Fundacion Foro Nacional por Colombia, Revenue Watch, 2011.

Garnaut, Ross, Mining. Dilemmas of Governance, Mining and Mineral Resource Policy Issues
in Asia-Pacific. Prospects for the 21st Century, Australian National University, Canberra, 1995.

Garnaut Ross and A. Clunies Ross, Uncertainty, risk aversion and the taxing of natural resource
projects, Economic Journal, Vol. 85, pp.278-87, 1975.

Gauthier Bernard and Albert Zeufack, Governance of oil revenue in Cameroon, Oxcarre
Research Paper, 2009.

Gelb Alan and Stephanie Majerowicz. Oil for Uganda – or Ugandans ? Can Cash Transfers
Prevent the Resource Curse? Center for Global Development, 2011.

Goldsmith Scott. The Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend: An Experiment in Wealth Distribution
2002.

Hamilton Kirk, Giovanni Ruta and Liaila Tajibaeva. Capital Accumulation And Resource
Depletion: A Hartwick Rule Counterfactual. Environmental & Resource Economics. 34:517–
533. 2006.

Hartwick, J. M. Intergenerational Equity and the Investing of Rents from Exhaustible Resources,
American Economic Review 66, 972–974. 1977.

Heaps Terry and John Helliwell, The Taxation of Natural Resources, Auerbach A. J. and
Feldstein M., (Eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. I, North Holland, 1985.

                                              38
Kolstad, Ivar and Tina Soreide, Corruption in natural resource management: Implications for
policy makers. Resources Policy, 34, 214-226, 2009

Government of Nigeria, Report of the Petroleum Revenue Special Task Force (Ribadu Report),
Lagos August 2012.

International Crisis Group, Black Gold in the Congo: Threat to Stability or Development
Opportunity? 2012.

Institute for Development Studies, An upside down view of governance, University of Sussex,
2010).
Labonne Beatrice, Community and Mineral Resources: from Adversarial Confrontation to Social
Development through Participation, Accountability and Sustainability, Mining and Mineral
Resource Policy Issues in Asia- Pacific. Prospects for the 21stCcentury, Australian National
University, Canberra, 1995.

Lin. Fan. C, and Daniel Triesman, Political decentralization and corruption: Evidence from
around the world, Journal of Public Economics, Vol.93, Issues 1-2, p.14-34, 2009.

Mc Neish John-Andrew, Sobre Maldiciones y demonios: Hidrocarburos y soberania, Umbrales,
VOL. 20 PP. 189-222, 2010.


Michelsen Institute, Reforming corruption out of Nigeria Oil, (2009)].

Melvin, N. and De Koning, R., Resources and armed conflict, SIPRI Yearbook 2011:

Moore Mick, How does Taxation Affects the Quality of Government? Institute of Development
Studies, 2007.

Morrison Karl, Paolo Omar Cerutti, Phil René Oyono, Matthew Steil, Broken Promises: Forest
Revenue- Sharing in Cameroon, World Resources Institute, 2009.
Moss, T. Oil to Cash: Fighting the Resource Curse through Cash Transfers. Center for Global
Development, Working Paper 237, 2011.

Nellor, David, Sovereignty and Natural Resource Taxation in Developing Countries, 1987.

O’Fairceallaigh, Indigenous people and mineral taxation regimes, Resource Policy, Vol. 24, pp.
187-94, 1998.

Oshoniebo Evaristus, Fiscal regimes for natural resource extraction: implications for Africa's
development, Natural resource investment and Africa’s Development edited by Francis
Botchway, Eward Elgar, 2011.

Otto James (Editor). Taxation of Mineral Enterprises, Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic Publisher,
1995.
                                             39
Otto, James. Fiscal Decentralization and Mining Taxation. Washington. World Bank Group
Mining Department, 2001.

Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson, Explaining Leakage of Public Funds, CEPR Discussion
Papers 3227, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers. 2002

Robinson, J.A., Torvik, R. Verdier, T. Political foundations of the resource curse. Journal of
Development Economics 79, 447–468.2006.

Rose-Ackerman, S. Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences and Reform.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.1999.

Ross, M., A closer look at oil, diamonds, and civil war, Annual Review of Political Sciences,
2006,

Ryggvik, Helge, The Norwegian Oil experience: a toolbox for managing resources. Centre for
technology, innovation and culture. Oslo, 2010.

Sachs, J.D., Warner, A.M. The curse of natural resources. European Economic Review 45, 827–
838. 2001.

Sanguinetti, Pablo, Canon Minero y Decisiones Fiscales Subnacionales en el Perú, Corporacion
Andina De Fomento, 2010.or
l
Sayne Aaron and Alexandra Gillies. The Prospects for Cash Transfers in the Niger Delta: A
Skeptical View, Center for Global Development, 2011.
Scott, Anthony, Who should get Natural Resources Revenue? A. Scott (Ed.), Natural Resource
Revenues: A Test of Federalism, Vancouver: The University of British Columbia Press, 1975.

Segal, Paul. How to Spend It: Resource Wealth and the Distribution of Resource Rents
     Research Paper, University of Sussex and Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, 2011.

Shah, Anwar. Corruption and Decentralized Public Governance. World Bank. Policy Research
working papers. 2006.

Soares de Oliveira, Ricardo, Oil and Politics in the Gulf of Guinea, Columbia University Press,
2007.
State of Alaska Department of Revenue, Permanent Fund Dividend Division www.alaska.gov.
Sunley Emil and Thomas Baunsgaard, The Tax Treatment of the Mining Sector: an IMF
perspective. .IMF, 2001.

Sunley Emil, Thomas Baunsgaard and Dominique Simard, Revenue from the Oil and the Gas
Sector: Issues and Country Experience, Davis, J.M, R.Ossowski, and A.Fedelino (Eds.), Fiscal
Policy Formulation and Implementation in Oil-Producing Countries, , International Monetary
Fund, 2003.
                                               40
Sunnevåg K, Designing Auctions for offshore petroleum lease allocation, Resources Policy, 26,
3-16, 2000.

Vale Columbia Center, Fiscal Reforms in the Oil Sector Since the 90's Highlighting Introduction
of Progressive Fiscal Elements, 2012.

Warrack Allan, Wither a heritage Fund Public Dividend Policy?, R. Roach (editor), Alberta’s
Energy Legacy: Ideas for the Future, Canada West Foundation, 2007

Wenar Leif. Property Rights and the Resource Curse, Philosophy & Public Affairs (n. 1.) 2008.

World Bank. Niger Delta Social and Conflict Analysis. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
2008.
World Bank, When do Participatory Development Projects Work? 2012.

Wumi Iledare and Rotimi Suberu, Nigeria, Oil and Gas, George Anderson (Ed.), Federal
Systems, Oxford University Press, 2011.




                                              41
