                                                                                                   90261




                              10th ICP 2011 Executive Board Meeting

                                     January 24, Washington DC

                                          Minutes of Meeting

The 10th meeting of the International Comparison Program (ICP) 2011 Executive Board took place on
January 24, 2014, at the World Bank in Washington DC to: (i) confirm the due diligence undertaken for
the ICP 2011; (ii) ensure quality global results; and (iii) agree upon an action plan towards the release of
the final global results. As per the agenda shown in Annex 1, meeting discussions related to: (i) report
from the Global Office on activities since the 9th Executive Board; (ii) ICP 2011 preliminary global
results; and (iii) release of the ICP 2011 final global results. In attendance were Board members,
observers, and ICP Global Office staff as listed in the attached list of participants in Annex 2.


0.   Opening Remarks, Adoption of the Agenda and Approval of the Minutes of Last
     Meeting
Martine Durand, Chair of the Executive Board, welcomed the Board members and observers to the
meeting. The Chair introduced Haishan Fu, the new Director of the World Bank Development Data
Group, and welcomed Paul McCarthy and Fred Vogel, Technical Advisory Group Chair and Co-Chair, as
well as Mohanna A Al-Mohanna and Katherine Wallman who, like Paul McCarthy and were connected
remotely from Saudi Arabia, USA and Australia respectively.
The Chair invited Board members to adopt the agenda and the minutes from the ninth meeting of the
Executive Board held on October 30, 2013 in Washington, DC. Both documents were adopted by the
Board. It was clarified that, in the minutes of the ninth meeting of the Executive Board the evaluation will
be conducted by the “Friends of the United Nations Statistical Commission Chair”.


1.   Report from the Global Office on Activities since the 9th Executive Board
Michel Mouyelo-Katoula, ICP Global Manager, briefed attendees on the Board decisions, actions taken
and the ICP meetings held since its last meeting on October 30, 2013.
Michel reviewed the findings from the Special Task Force efforts undertaken in December 2013 as well
as the findings from the Ad-Hoc Data Review Meeting that was held in January 2014. The Chair and the
Global Office apologized for the oversight of not inviting a representative from India’s Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation to attend the Ad-Hoc Data Review Meeting in Paris, France.
Technical issues raised by various Board members and the actions taken towards quality-assurance were
addressed in depth. The issues specifically encompassed the following: (i) the possibility of including
China as a singleton country; (ii) using the additional prices collected by China for the global core list;

                                                     1
(iii) inconsistency in simulation findings; (iv) findings of the high-level mission to China in October
2012; (v) use of importance indicators and weights; (vi) change of the linking methodology from 2005;
(vii) change of the construction methodology from 2005; (viii) using construction mark-ups; and (ix)
changes in applying productivity adjustment from 2005. The improvement of validation processes and
documentation in the ICP 2011 from the 2005 round was highlighted as were the findings of the
simulations completed to ensure quality results.
The TAG Chair and Co-Chair reviewed the approaches followed by the TAG to reach their decisions. On
the TAG membership, it was clarified that the TAG is comprised of experts and is not a body of
regional/country representatives. All TAG members were approved by the Board through the formal
process.
The ICP Global Office demonstrated the efforts taken during the ICP 2011 to document all steps by
displaying the ICP 2011 website, which contains various methodological and operational materials
including the ICP Book and Operational Guide.  
Overall, there was strong support of the innovation, credibility, transparency and integrity of the ICP
2011. They agreed that the due diligence and depth of work conducted since the 9th Executive Board
diligently ensures the quality of ICP estimates. Many members indicated that users were keen to see the
estimates released as some had been unhappy with the delay of releasing the preliminary estimates. It was
noted that some policy relevant applications of the ICP had been missed due to this delay and this was
leading to challenges of the program’s relevance and credibility.
China’s National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) expressed gratitude for the efforts done to address issues
they raised at the last Board meeting, in part through the work of the Special Task Force. NBS stated that
much progress was made through the explanations and simulations provided by the Global Office over
the past two months. NBS reiterated the particular challenges of ICP estimation for large and fast-growing
economies like China, especially on the difference between the extrapolated results versus the preliminary
2011 results. NBS would appreciate further explanation to help in their dialogue with policy-makers, but
confirmed their data would be used in the ICP 2011 round. The Board agreed that dialogue was the
correct approach for handling China's remaining issues. The scope and evolution of this dialogue should
be reported to the Board as part of the ICP's commitment to transparency.
India’s Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation summarized the issues in their letter sent to
the Board and stressed efforts needed to be redoubled to ensure the principles of the ICP – credibility,
transparency and integrity – as well as the TAG membership were maintained through the conclusion of
the round. The Board recognized that the ICP 2011 round is innovative and grew from a simple research
product to a global official statistics product and, therefore, the extent to which ICP estimates are
applicable to various policy uses should be documented and communicated to users.
The Board acknowledged that a difference between the 2005 extrapolated results in comparison to the
2011 preliminary results should be expected from a technical aspect. The limitations of ICP 2005 as well
as the explanation of methodology changes must be provided to users. Risk management and response to
future crisis and complex issues were noted for consideration in the evaluation of the ICP 2011.
The Chair reiterated that the consensus view was that much due diligence had been done. To further boost
the transparency of the process, the Chair indicated that decisions taken through the remainder of the
round, descriptions of the limitations of the results to specific policy application, innovations, and

                                                    2
procedures must be explained and documented. The final results will be circulated to the Board together
with supporting technical documentation ahead of the 11th Executive Board meeting, which will take
place in New York on March 2, 2014. The requested documentation is a set of six notes related to: (i)
Global validation; (ii) Impact of new 2011 linking methods at BH level (GCL) and above (CAR); (iii)
Approach for Linking Housing; (iv) Construction approach and markups; (v) Use of importance
indicators/ weight in linking; and (vi) Use of productivity adjustment in linking.

Upon completion of the March 2 Board meeting, the ICP's efforts should shift to finalizing
communication and outreach strategies.

Decision 1.
        The Board agreed that the due diligence and depth of work conducted since the 9th
        Executive Board diligently ensures the quality of ICP estimates, but stressed that the final
        stages of the ICP 2011 must be as transparent as possible. As such, they requested
        additional technical documentation in the form of six notes to be circulated to the Board
        together with the final results ahead of the 11th Executive Board meeting. The Global
        Office would quickly circulate an outline of each of the six notes that should be made
        available for transparency purposes, for Board members to provide feedback.



2.   ICP 2011 Preliminary Global Results
Nada Hamadeh, Senior Statistician and Team Leader, explained the computation process conducted by
the PPP Computation Task Force and the findings of the preliminary global results, which were circulated
to Board members in January 2014. An overview of the 2011 preliminary results included the ten largest
economies by nominal and real 2011 GDP share as well as the economies with the highest and lowest real
GDP per capita. It was noted that differences exist between GDP volume growth rates as measured by the
time series national accounts and as implied by PPP benchmarks.
It was noted that more details on the current results would be shared promptly with the minutes of the 10 th
Board meeting, while the final results would be circulated to Board members on February 25, 2014 ahead
of the 11th Executive Board meeting. The Results Review Group would also continue their efforts on
reviewing the data and processes to ensure quality results.
China NBS reaffirmed their commitment and participation in the ICP program by indicating they will
allow the Global office and the Regional Coordinator in Asia to use China’s data to compute the regional
and global results.
The Chair stated that NBS would affirm whether China would be included as official estimates in the ICP
2011 results at the March 2, 2014 meeting once they are able to review the final results.
Decision 2.
        The Board concurred that the NBS would inform the Board about their position on the
        release of China’s results in the ICP 2011 results before or at the March 2, 2014 meeting
        once they are able to review the final results.




                                                     3
3.   Release of the ICP 2011 Final Global Results
Nada reviewed the general action plan and timetable towards the release of the final global results.
Discussion focused on the open dialogue and steps necessary to address all remaining concerns in order to
move forward. Given that much material would need to be circulated to meet the earlier requests for
information and transparency, the Chair proposed to release the final results and final report
simultaneously in early June 2014. The change in the release date will provide for more time to finalize
the communication strategy and implement it between March 2 and June 2014.
There was an agreement at the meeting that regional comparisons (except the Asian comparison) could
release their regional results before the June 2014 release of the global results, if they so wish. Asia can
release their regional results after the March 2, 2014 Board meeting, once NBS's position on the release of
China’s results in the ICP 2011 results has been clarified.
It was agreed that a detailed outline of the report and tables would be shared with the Board at their
meeting on March 2, 2014. The major milestones until publication included those listed in the table
below.


Table 1. Major Milestones until Publication

                            Milestones                            Jan          Feb       Mar       Apr   May   Jun
                                                                  15-24
Submission of final regional results                                      24


10 th Executive Board meeting
                                                                               15


Final results computed by Computation Task Force
                                                                                    25



Final results circulated to the Executive Board

11 th Executive Board meeting
                                                                                         2
                                                                                             3-7




ICP status report at the 45 th UNSC

Finalization of the 2011 ICP Global Report

Release of 2011 ICP Global Results and Final Report

Decision 3.
        The Board agreed to delay release of the final ICP 2011 results and final report
        simultaneously in early June 2014. Regional comparisons (except the Asian comparison)
        could release their regional results before the June 2014 release of the global results, if
        they so wish. Asia can release their regional results after the March 2, 2014 Board
        meeting, once NBS's position on the release of China’s results in the ICP 2011 results
        has been clarified.




                                                      4
4.   Meeting Decisions
Martine summarized the decisions made during the meeting and provided closing remarks. In summary,
the meeting decided on the following points:
        The Board agreed that the due diligence and depth of work conducted since the 9 th Executive
         Board diligently ensures the quality of ICP estimates, but stressed that the final stages of the ICP
         2011 must be as transparent as possible. As such, they requested additional technical
         documentation in the form of six notes to be circulated to the Board together with the final results
         ahead of the 11th Executive Board meeting. The Global Office would quickly circulate an outline
         of each of the six notes that should be made available for transparency purposes, for Board
         members to provide feedback.
        The Board concurred that the NBS would inform the Board about their position on the release of
         China’s results in the ICP 2011 results before or at the March 2, 2014 meeting once they are able
         to review the final results.
        The Board agreed to delay release of the final ICP 2011 results and final report simultaneously in
         early June 2014. Regional comparisons (except the Asian comparison) could release their
         regional results before the June 2014 release of the global results, if they so wish. Asia can
         release their regional results after the March 2, 2014 Board meeting, once NBS's position on the
         release of China’s results in the ICP 2011 results has been clarified.




                                                      5
Annex 1. Agenda




                         10th ICP 2011 Executive Board Meeting

                                       Agenda
                              World Bank, Washington, DC
                                   January 24, 2014


08:30-09:00   Check-in & Breakfast


09:00-09:15   Welcome and Opening Remarks


09:15-09:30   Adoption of the Agenda and Approval of the Minutes of Last Meeting
              The Board is invited to adopt the agenda and approve the minutes of the 9th Executive
              Board meeting, held in Washington, DC on October 30, 2013.


09:30-11:00   Report from the Global Office on Activities since the 9th Executive Board
              Meeting
              The Board is invited to express its views on the due diligence and depth of work that
              was undertaken since the 9th Board meeting to ensure the quality of estimates.


11:00-11:15   Coffee


11:15-12:30   Report from the Global Office on Activities since the 9th Executive Board
              Meeting (continued)


12:30-14:00   Lunch hosted by DECDG Director, World Bank


14:00-15:00   ICP 2011 Preliminary Global Results
              The Board is invited to review and discuss the preliminary global results that were
              circulated to Board members in January 2014.


15:00-15:30   Release of the ICP 2011 Final Global Results
              The Board will discuss the action plan and timetable towards the release of the final
              global results.


15:30-16:00   Other Business and Concluding Remarks

                                              6
Annex 2. List of Participants

  #             Participant                 Organization                       Status
      1 Douglas Brooks           Asian Development Bank            Member
      2 Charles Leyeka Lufumpa   African Development Bank          Member
      3 Babakar Fall             ANSD, Senegal                     Member
      4 Michael Davies           Australian Bureau of Statistics   Observer
      5 Weiqun Du                NBS China                         Observer
      6 Yangwei Li               NBS China                         Observer
      7 Yuncheng Zhao            NBS China                         Observer
      8 Andrey Kosarev           CIS-STAT                          Observer
      9 Francois Lequiller       Eurostat                          Member
  10 Paul Konijn                 Eurostat                          Observer
  11 Louis Marc Ducharme         IMF                               Member
  12 Kimberly Dale Zieschang     IMF                               Observer
  13 Rafael Possé Fragoso        INEGI, Mexico                     Observer
  14 T.C.A. Anant                MOSPI, India                      Member
  15 G M Boopathy                MOSPI, India                      Observer
  16 Martine Durand              OECD                              Chair
  17 Francette Koechlin          OECD                              Observer
  18 Vasily Kuznetsov            Rosstat, Russia                   Observer
  19 Mohanna A Al-Mohanna        Saudi Arabia                      Member (connected via phone)
  20 Craig Kuntz                 Statistics Canada                 Observer
  21 Pali Lehohla                Statistics South Africa           Member
  22 Paul McCarthy               TAG Chair                         Observer (connected via phone)
  23 Fred Vogel                  TAG Co-Chair                      Observer
  24 Pascual Gerstenfeld         UN-ECLAC                          Member
  25 Giovanni Savio              UN-ECLAC                          Observer
  26 Juraj Riecan                UN-ESCWA                          Member
  27 Katherine Wallman           United States OMB                 Member (connected via phone)
  28 Ivo Havinga                 UNSD                              Member
  29 Jim Thomas                  US BLS                            Observer
  30 Haishan Fu                  World Bank                        Member
  31 Grant Cameron               World Bank                        Observer
  32 Michel Mouyelo-Katoula      World Bank                        Observer
  33 Nada Hamadeh                World Bank                        Observer
  34 Yuri Dikhanov               World Bank                        Observer
  35 Marko Rissanen              World Bank                        Observer


                                                7
#         Participant               Organization              Status
36 Biokou Mathieu Djayeola   World Bank            Observer
37 Virginia Romand           World Bank            Observer
38 Morgan Brannon            World Bank            Observer




                                          8
