                                                                                                    90263




                              11th ICP 2011 Executive Board Meeting

                                    March 2, 2014 New York, NY

                                          Minutes of Meeting

The 11th meeting of the International Comparison Program (ICP) 2011 Executive Board took place on
March 2, 2014, at the ONE UN Hotel in New York, NY to: (i) review and discuss the final ICP 2011
global results; (ii) provide feedback on the outline of the ICP 2011 final report; and (iii) determine a date
for publication of the ICP 2011 final global results. The meeting agenda is listed in Annex 1. In
attendance were Board members, observers, and secretariats of the ICP Global Office as recorded in the
list of participants in Annex 2.


0.   Opening Remarks, Adoption of the Agenda and Approval of the Minutes of Last
     Meeting
Martine Durand, Chair of the Executive Board, welcomed the Board members and observers to the
meeting while emphasizing the goal of publishing final ICP 2011 results and the final report as early as
possible.
The Chair invited Board members to adopt the agenda and the minutes from the 10th meeting of the
Executive Board held on January 24, 2014 in Washington, DC. Both documents were adopted by the
Board.


1.   ICP 2011 Global Results
Michel Mouyelo-Katoula, ICP Global Manager, reviewed the Board decisions made at the 10th meeting
and the subsequent actions taken. Michel reminded the Board of the computation process, noting that the
results have converged and may undergo one final wave of calculation prior to the release of the results.
A thorough examination was conducted by the Results Review Group who also reviewed the
methodological changes between the ICP 2005 and 2011 results. The findings of the Results Review
Group as well as the six technical notes requested by the Board in January, and final ICP 2011 results
were circulated to the Board prior to the meeting.
Tables and graphs were displayed which covered the following: GDP shares for the largest twelve
economies; GDP per capita for the highest and lowest ten countries; regional average expenditures per
capita; GDP regional shares; and regional average price level indices.
Martine captured the broad overview of the results and reiterated that there was convergence after a
number of rounds of computation. Simulations were done to analyze the various assumptions and changes


                                                     1
between the 2005 and 2011 benchmarks. It was clarified that marginal adjustments would be made prior
to publication, but nothing further would significantly change the results.
Board members were asked to express their views on whether they were satisfied with the additional
information provided in the six technical notes and to comment on the ICP 2011 results.
Regarding the latter, the National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBS) stated their position as follows:
     1. China has no objection if the World Bank/Asia Development Bank uses China’s data collected
        and submitted for the 2011 ICP so as to facilitate the existing compilation activities.
     2. As China is not totally assured of the methodological soundness of the ICP, China does not agree
        to the release of China’s headline results based on the data collected and submitted for the 2011
        ICP. However, if the World Bank/Asia Development Bank releases estimates, whatever the
        methods being used, notes shall be made that the results are produced by the World Bank/Asia
        Development Bank but are not recognized by the NBS as official statistics.
     3. China has no objection if the World Bank/Asia Development Bank releases China’s results at
        detailed levels which are estimated on the basis of China’s ICP data of the 2011 round and may
        appear in texts, tables, graphs, annexes or China chapter(s). However, notes shall be made that
        they are not recognized by the NBS as official statistics.
     4. The NBS requests the World Bank/Asia Development Bank to send the draft reports, before their
        release, to the NBS for comments on the texts, tables, graphs and notes which are associated with
        China’s results.
The Board welcomed the fact that China is not opposed to using their data and expressed its appreciation
for their statement. The Board acknowledged the difficulty in capturing the structural change that China
was undergoing and confirmed that NBS’ position would be upheld. The Board was reminded that ICP
2011 results are official statistics produced by the program and by any individual national statistical
office.
Overall, the Board appreciated the manner in which the results were shared for review and agreed that
conceptual issues would require improvements over time. Documentation should allow for users to better
understand the figures, analyses and limitations. The Board endorsed the results as satisfactory and ready
for release. The Board expressed gratitude to all of the participants including countries, Regional
Coordinators, the Global Office and all of the governance groups involved in the ICP 2011 round. It was
requested that the work of the countries and National Statistical Offices be acknowledged in the final
report.
Decision 1.
         The Board endorsed the ICP 2011 results and agreed that they are ready for being
         published with the appropriate reservation comments expressed by China to be attached
         to some specific numbers.



2.   Release of the ICP 2011 Final Global Results and Final Report
Martine proposed a two-stage release to enable the results to be shared publicly as soon as possible. The
first stage would involve a summary release of the results above the analytical level accompanied by key

                                                     2
documentation. The second stage would be the full release of ICP 2011 results with the final report at a
later time. The Board endorsed the proposed two-staged approach for releasing the results with
appropriate accompanying both releases.

Haishun Fu, DECDG Director, suggested that the first stage be released on April 30, 2014 followed by
the second stage on June 5, 2014, as shown in Table 1.

Decision 2.

        The Board agreed to a two-step approach for releasing the ICP 2011 global results.
        Summary results along with key documentation will be released on April 30, 2014,
        followed by a comprehensive report that will include the full set of results and more
        comprehensive documentation in the summer of 2014.


Nada Hamadeh, Senior Statistician and Team Leader, outlined the sections to be covered in the ICP 2011
final report and presented items for consideration to ensure that sufficient documentation would be
available and would meet users’ needs. It was noted that an additional chapter would be needed on how
PPPs could be used by countries.

The outline of the ICP 2011 final global report was endorsed by the Board. It was clarified that
imputations for the non-participating countries in the aggregate data would be included in the summary
release of results. In the uses and users sections, a section regarding the limitations of PPP uses for
poverty analysis would also be incorporated into the final report. The Board was reminded that the SNA
93 was adopted at the inception of the program, as the reference framework for GDP estimation and
splitting. The Board was also reminded that any PPP revisions would abide by the ICP revision policy
adopted by the Board. Suggestions were made to include frequently asked questions as well as a foreword
in the ICP 2011 Final Report that concentrates on the value of the ICP as well as capacity building and
training to provide more than the technical aspects, which would be signed on behalf of the Board.

As a result of the decision to release the results in two stages, the Global Office indicated that they would
circulate an outline of the summary results to the Board in March 2014 and the revised outline of the full
report by June 2014; obtain suggestions for frequently asked questions from the Board and Regional
Coordinators, especially regarding the comparison between 2005 and 2011 results; and make all
communications available to Regional Coordinators for them to release the global results at the regional
level.

Decision 3.
        The Board endorsed the outline of the ICP 2011 final global report that incorporates the
        suggestions made by the Board. Outlines of the summary results as well as the full report
        will be circulated to the Board prior to their release. The Global Office will obtain
        suggestions for frequently asked questions from the Board and Regional Coordinators.
        Additionally, communications will be made available to Regional Coordinators for them
        to release global results at the regional level.




                                                     3
Table 1. Major Milestones until Publication

                            Milestones                        Jan   Feb   Mar    Apr    May   Jun    Jul

11 th Executive Board meeting




                                                                          2
                                                                           3-7
ICP status report at the 45 th UNSC




                                                                                   30
Release of ICP 2011 Summary Global Results

Finalization of the ICP 2011 Global Report




                                                                                              5
Release of the ICP 2011 Global Report




3.   Meeting Decisions
Martine reiterated the decisions made during the meeting and provided closing remarks. In summary, the
meeting decided on the following points:
     •   The Board endorsed the ICP 2011 results and agreed that they are ready for being published with
         the appropriate reservation comments expressed by China to be attached to some specific
         numbers.
     •   The Board agreed to a two-step approach for releasing the ICP 2011 global results. Summary
         results along with key documentation will be released on April 30, 2014, followed by a
         comprehensive report that will include the full set of results and more comprehensive
         documentation in the summer of 2014.
     •   The Board endorsed the outline of the ICP 2011 final global report that incorporates the
         suggestions made by the Board. Outlines of the summary results as well as the full report will be
         circulated to the Board prior to their release. The Global Office will obtain suggestions for
         frequently asked questions from the Board and Regional Coordinators. Additionally,
         communications will be made available to Regional Coordinators for them to release global
         results at the regional level.




                                                    4
Annex 1. Agenda




                        11th ICP 2011 Executive Board Meeting

                                     Agenda
                             World Bank, New York, NY
                                   March 2, 2014


08:30-09:00   Check-in & Breakfast


09:00-09:15   Welcome and Opening Remarks


09:15-09:30   Adoption of the Agenda and Approval of the Minutes of Last Meeting


09:30-11:00   ICP 2011 Global Results

11:00-12:30   Release of the ICP 2011 Final Global Results and Final Report

12:30-13:00   Other Business and Concluding Remarks




                                          5
Annex 2. List of Participants

  #              Participant               Organization                         Status
      1 Douglas Brooks          Asian Development Bank            Member
      2 Chellam Palanyandy      Asian Development Bank            Observer
      3 Oliver Chinganya        African Development Bank          Observer
      4 Babakar Fall            ANSD, Senegal                     Member
      5 Peter Harper            Australian Bureau of Statistics   Observer
                                Brazilian Institute of
      6 Marcia Quintslr                                           Observer
                                Geography and Statistics
      7 Xu Xianchun             NBS China                         Observer
      8 Zhao Yuncheng           NBS China                         Observer
      9 Di Wei                  NBS China                         Observer
  10 Vladimir Sokolin           CIS-STAT                          Member
  11 Andrey Kosarev             CIS-STAT                          Observer
  12 Larus Nørlund              Eurostat                          Member
  13 Kimberly Dale Zieschang    IMF                               Observer
  14 Eduardo Sojo               INEGI, Mexico                     Member
  15 François Coute             INSEE, France                     Member
  16 T.C.A. Anant               MOSPI, India                      Member
  17 Martine Durand             OECD                              Chair
  18 Egorenko Sergey            Rosstat, Russia                   Observer
  19 James Tebrake              Statistics Canada                 Observer
  20 Olav L. Jones              Statistics Norway                 Member
  21 Mohanna A Al-Mohanna       Statistics Saudi Arabia           Member
  22 Pali Lehohla               Statistics South Africa           Member
  23 Imelda Atai Musana         Uganda Bureau of Statistics       Observer
  24 Pascual Gerstenfeld        UN-ECLAC                          Member
  25 Giovanni Savio             UN-ECLAC                          Observer
  26 Juraj Riecan               UN-ESCWA                          Member
  27 Majed Skaini               UN-ESCWA                          Observer
  28 Ivo Havinga                UNSD                              Member
  29 Jim Thomas                 US BLS                            Observer
  30 Haishan Fu                 World Bank                        Member
  31 Grant Cameron              World Bank                        Secretariat
  32 Michel Mouyelo-Katoula     World Bank                        Secretariat
  33 Nada Hamadeh               World Bank                        Secretariat
  34 Morgan Brannon             World Bank                        Secretariat



                                               6
