                                                                                                        90289

    Human Capital Flight: Stratification, Globalization and the Challenges to
                        Tertiary Education in Africa*
                                                 By B.J. Ndulu

1. Introduction: Why the concern with human capital flight from Africa?

A recent remark by the Geneva-based International Organization for Migration (IOM), captioned
“ African brain drain robs continent of future” perhaps best captures the sentiment on the human
capital outflow from the region. The remark asserts that the brain drain of highly skilled
professionals from Africa to overseas opportunities is making economic growth and poverty
alleviation an almost impossible task across the continent. Recent meetings of the Heads of State
of the Southern African Development Community and the meeting of the Association of African
Central Banks (August 2001) echoed similar sentiments.


Africa is a capital scarce region and loss of this limited resource is widely considered detrimental
to the prospects of sustained growth and development. The concerns about loss of African capital
have to date largely focused on the flight of financial wealth from the region. Investment in
Africa remains low even by developing countries’ standards, at the same time that valuable own
private capital, estimated at nearly 40% of the Africa’s private wealth, has left the continent in
search of safer havens elsewhere. Independent estimates show that in 1990 Africans held up to
$360 billion or 40 percent of their wealth outside the region. This was equivalent to the size of
Africa’s debt or 90 percent of GDP. This high capital flight compares unfavorably with just 6
percent of East Asian wealth and 10 percent for Latin America being held outside of their
respective regions (Collier, Hoeffler and Patillo, 1999). Many of the factors that inhibit capital
inflows also motivate capital flight from Africa. There is a significant parallel to this problem on
the side of human capital.

Weakness in human capital and particularly skill deficiency is a drag on investment and growth
in Africa. Progress in overcoming shortages of skilled and trained manpower seems to be
disappointingly slow, despite substantial resources devoted by both governments and donors to
this effort during the last three decades (OED, 1994). This deficiency is sustained at the same
time that Africa is losing a very significant proportion of its skilled and professional manpower
to other markets and increasingly depending on expatriates for many vital functions.

The problem of human capital in Africa is not solely due to low level of education and training.
The region has also not been able to retain a large proportion of its skilled and professional
personnel, an issue that this paper will predominantly dwell upon. In order to obtain a correct
sense of proportion of the problem at hand, it is useful to place up front this component of
African migration in the context of overall world and African migration. Approximately 150

*
 The views expressed in this paper are attributable solely to the author and not the World Bank for which the author
works. I wish to acknowledge the able assistance of Prosper Chale, a research assistant to the Macroeconomic Unit
at the World Bank Country Office in Dar-es-Salaam.


                                                         1
million people or 4 percent of the total world population is composed of migrants. Out of these,
IOM (2000) estimates that 50 million or one third of all world migrants are Africans. It is
noteworthy that most of African migration is intra-continental and about half of the African
migrants (25 million) are either refugees (5 million) or displaced persons (20 million). Our
interest in this paper therefore concerns a very small proportion of migrants from the region i.e. -
African skilled and professional emigrants to the rest of the world.


Compared with all other regions of the world, African international migration has recorded the
fastest growth in the last three decades, raising its share in the global total from 10.6 percent in
1965 to 13.4 percent in 1990 (Zeleza, 1998). This exceeds its share in the world population of
approximately 10 percent. The estimated average number of skilled African emigrants rose from
1800 per year between 1960 and 1975 to 23,000 between 1974 and 1987 (table 1). Although
comparatively the Africa region is the smallest source of immigration to the developed world, a
high proportion of its migrants is made up of highly skilled professionals. Emigration from
Africa is therefore uncharacteristically skill-intensive.

Much as the evidence is sporadic and for most part anecdotal, one can obtain a good sense of the
magnitude of the problem from it. It has been estimated that for a number of African countries,
more than 30 percent of its highly skilled professionals are lost to the OECD countries
(Carrington and Detraciage, 1998; Haque and Aziz, 1998). Nearly 88% of adults who emigrate
from Africa to the United States have a high school education or higher (Speer,T. cited by
Zeleza, P. T ,1998). Apraku (1991) conducted a survey of African immigrants in the USA. He
found that 58 percent of the respondents had either Phds or were MDs and a further 19 percent
had Masters degrees. Out of these, 20 percent had been previously university professors in their
home countries. This compares with 40 percent for all immigrants into USA with tertiary
education. (table 2). Based on a more systematic analysis of the 1990 USA Census results, out of
128,000 African immigrants over 25 years old, 95,000 were highly educated. There are more
African scientists and engineers working in the USA than there are in Africa. The emigration of
technically skilled people has left 20,000 scientists and engineers in Africa servicing 600 million
people (IOM, 2001).

Regional averages mask the wide variation of the problem faced by individual countries. Table 3
confirms the dominance of migrants with tertiary education from a sample of 24 African
countries. The range varies from 44 to 90 percent across these countries. Anecdotal information,
impressively compiled in the paper by Paul Zeleza (1998) and the 1992 Human Development
Report, provides the flavor of variation across countries. It is estimated that there are more than
21,000 Nigerian doctors practicing in the United States alone. About 60 percent of all Ghanaian
doctors trained locally in the 1980s left the country (According to UNDP’s 1992 Human
Development Report). In Sudan, 17% of doctors and dentists, 20% of university lecturers, 30%
of engineers and 45% of surveyors have gone to work abroad. South Africa has lost 25% of its
graduates to the USA alone. Moreover, South Africans account for 9.7% of all international
medical graduates practicing in Canada. Out of all the medical graduates produced by
Witwatersrand University in the last 35 years – more than 45% or 2000 physicians, have left the
country. The South Africa’s Bureau of Statistics estimates that between 1million and 1.6 million
people in skilled, professional and managerial occupations have emigrated since 1994, and that


                                                 2
for every emigrant, 10 unskilled people lose their jobs. Gambia has lost almost 60% of its
graduates to destinations abroad. In the 1980s Zambia had 1600 doctors in the country. The
number has plummeted downwards to 400. The Southern African Development Community –
Human Resources Division estimates that at least 10,000 teachers have left SADC countries for
greener pastures since 1996 (Integrated Regional Information Network -IRIN, August, 2001).

The problem also manifests itself in terms of those training abroad not returning to the region. In
a USA Social Research Council study Pires et al. (1999) conducted a survey on the rate of
repatriation of 1,708 Sub-Saharan African Phds, trained in a selected number of universities in
the USA and Canada between 1986 and 1996. Based on the analysis of the data (see table 4) 34
percent of them have not returned to Africa. Out of the total number of African Phd graduates in
the USA over this period 57 percent of them returned to their countries of origin, a further 5% to
other African countries, a total return rate to Africa of 62 percent. Altogether, 36 percent stayed
in North America, and the remaining 2% went to Europe and elsewhere. Variations in rates of
repatriation across countries were conditioned by a number of factors, including political
stability, job opportunities, weak or absent universities and independent research centers at
home, and fear of professional atrophy.

There are some unsystematic cost estimates of brain drain from Africa. The main cost is the loss
of investment in education. UNHCR, (2001) estimates that the educational capital embodied in
highly skilled graduates who emigrated to the United States in 1990 alone was $640 million. It
concludes that emigration can represent a significant transfer of resource from poor countries to
rich. (UNHCR, 2001). UNCTAD (---) on its part estimated the annual cash value of each African
Professional migrant, based on 1979 prices, to be $184,000. With the roughly estimated 95,000
African Professional in the US alone, Africa would be losing almost US$ 17.5 billion annually
through brain drain, while receiving a technical assistance of only about US$ 4 billion annually
from all sources. These estimates do not necessarily represent the opportunity cost of the loss to
African countries as it is not certain whether the skilled emigrants would have been gainfully
engaged in their own professions at home. There are ample cases of internal brain drain, through
which professionals engage themselves in petty trade and other non-professional activities for
survival, mainly because of not being able to find sufficiently remunerative employment in their
own line of work.

I chose to begin with highlighting the concern with human capital outflow from the region, to set
the stage for the rest of the paper, which will take up the issue from a developmental perspective.
The paper is not about human capital flows in its generality. Rather it narrowly focuses on the
high skill content of African emigration to industrial countries, its impact on development in the
region, and the challenges faced by institutions of higher learning in helping the region deal with
this problem. Higher education (accredited universities) in Africa is a shrinking proportion of the
rapidly expanding tertiary (post-secondary) education. The paper addresses the challenges faced
by African institutions of higher learning in two ways. One is through responding to the
changing demand patterns for tertiary education at home; and the second is by adapting to
emerging global arrangements for production, utilization and sharing of knowledge.




                                                3
The rest of the paper takes up the issue of African brain drain in the context of relevant changes
taking place globally: globalization, knowledge-based economy and demographic trends in the
world. Section 2 of this paper reviews the conceptual underpinnings of human capital flows from
a developmental perspective. Section 3 reviews the evolution of tertiary education in Africa and
its adaptation to the changing systems of knowledge generation and sharing in the global context.
Section 4 reviews possible actions for dealing with the impact of human capital flows taking
advantage of global knowledge sharing arrangements and applying measures to reduce pressures
for emigration. Section 5 concludes. We adopt a basic perspective that control is not the answer
rather addressing squarely the fundamental push factors.




2. Human Capital Flows from a Developmental Perspective


Human capital is the stock of skills and productive knowledge embodied in people. The yield or
return to human capital investment lies in enhancing a person’s skills and earning power (private
return), and in increasing overall economic efficiency through complementary application of
different skills and improved economic decision-making both within and without the market
economy (developmental value). Adam Smith in Wealth of Nations identified the improvement
of workers’ skills as a fundamental source of economic progress and increasing human welfare (
cited in Eatwell et al, 1996 vol 2 p.682). These improvements are achieved not only through
education and formal training, but also, through learning by doing. From an individual’s
perspective investment in human capital is a life-long process. Knowledge embodied in a person
includes abilities for problem solving, command over relevant information, and technical,
managerial, and entrepreneurial skills.


Human capital flow, though not recorded in the balance of payments among nations, entails an
international transfer of resources in the form of human capabilities and skills. Although the flow
of human capital has lagged behind that of commodities and financial capital, it is nevertheless
significant in terms of its effects on development as we will argue later. The pattern of flows is
also changing as the source countries are diversifying, and skilled migration has assumed greater
importance in terms of actual flows and focus of migration policies more generally.
Human capital flows and Growth
From a developmental perspective, the main concerns arise from the negative consequences of
the net outflow of skilled and professional manpower from poor countries on growth and income
levels. This is in addition to the unaffordable loss of the considerable investment undertaken in
generating these scarce skills. The traditional position on this issue treats brain drain as a
negative externality imposed on the population remaining behind (Bhagwati and Hamada, 1974
), in terms of both slower economic progress and living standards in poor countries. Loss of jobs
for semi and unskilled labor force, and reduction in production and incomes result from
inadequate supply of skilled and professional labor, which is a necessary complement to semi-


                                                4
skilled and unskilled labor in production (Piketty, 1997; Miyagiwa, 1991). It is also argued that
the poor source countries lose their potentially most enterprising and ambitious young
population, stifling the development of the more dynamic private sector.


More recent research on growth have strengthened the traditional position by showing that brain
drain from a skill scarce poor country, leads to a permanent loss in growth and income levels
(Haque and Khan, 1997; and Haque and Aziz, 1998). Brain drain reduces the growth rate of the
effective human capital that remains behind in the economy and hence generates a permanent
reduction of per capita income growth in the home country (Haque and Kim, 1995). The findings
build on results from research on endogenous growth and its extensions. Unlike the neoclassical
growth literature in which long run growth is determined by exogeneous rates of population
increase and technological progress, in endogeneous growth literature the long run rate of
income growth is also influenced by public policies and public investment which in turn
influence the rate of technological progress and productivity growth. The accumulation of human
capital is an important part of this long term development process, and this accumulation is
influenced in major ways by public programs.

Although basic education is widely considered critical for poverty reduction, there is emerging
evidence from cross country growth studies that secondary and higher education are more
significant in raising long term growth and the levels of income (Barro and Lee, 1993, Barro
;1998)1. In a recent paper Barro (1998) finds that school attainment at the secondary and higher
levels for males aged 25 and over has a positive and on the subsequent rate of economic growth
(p.18)2. The estimated impact for this category is such that an additional year of schooling raises
the growth rate impact by 0.7 percent per year, a very large effect indeed for slow growers Barro,
ibid, p.18). This impact is mediated predominantly via improved capabilities to absorb
technological advances. Hanushek and Kim (1995), based on cross country scores in
international examinations, emphasize the point that quality of schooling capital is more
important for economic growth than years of education attainment. Barro (1998) even after
adjusting for schooling quality using a comprehensive data set from Lee and Barro (1997), finds
a persistent impact of quantity concludes that quality and quantity of schooling for this category
of educated group matters for growth.


In a cross-country empirical study to determine the effect of foreign direct investment (FDI) on
growth, Borensztein, Gregorio and Lee (1997) tested the effect of the flow of FDI from
industrial to 69 developing countries. The results, found that FDI had a larger impact on growth
than domestic investment, on account of its higher productivity. This impact obtains only when
there is sufficient capability in the host country to absorb complex technologies that comes with
FDI. The robust complementary effect between FDI and human capital obtains when the host
country has a minimum threshold stock of human capital. The threshold human capital level is

1
  Barro (1998) actually shows that while secondary and higher levels of education are positively correlated with
growth, primary education often does not significantly correlate with growth or has the wrong sign. The latter
insignificant impact is obtained more widely in the endogenous growth empirical research.
2
  Barro (1998) finds that female schooling in the same education and age category does not have significant impact
on growth most probably due to discriminatory practices in the labor market.


                                                         5
for countries with male population 25 years and over having at least 0.52 years of secondary
schooling. This education achievement is far above that for the majority of African countries.


The skills lost through brain drain are not easily replaced given both the limited capacity of
higher education and training capacity in developing countries and the paucity of the means for
acquiring the same elsewhere. In a dynamic sense, brain drain can reinforce the limited ability to
generate needed skills in poorer countries as it reduces their capacity to train a new generation of
professionals (HDR 1992). But as we will argue later below, with globalization the borders for
reproductive capacities of knowledge are softening.


The use of technical assistance through aid to fill capacity deficiencies in poor countries has
often been targeted to alleviate short-term capacity shortfalls. In this form it often discouraged
efforts to build and retain local capacity in government in the long term. Enclave project or
program management systems, usually deployed through technical assistance to address capacity
weaknesses in the public sector, have tended to engender psychological dependence on
expatriate capabilities. This dependence has very often militated against capacity development
for sustained self-management in these countries.


Recently, a strand of research on brain drain points to indirect beneficial effects arising from the
fact that migration possibilities foster relatively higher investment in education, compared to a
country closed to migration, because of higher expected returns abroad to education (Beine,
Docquier and Rapoport, 1999)3 . It is argued that as long as this “brain gain” effect from
migration possibilities dominates the ex-post effect of actual out-migration, the average level of
human capital of the remaining population would be higher. The empirical work of this strand
confirms a strong positive effect of migration possibility on human capital investment and that
for moderate levels of actual ex-post migration the net effect could indeed be beneficial. It is
important to emphasize that the beneficial effect crucially depends on ex-post actual out
migration not being excessively high, a point that the traditionalists emphasize any way.


Main causes of voluntary human capital flows
Economic and Demographic Pressures
The causes for “voluntary” emigration of professional skills are multi-faceted and so are the
theories explaining them. In this section we first review the conceptual basis for pressures behind
emigration and then draw lessons from empirical work by Hatton and Williamson (2000) about
the experience of 19th Europe emigration for African situation.
Neoclassical theory (micro) of migration flows has tended to emphasize differentials between
source and destination countries in the rates of return to investment in human capital (mainly a
result of productivity differences) and employment rates (affecting probability of being


3
 This is a fairly recent strand of research, which began with the work by Mountford in 1995, and subsequently
followed by a small group of research papers Gallor Tsiddon (1997), Docquier and Rapoport(1997), Vidal (1998).


                                                      6
employed). Limited opportunities for reasonable returns due to an underdeveloped private sector
and inefficient public sector are particularly pertinent in the African context.


The new economics of migration explains the flow primarily as a household strategy to mitigate
risk in household income earning, which in turn is a consequence of a lack of missing insurance
markets and compensatory income distribution policies in source countries. Official global
remittance in 1990 were estimated at $71 billion, and represented a net transfer back to
developing countries of $31 billion equivalent to nearly three quarters of ODA (Russell,1998?)
and a considerable diversification of household income sources. Risk of professional
marginalization and obsolescence due to absence of peer pressure and interaction (professional
isolation), and absence of complementary inputs for professional practice reinforce these
pressures.


Dual labor market theory is demand-based and underscores the drive by employers and
governments in destination countries to source low-wage migrant workers as a means for
avoiding structural inflation. Although also reinforcing the push factors for voluntary migration,
political instability and civil strife are the main reasons for refugee migration.


Hatton and Williamson (2000) analyze the driving forces behind mass migrations from poor
Europe in the late 19th century to draw lessons forn future emigration potential from Africa to
more developed economies. From their analysis economic and demographic fundamentals are
the key drivers for both experiences, and they conclude from their empirical work that left
unmitigated these forces lead to far greater projected magnitude of emigration from Africa than
19th century Europe.


Based on the European experience, these forces worked themselves through three key channels.
First, Real wage advantage of destination over source countries raised emigration by 1.27 per
thousand. Secondly, demographic pressures (and transition) drove emigration with a long-term
estimate suggesting that half of excess births in source countries compared to destination
countries ended up emigrating twenty years later. This impact was dominated by changing share
of population (or work force) aged 15-29, which is more likely to move. Thirdly the stock of
migrants and past migration rate had a chain emigration effect on current emigration rate leading
to persistence in emigration streams. For example nearly a third of African immigrants arriving
in the USA during the late 1990s were classified as close relatives of US citizens.


A combination of these factors over the long term propelled an inverted U pattern of emigration -
first rising with youthfulness of the demographic structure and increasing real wages at home
making the cost of emigration more affordable; reaching a peak before it declined in the catch up
phase as the real wage differential closed and the population structure became more mature.




                                                7
Hatton and Williamson also assess the relevance of the European experience for the potential
African emigration. The real wage gap between Africa and developed countries is enormous and
is unlikely to shrink in the near future given the slow growth performance of the region. The
huge incentive to emigrate from the region will therefore persist for the foreseeable future.
Although Africa is unlikely to catch up with destination countries in the near future, it will
continue to experience some improvement in real wages and standard of living making the cost
of emigration more affordable. Youths’ share in total population is rising fast, even after
adjusting for the impacts of AIDS and the growth of this category of population is projected to
grow at 2.9 per annum between 1995 and 2025 for Africa as a whole (even higher excluding
North Africa – at 3.4 percent). Since emigration tends to self select young adults, the rate of
growth of those Africans most likely to move (aged 15-29) is expected to rise fast.


The above demographic pressure from an explosive increase of economically active population
in the developing4 countries is exarcebated by non-replacement growth of population in key
migration destinations (Russell, 1998). Replacement migration strategies are likely to attract
international migration to offset declines of total and particularly aging population in developed
countries. Prewitt (2001), in a paper for this volume, observes that the USA is already adjusting
its immigration policy in that direction and that Europe may not be able to withstand the pressure
from population decline and dislocation of economic activity without following suit. Since, as
we saw earlier, international migration has increasingly tended to favor skilled migration, there is
likely to be mounting pressure for emigration of young skilled persons from poor developing
countries to developed ones.


Globalization, knowledge-based economy and the intensification of human capital flows
The world systems theory explains voluntary international migration largely through the process
of globalization of production and trade. Such flows are facilitated by a significant reduction in
barriers to trade, production sharing arrangements and reduced cost of movement. Globalization
offers both opportunities for amelioration of the pace of brain drain and the sources of additional
pressures for emigration of skilled manpower from poor developing countries.


The intensification of globalization has lowered the impediments to mobility of all forms of
capital, accelerated the standardization of knowledge requirements, made production by
multinationals more foot loose, and enhanced the scope for private sector growth. On the up side
The phenomenal growth and easier mobility of private capital opens up opportunities for
engaging professionals in their home countries and at higher returns based on increased
productivity. This is by no means trivial, particularly, for countries in Africa, where most
professionals have been engaged in the public sector at typically very low wages.5 Global

4
  Economically active population in developing countries increased by 59 percent between 1970 and 1990 due to
young age structure - high fertility & declining infant and child mortality (Russell,1998)
5
  Heller and Tait(1984) showed that during the late 1970s and early 1980s the ratio of public wages to private wages
in developing countries was lower than in industrial countries, despite the reverse expectation since governments in
poor countries with an insignificant private sector would usually employ relatively higher proportion of quality
human capital. In the case of Africa the experience has been not only of an annual 9 percent trend decline in real


                                                         8
knowledge sharing arrangements, through partnerships and networking, is also expanding the
scope and capacity available to poor countries for production and more effective application of
knowledge.


A particular development in the global production system is that of production sharing
arrangements across countries by multi-nationals. They currently account for over 30 percent of
global production (Lindbaek, 1997). Although such arrangements are still predominantly among
industrial countries, increasingly developing countries are partaking in them, initially based on
their low wage comparative advantage, raising opportunities for enhanced use of local skilled
workforce. The comparative advantage of low wage in developing countries, however, can be
nullified by low productivity partly due to the scarcity of complementary professional skills.
Although the wages per hour may be low, the wages per unit of output could be high due to low
productivity. Surveys of investors show that labor is not cheap where productivity is low.
Productivity in turn is influenced, not only by the quantity and quality of capital stock, but also
quality and quantity of know how (knowledge) (Lindbaek, 1997).

The emergence of a knowledge economy opens up new windows of opportunities for late comers
to achieve faster productivity-based growth. This is partly because new technologies allow “leap
frogging” for those countries that do not carry the inertia from the previous industrial structure
(Perez, 1985). It has been shown that as major technological revolutions take place, developing
countries that have positioned themselves to benefit from the “underlying technology” of the
next long wave can catch up with rich countries, while those who lock themselves up in dinosaur
technologies fall behind (Brundenius, 1996). The challenge to developing countries, however,
relates to the fact that information and microelectronics, the core of the knowledge economy,
aids human mental effort. To meet this challenge poor countries have to position themselves well
in terms of human competencies and capability of firms to work with this technological
revolution. Opportunities for “leap frogging” and threats from marginalization are strong
motivators for seeking and retaining knowledge.




3. The Evolving African Knowledge System in the Global Context and the Brain Drain
Challenge

We start with the premise that Africa will continue to experience emigration of skilled and
professional personnel to the developed world for the foreseeable future. Based on pressures
from globalization and demographic trends in the sending and receiving countries, reviewed
above, we foresee a likely continuation of fast-paced loss of the region’s talent for some time to
come. For the long term the region needs to devise strategies for enhancing capacity for training,
retaining skilled manpower and some reversal of brain drain. In this section we look at the way
tertiary education institutions are evolving to cope with the pressures for generating human
capital - to fill the quantity and quality deficiency in the region. This assessment is done taking

wages over the 1970s and 1980s but also a 6 percent decline per year of public sector wages as a ratio to private
sector wages.


                                                          9
into account the global evolution of the education system and new opportunities from global
knowledge sharing mechanisms, facilitated by developments in information technology and
networking. We also look at the emergence of knowledge generation and sharing system outside
the tertiary education system and the links between the two.

Tertiary Education in Africa

The tertiary education system is hard pressed to keep pace with increasing and diverse local
demands for knowledge, apart from coping with the consequences of the brain drain from the
region. While other supply side solutions are emerging, e.g. global knowledge sharing
arrangements and networking discussed later below, the African tertiary education system will
have to carry the bulk of the burden.

Africa, like the rest of the world is currently undergoing a major transition from the traditional
university-based higher education to a more utilitarian and diverse tertiary education system. The
influence and pressure from the evolution of the global education system, treated in some detail
in the lead paper by Kenneth Prewitt (2001), is evident here. Multi-faceted delivery systems for
higher education are emerging challenging the traditional monolithic system dominated by
universities thereby expanding the scope of service and competition within the industry. This is
slowly happening in Africa as vindicated by the emergence of a range specialist higher education
institutions and centers performing tasks, once considered the preserve of the do-it-all
universities.

The evolution is marked by proliferation of professional schools, industry- specific training
institutes (e. g. for banking and other sector-specific on the job training) and private universities
with program structures tilted towards professional courses. This development is further
amplified by the emergence of the much more cost-effective delivery systems, such as
institutions offering education through correspondence, part time higher education programs
such as open universities and multiple streaming of programs to accommodate part timers in
conventional universities. Electronic communication, is giving reality to “virtual universities”,
with no national or regional boundaries. It is noteworthy that there is an apparent incoherence
and some degree of waste in the evolving system, partly reflecting the process of transition and
desperate quest for institutional survival.



Three important developments prompt or support the ongoing changes in the organization and
delivery of tertiary education in Africa.
(i) Tertiary education in Africa and higher education within it is becoming much more utilitarian.
This is in tandem with the rising dominance of market-oriented approach to organizing and
providing education services, world-wide. The effectiveness of the education system is indeed,
assessed on the grounds of its ability to provide relevant and effective skills for dealing with
specific tasks. This change, places far greater pressures on the higher education system to be
responsive to the perceived needs of the society, which it seeks to serve.




                                                 10
The rapid change is prompted by increasingly more exacting demands regarding “returns to
investment” in education from both the private and public service sectors. Viewed from the
private cost-benefit angle, those committing resources in education or knowledge investment
purposefully assess income earning capabilities and mobility across local and international firm
employment (“value for money” and “risk mitigation”). Ability of tertiary education institutions
to provide relevant and effective skills for dealing with specific tasks is turning out to be a major
criterion, by which particular modalities of delivery of tertiary education are judged by
individuals.

From the social cost-benefit view functionality and more recently meritocracy are increasingly
driving the way tertiary education is assessed by users in the public sector. This perspective
derives from the growing view that improved governance through, inter alia, deployment of
better human capital in the public sector will strengthen the capacity for improved economic
management and public service delivery. Indeed the bulk of second -generation public service
reform programs in Africa aim to achieve this goal. Domestic presence of professions and
technical skills have also proven to be extremely necessary for the development of civil society
to serve as watch dogs of prudent public policy and application of good governance (Haque and
Aziz, 1998). Deployment of better human capital in public service and domestic presence of
professionally competent civil society as agents of restraint engender improved governance and
in turn can induce increased private investment and higher productivity of the private sector.

Within the public sector, the reward system to higher education investment distinguishes
remuneration based on relevance and effectiveness of the knowledge gained in the process of
education. Governments as major employers typically apply this distinction across disciplines in
setting pay scales and professional progression. After nearly three decades of wage compression
for egalitarian reasons, governments in reforming countries are decompressing wages and
salaries, making differences in pay across skill levels more distinct. The private sector is even
more discriminating in these terms. Within the system of higher education itself, secondary
sources of earnings among staff are largely determined by the differences in the marketability of
their skills and disciplines to clients.

(ii) There is a growing influence of independent quality certification of the products from the
mushrooming and wide range of tertiary education in Africa. Independent certification enables
dealing with the risks faced by employers from engaging products of unknown quality. It thus
helps to deal with the problem of information asymmetry between producers and users of
products from the growing number and wide variety of tertiary education institutions.
Independent certification is in fact the primary accountability instrument for the sector.
Professional associations and registration boards for practicing professionals play a central
accountability role for ensuring adherence to standards and minimum requirements for
professional certification. These institutions cover most graduates in professional studies,
including engineers, medical practitioners, lawyers passing the bar, and accountants. Increasingly
some graduates also seek international standard certification through enrolling for similar
examinations abroad, to expand their mobility for employment in international firms at home and
abroad.




                                                 11
The accountability system appears to be considerably weaker for most of the so called “non-
professional” products, largely liberal arts, social sciences and pure sciences. Nevertheless,
certification is being sought via two types of arrangements for this category of higher education.
One approach is through collaboration with reputable institutions abroad, regarded to be within
the contemporary intellectual “frontier”, through twinning arrangements. This approach recently
has entailed issuing to local students certificates from the more reputable partner institution
abroad. The second approach is through regional or sub-regional collaborative graduate
programs, such as the one supported by the African Economic Research Consortium or CIEREA.
This approach utilizes a collective quality assurance mechanism applied through (a) peer
pressure for adherence to commonly agreed high quality curriculum, (b) selectivity in
designating certifying institutions from among the collaborating institutions based on adequacy
of capacity to offer core courses of agreed quality, and (c) subjecting student and program
performance to external international review (external examination). Both programs run a joint
facility for electives. Apart from pooling quality staff and expanding the menu of
specializations, the facilities also indirectly act as a quality controllers for core courses offered
by the designated universities.

(iii) The presence and role of knowledge intermediaries between producers and users of
knowledge outside the formal tertiary education system is increasing. These intermediaries
primarily help to raise the demand for knowledge in the public policy sphere. There is no doubt
that most African countries urgently need to strengthen their policymaking resources. Outside of
government, capacity for policy analysis resides in universities, academically-oriented research
institutes and, more recently, national policy institutes. A 1994 study conducted by AERC in
eight sub-Saharan African countries found that most communities, parliaments and non-
governmental organizations did not possess their own in-house capacity for policy analysis --
relying instead on the institutions mentioned above.

A more worrying finding from the study, perhaps, is the fact that research and analysis
performed in academic institutions is rarely available to either government or non-government
users due to poor dissemination. Until very recently, no intermediate institutions (e.g., national
policy institutes) existed to make complex analyses available in formats intelligible to a variety
of audiences. However, the study did find that the barriers between the two groups are coming
down in many of the countries studied, as researchers have gained credibility by producing more
policy-oriented research and presenting their recommendations in practical formats.

Policy institutes and policy research networks have recently launched a wide range of initiatives
to meet these challenges. Some are regional in nature but are designed to serve national demands
-- and others exist within the national setting. All these initiatives aim to augment the pool of
analysts through formal training and learning by performing research, enhance skills and
professionalism, and promote the application of research in the context of policy. (Ndulu, 1996)

National policy institutes have emerged during the past five years funded by regional and
international donors, governments, the private sector and own resources from specific tasks
requested by its their wide clientele. These institutes make complex analyses available in formats
intelligible to a variety of audiences. As knowledge intermediaries at the local level, the national
policy institutes play a particularly useful function in enhancing access to global and local



                                                 12
knowledge. At the same time, they help shape the agenda of knowledge producers through
feedback. Better ones among the institutes have built strong credibility with both sides of
knowledge (suppliers and users) and play important roles as honest brokers in dialogues
involving competing interest groups. The institutes also respond to requests for policy analysis
by mobilizing local talent to carry out necessary research. In many cases, these institutes operate
knowledge access systems (including websites) for users and researchers. By maintaining a
forward-looking research agenda, national policy institutes seek to pro-actively influence the
policy agenda.

Intermediation efforts are not confined to national levels only. Regional or sub-regional policy
research networks are also emerging and across several disciplines and specializations. These
are networks of individuals and institutions across countries. The most prominent example of
these is a network of economists engaged in policy-oriented macroeconomic research, which is
coordinated and supported by the African Economic Research Consortium (AERC). Other
examples include a network of environmental economists (East Africa Environmental
Economics Network), one of social scientists (Council for Development of Social Science
Research in Africa) and a francophone network dealing with industrial policy. Policy seminars
organized by these networks can serve to bridge the gap of suspicion between academics and
policymakers. Not only do they provide a showcase for local talent in policy analysis, they also
foster important dialogue on policy issues. Joint initiatives between public and private
researchers have also proved to be an effective way of cultivating close relations.



Making use of the Global Knowledge Sharing Arrangements to supplement local capacity

Akin to production and trade, globalization is softening the boundaries of learning, knowledge
generation and application widening the scope for ameliorating the impact of brain drain and
strengthening local capacity. Indeed, the national or regional boundaries for knowledge
generation and application are increasingly becoming superfluous, as a basis for assessing an
individual country’s capacity for education and training. Information technology has opened up
the scope for accessing and exchanging global knowledge, and for distance learning. Virtual
tertiary institutions; networking among higher education institutions and professional
associations, international certification and therefore standardization of achievements are some
of the major vehicles which integrate the global knowledge system across countries.

There is a growing consensus in the international development community that knowledge
sharing is a global public good. Globalization has made the prosperity and welfare of the world
much more interdependent, with stronger channels for the contagion effects (good or bad). It is
also widely recognized that poverty is the weakest link in the concerted efforts by the
international development community in making the world safer, healthier and more prosperous.
Development based on knowledge can indeed make a difference in the pace and extent of
improvement in livelihoods and the quality of life of the people in the developing world.
Countries and people differ in their capacity for acquiring, absorbing and using knowledge.
Evidence suggests that these knowledge gaps--i.e., the unequal distribution of knowledge
between rich and poor countries, and within countries between rich and poor people--are



                                                13
widening. (RAWOO). Knowledge sharing is, therefore, one effective way for closing knowledge
gaps in the context of global interdependence.

There is some scope for global exchange of knowledge, even amongst unequals, for mutual
benefit through linking locally specific and global knowledge. There is also a growing
appreciation for location-specific knowledge in a rapidly evolving global knowledge system.
This is clear from the recent prominence of learning from country or region-specific situations
whether in the forms of “miracles” or “crises”. The world thus continuously learns from "best
practices", “disasters”, and “exceptions to received wisdom” to augment its knowledge base. For
this to happen, effective international mechanisms for knowledge exchange and global learning
need to be in place. Such mechanisms should also ensure relevance(from contextual research)
and excellence through global peer pressure and access to the international frontier of
knowledge.

For poorer countries to effectively engage in this form of exchange, it is necessary to develop
local capacities for knowledge generation and absorption. The tertiary education system, is an
important conduit for such exchange but is not the only ones. Intermediaries for global
knowledge are also emerging in Africa, outside the formal tertiary education system. Prominent
among these include national research institutes, regional networks and centers of excellence. As
a group, these institutions play a facilitative role in availing global knowledge to African
societies more broadly, and also help enhance the interaction between the tertiary education
institutions and the global knowledge system, thereby aiding quality enhancement. Albeit at a
very early stage, African countries have also begun to exploit opportunities offered through
global knowledge sharing arrangements, as a means for supplementing and strengthening the
capacity to deliver tertiary education, knowledge acquisition and application.

Even as national higher education institutions reverse their previous state of decay, regional
networks will continue to play a desirable and effective role in supporting and sustaining national
knowledge generation and absorption in five important ways. One is to continue to provide a
critical mass of professional peer review not available at the national level, thus sustaining peer
pressure for learning and excellence as well as ameliorating professional isolation. Two is to
provide an effective mechanism for keeping in touch with the rapidly changing frontier of
knowledge through a more rationalized contact with the rest of the world and information
sharing. Three is that networks provide a medium of exchange of experiences in a comparative
mode and a mechanism for gleaning from “best practices” in specific policy contexts thus
making them an important resource for collective knowledge and contrasting experiences,
important for learning. Four, networks provide a cost effective means for specialized training
and skill formation often not viable at the national level, given paucity of resources and time
availability of specialist trainers. Five, networks constitute an effective approach to projecting a
professional image through pooling to gain attention and profile. The collective ability of
participants to garner reputation augurs well for enhancing professional credibility to attract
more opportunities for professional engagements and providing credible inputs from Africa into
the global learning systems.




                                                14
4. Dealing with human capital flight from Africa

The strategies for dealing with the consequences of the large emigration of skilled manpower
from Africa should address both the demand and supply side weaknesses. In the long term,
higher and sustained growth holds the answer to a durable resolution of the problem. To recap
from the foregoing, the region is losing its talent because it can not remunerate, preserve, and
utilize it effectively. Low productivity in the economy and sluggish growth of employment
opportunities are largely behind the low rates of return to education. In the absence of a vibrant
private sector to absorb the talent in African economies, demand for it will remain low and rates
of returns in the local market are likely to stagnate at the current low levels. Political risks and
civil unrest are major push factors militating against retention of those trained locally or
repatriation of those trained abroad. The fact that the largest loss of skilled manpower occurs
from troubled countries attests to this fact. Preservation and sustenance of acquired knowledge
needs maintaining contact with peers and having access to tools necessary for its effective
application. Paucity of both generate exit pressures.

African countries can not deal with the problem of brain drain through erecting hurdles to
contain emigration. As we have learnt in the case of financial capital, the region could not
contain the flight of its financial wealth through this means as evident from its large magnitude
held outside Africa. Success in reversing capital flight has begun in those countries that have
created a conducive investment climate and expanded the scope of opportunities for investment
(demand). An appropriate strategy to contain human capital flight and in some cases achieve
reversal would require to address the push factors (motivation) identified above and scale up
local demand for skilled manpower. There is one other particular dimension of the strategy,
which we highlight below, the use of African talent in the diaspora to support the development
initiative in the region.

While individual countries may take measures to reverse human capital flight, a collective
initiative including enhanced easier labor mobility within the region would probably broaden the
scope for retention of skilled personnel within the region. With expanding growth opportunities
at home and easier interaction with peers through professional networks, such efforts could be
even more successful.




                                                15
Raising demand for knowledge at home

Private sector growth and development
Talent will flee from where it finds no gainful use. Raising the demand for skilled manpower in
the region is part of the durable solution to the brain drain problem. In a virtuous circle, better
skills lead to higher growth and in turn higher growth leads to increased demand for skills. There
is no doubt about the need for skilled labor to spur growth and development, but this must be
backed by effective demand for it. To a very large extent, the two main sources for expanding
opportunities for gainful application of skills, are private sector growth and professionalization
of the public sector. As pointed out earlier, the ongoing transition towards a private sector-led
market oriented economy, if durable, augurs well for shifting the incentive structure in favor of
scarce talent.

Attraction of foreign direct investment can play a particularly important role in raising
productivity and return to investment in education. Foreign direct investment by multinational
corporations is a major channel for access to advanced technology by developing countries. It
increases the rate of technical progress in the host country through a “contagion” effect from the
more advanced technology and management practices used by foreign firms (Findlay 1978). The
complementarity between FDI and human capital in the process of productivity growth and
technical progress provides the link to increased demand for skilled manpower. If African
countries exploit the opportunities from the phenomenal growth in global foreign direct
investment, as in the other developing regions, the likelihood of retaining and reversing the drain
of talent will be higher.


The risk-unadjusted return to investment in Africa, at 29 percent, was estimated to be the highest
among regions in the world in 1999 (UNCTAD 1999). Yet, Africa attracted a miniscule share of
the vast private capital flows. Higher risks, particularly for the much-needed private investment
in infrastructure, and low utilization of risk mitigation instruments, such as investment
guarantees, pose serious impediments to investment growth (Ndulu, 2001). The most critical
factors influencing the individual country poor investment reputation include political risk of
confiscation and expropriation, inability to transfer mobile assets or proceeds there from, risks of
contract repudiation and asset losses due to events of political violence

The success of African countries to attract larger and more diversified foreign private capital
depends also on the collective reputation of the continent and its ability to enlarge the market
through enhanced connectivity. Spillover or contagion effects from wars, civil instability, and a
lack of a critical mass of good investment environment (policy, institutions, and regulation) dents
the overall reputation. Individual countries can not choose their neighbors, making the collective
effort for reducing investor perception of high investor risk in the region both imperative and
urgent. What is more important is that such improvements should persist and occur in a critical
mass of African Countries to counter the negative perceptions on the region from legacy.

Professionalizing the Public sector




                                                16
Globalization, rising importance of information technology for enhancing productivity, the shift
towards market-oriented economic policies and more democratic governance are combining to
raise the demand for skills and informed public policy decision. These changes raise the pressure
on governments to implement policies that will pave the way to prosperity. The rapid
improvement in information technology and knowledge sharing arrangements through
partnerships and networks have made the possibility of meeting such demands a reality and
credible.

To meet the challenge of improved public services and policy dialogue, some African countries
are pursuing reforms, which target professionalizing the public service. The second generation
civil service reforms, as pointed earlier, aim to reintroduce meritocracy in public service,
restructure incentives in favor of professional cadre, and pursue institutional rationalization to
enhance the functionality and cost-effectiveness of public service delivery. These may have two
positive effects on the demand for skilled and professional employees. A direct effect will be a
rise in the demand for professionals, higher quality education at entry into public service, and
further training on the job. The indirect effect is through the beneficial impact of improved
governance on private investment. Excessive bureaucracy and non-transparent governance
typically raise managerial and risk costs of firms reducing profitability of ventures. Their
reduction should augur well for private investment.


There is a slow but robust process of liberalizing political systems in Africa, albeit with teething
difficulties. Pressure is also mounting for devolving authority to sub-national governance
entities. Both developments will raise the pressures for greater inclusiveness across stakeholders
in designing development programs and fundamentally change the accountability systems to fit
more open governance structures. A strong civil society will enhance the demand for informed
participation in shaping the development agenda. As pointed out earlier the growth of a robust
civil society depends on the domestic presence of professions and technical skills to help it
engage in the development dialogue and enhance its role as a watch dog of prudent public policy
and application of good governance.

Adapting the Tertiary Education System to the challenge of containing human capital Flight

The ongoing evolution of the tertiary education system in Africa is geared towards meeting
market needs. In this respect it augurs well for boosting and meeting the local demand for skilled
personnel. However, the sheer magnitude of the capacity gaps to be filled and the wide range of
specialist requirements makes the task of these institutions daunting in terms of financing
requirements and the scope to meet the wide range of specializations now emerging in the
context of the knowledge economy. Public funding can support high quality tertiary education
only when the system is relatively small and hence inevitably elitist (Barr, 1998). The transition
to a provision of large scale and varied tertiary education, therefore, entails significant
supplementation of resources from the clients, development of curricula that are responsive to
the needs of clients, and harnessing the global knowledge system for enhanced quality and filling
gaps in faculty expertise not locally available.




                                                17
To these ends the main challenges to African institutions of higher learning revolve around five
main areas of action:

(a) Traditional universities in Africa need to sharpen their responsiveness to rapidly changing
needs of the societies they serve and subjecting their programs to global pressures for excellence.
Public universities in Africa, in particular, face a daunting task to move away from the elitist
model and the associated rigidities of tradition for managing their affairs. Makerere University in
Uganda offers a particularly innovative example of a traditional university in Africa that is
pursuing a transition from an elitist and predominantly public-financed institution to a more
market-oriented approach funded largely by private resources. In the past six years, Makerere
university has taken a number of interrelated measures to secure alternative financing, introduce
demand-driven courses and set up new management structures consistent with the new approach
(Court, 2001). The success of these initiatives is paying off in terms of doubling enrollment, a
rise in the proportion of privately sponsored students to more than 50 percent of total enrolment
and 80 percent of admissions, and well motivated and reasonably paid faculty. “Practical and
professional career purpose (of courses offered) suggests that an estimate of demand rather than
a prescription of supply is influencing the academic curriculum” ( Court ibid p.7). Makerere’s
experience suggests that a transition is both feasible and desirable.

(b)Rationalization of the tertiary education system is necessary to weed out dead wood or make
capital in these institutions available to alternative use within the education sector. Private
universities and other private tertiary education institutions, many of them set up after the new
approach to tertiary education began taking root, are geared towards meeting the increasing
demands for non-conventional and non-academic courses to meet local needs and employment
opportunities. These universities as Court, (2001) notes have proved themselves to be flexible,
unencumbered by a particular tradition, creative, experimental, responsive and inclusive. There
does exist, however, a number of public tertiary education institutions that were set up to target
very specific-public enterprise or service needs (such as for the leather or sugar industry). Very
often these do not have adequate demand to justify overheads nor are they sufficiently flexible to
substitute for alternative skill markets. The problem has grown more acute with the demise or
privatization of a number of these public enterprises, prompting rationalization measures.

(c) Quality control and independent certification is critical for a rapidly evolving tertiary
education system. We have shown above how independent post-graduation independent
certification is playing that role in the case of professional courses and training in specific skills.
Apart from embedding this accountability instrument systematically in the larger knowledge
certification system, progressive movement towards applying international standards in the
certification process would ensure a beneficial backwash effect in the quality of training
programs.

Furthermore, as multinationals relocate to the region to serve its market from within through
foreign direct private investment, a pool of skills meeting international standards would help
sustain such a relocation and raise returns to the graduates. The problem of accountability for
non-professional courses is harder to tackle. External examination, collaboration with foreign
institutions of repute, and networking were identified as mechanisms that are now emerging to
facilitate quality control. More systematic incorporation of these arrangements, especially in the



                                                  18
university education systems could be facilitated by new actors, such as the Association of
African Universities and the Association for the Development of African Education.

(d) Regional or sub-regional collaboration, in the African context, where the critical mass of
professional peer pressure within national confines is largely wanting, is desirable to exploit
complementarities in strengths and capabilities, and to project a strong professional visibility of
the region on a global scale. Networking also helps to sustain the quality of higher education and
to prevent atrophy of skills, given that they provide opportunities for professional interaction
well beyond the boundaries, and help create professional ethos and esprit de corps on a larger
scale.

More specifically, effort and resources should be channeled to supporting and sustaining the
emerging regional and sub-regional research and training networks. They are attractive because
they are a cost-effective means for enabling rationalized support for building capacity of national
institutions and providing a platform for professional peer pressure. A key target will be to
reduce professional isolation and the resultant atrophy of acquired skills. Graduate training
networks on the other hand allow pooling and sharing of scarce quality faculty, apply peer
pressure in enforcing standards in curricula, and help in exchanging experiences across
participating institutions. Efforts should be made to promote their roles as intermediaries for
cost-effective access to frontier knowledge by way of availing up to date literature and arranging
the involvement of world class resource persons in the research process. Furthermore, regional
networks can be promoted to serve as building blocks to the global partnership arrangements for
knowledge.

Some networks have been successful in attracting the involvement of highly qualified Africans
in the diaspora - in the development dialogue and initiative. This objective should be pursued
more vigorously, in conjunction with the broader scheme of the involvement of African
professionals abroad discussed later below.

(e) Cost-effectiveness in the delivery of tertiary education is necessary to survive strong local
and world-wide competition. The advent of information technology, as observed earlier, has
widened the scope of competition through lower cost access to alternatives abroad and a
tendency towards unified global knowledge standards. In this regard apart from reviewing the
cost effectiveness and flexibility of governance structures, cultivation of innovative and
entrepreneurial attitudes among the managers of these institutions is of prime importance. Public
universities need to be given space and autonomy to innovate. Tertiary/higher education
institutions should also exploit potential advantages of product differentiation based on area-
specific needs.

Strategies for reversing brain drain

We look here at three main possibilities for permanent or temporary repatriation of qualified
Africans abroad – assisted permanent return, use of African talent in the diaspora, and use of
qualified African emigrants in technical assistance schemes.

(a) Repatriation programs



                                                19
Between 1993 and 1999, the IOM in partnership with the UNECA, ran a program for repatriation
of qualified African emigrants back to their countries. The Return of Qualified African Nationals
(ROQAN) program matched particular needs for skills by governments, academic and research
institutions and private sector employers in African countries, with candidates who are willing to
return home and then provided financial support for their resettlement. The program succeeded
to repatriate 2000 African emigrant experts to about 6 countries. The high cost of repatriation
mainly explains the moderate success of this program.

(b) Involving Africans in the diaspora

In so far as many of the migrants may not return, African countries and the migrants themselves
need to device creative strategies to turn these professionals into assets for Africa. To achieve
this, it is important to design a scheme that allows skilled Africans working abroad to contribute
to the development of their home countries without giving up higher wages and better living
standards their current permanent residence affords. This approach will also enable the large
number of African intellectuals and intellectual communities abroad, to participate more actively
in strengthening the capacity for quality education and training in the region.

While plans are underway to continue with the ROQAN, the IOM has proposed a new initiative
entitled “Migration for Development” involving three types of interventions: “temporary return”,
“virtual return” and “economic return”. The initiative, essentially, targets the involvement of
qualified Africans in the diaspora to participate in the development activities in the region for
limited periods of time.

Under the temporary return arrangement, a qualified doctor, for example, would be assisted to
return home to teach, perform operations and share skills for a limited period. A virtual return
program would involve skill sharing, teaching, mentoring and even marking exam papers via the
internet and video conferencing. This approach, is considered particularly attractive because of
its cost effectiveness. The economic return program would encourage African professionals with
adequate capital or access to it, to invest in their home countries or the region. The approach
would provide information on investment opportunities and facilities for channeling capital to
the region.

(c) Utilizing African emigrants for technical assistance
It has been estimated that annually 100,000 foreign experts are deployed in African countries at a
cost of nearly $4 billion per year. The policies for this deployment largely preclude the use of
nationals in the sending countries for the envisaged tasks, even if they are qualified. Haque and
Aziz (1998) in an interesting paper explore the cost and skill profile of technical assistance if the
national emigrants were deployed under technical assistance programs. A key premise of their
argument is that for each skill category, the emigrant would be willing to accept a much smaller
premium to return and perform the required task than a foreign national. This premise is
particularly consistent with the observation by IOM (2000), that one of the important features of
African migrants is that most maintain social and cultural links with their home countries. They
would therefore be likely willing to “suffer” a premium reduction compared to their foreign
counterparts.




                                                 20
In their analysis Haque and Aziz broadly conclude that deployment of emigrants for technical
assistance would raise the overall quality of the skills deployed on account of the differential
premia. Furthermore, the total cost of the same level of technical assistance would be lower or
total level of technical assistance could be raised substantially, with the current financial
provision. This is an option worth exploring.


5. Conclusion

The problem of African brain drain manifests itself predominantly in terms of a rising and high
skill content of emigration from the region to exploit opportunities abroad. The main
consequence of this phenomenon is to leave the region starved of expertise necessary for
supporting higher growth and poverty reduction. The primary cause of the human capital outflow
appears to be a combination of relatively lower return to investment in tertiary education, risks of
professional atrophy due to lack of interaction with peers and the professional frontier, and
absence of necessary tools for professional engagement particularly among the highly
specialized professions. Political instability and the associated risks of possible loss of human
capital affects emigration of both skilled and non-skilled Africans.

The problem is set to intensify in the foreseeable future due to the intensification of the
globalization process, reduced cost of movement; and due to push and pull demographic
pressures. Rapid expansion of the economically active population in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, and the pressures for young replacement immigration in the developed
world combine to exacerbate the consequences of easier mobility.

Globalization, on the other hand, has raised the potential for relocating jobs to the region through
foreign direct investment, provided measures are taken to encourage the flow of such investment.
In combination with the ongoing reforms to professionalize the public service and the beneficial
role of knowledge intermediaries, linking producers and user of knowledge, the potential for
raising the demand for skills and productivity at home are real. Higher growth resulting from
increased utilization of skills, in turn, sets off a virtuous cycle, of interaction between growth and
improved human capital in the region. Furthermore, globalization has strengthened the rationale
for knowledge sharing in a more interdependent world, and facilitated by developments in
information technology, making knowledge sharing a reality.

To meet potentially higher demand requires a more market oriented approach in the delivery of
tertiary education in the region. Although encouraging changes are taking place in that direction
for private tertiary education institutions, the bigger challenge is a transition for traditional
public-funded universities to be responsive to the changing needs of its clientele, fostering cost-
efficiency in delivery of education and rationalizing the use of the other public sector tertiary
education institutions. Many of the latter category have become obsolete in purpose and do not
have the required flexibility to adjust to the changing demand patterns.

A fundamental requirement for ensuring better quality of the mushrooming range of institutions
and products thereof, is to strengthen the sector’s accountability system. For the professional
courses, this is best achieved through strengthening the system of independent post-graduation



                                                 21
certification. For non-professional courses, however, the method is to embed the external
examination system and apply peer pressure for maintaining quality through collaborative
arrangements and networking amongst unequals – within and without the region. Linking the
local certification systems to the global standard enforcement system will augur well for the
overall reputation of the tertiary education system in Africa.

Finally, there are ongoing measures to reverse brain drain and make use of qualified Africans in
the diaspora. Repatriation programs have had modest success partly because they are expensive.
A new initiative is being contemplated between IOM and African countries focused on making
use of African talent, wherever it is. The three components of this initiative are temporary return
to perform tasks and train for a limited time, a virtual return using information technology and an
economic return through encouraging investment at home by Africans abroad. It is instructive
that the first two components of the initiative would also help to strengthen the capacity of the
tertiary education system to deliver better and more useful products.




                                                22
       References


Apraku, K.K. (1991) African Emigres in the United States. A Missing Link in Africa’s Social and
      Economic Development. New York, Praeger.
Bahgwati, J. N. and Hamada, K. (1974). “The Brain Drain, International Integration of Markets for
      Professionals and Unemployment: A Theoretical Analysis”. Journal of Development Economics,
      Vo. 1. No. 1 pp. 19-42.

Barr, N. (1998)., "Market Forces and Education", Report of a presentation made at the World Bank,
       December 18,1998.
Barro, R.J. (1998), “Human Capital and Growth in Cross Country Regressions” Harvard University,
       October
Barro, R. J. (1997). “Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study”.
       Cambridge MA, MIT Press.

Barro, R. J. and Lee Jong-Wha (1993). “International Comparison of Educational Attainment”. Journal
       of Monetary Economics, No. 32, pp. 363-94

Beine, M., Docquier, F. and Rapoport, H. (1997) “Brain Drain and economic Development: Theory and
       evidence.” Journal of Economic Literature, JEL classifications: F22, J24, O15.

Borensztein, E., De Gregorio, J. and Lee, J-W. (1998). “How Does Foreign Direct Investment Affect
      Economic Growth?”. Journal of International Economics, Vol. 45. pp 115 – 135.
Brundenius, C. (1996), “How Painful is the Transition? Reflections on Patterns of Economic Growth,
      Long Waves and the ICT Revolution” in Mats Lundhal and Benno J. Ndulu New Directions in
      Development Economics- Growth, Environmental Concerns and Government in the 1990s,
      Routledge, London and New York.

Carrington, W. J. and Detrachiage, E. (1998) “How big is the Brain Drain?” IMF Working Paper No.
       102. Washington.

Carrington, W. J. and Detrachiage, E. (1999). “How Extensive Is the Brain Drain?”. Finance and
       Development: A Quarterly Magazine of the IMF, Vol. 36 No. 2.

Cohen, R. (1996). “Brain Drain Migration”. South Africa Comission on International Migration, 7.
Collier, P. and Hoeffler and Patillo, (1999) “Flight Capital as a Portfolio Choice” Policy Research
        Working Paper 2066, World Bank.

Collier, P. and Gunning J. (1999) “Why Has Africa Grown Slowly?” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 37, *March): 64-111.

Court, D. (2001). “Financing Higher Education In Africa: Makerere the Quiet Revolution” World Bank
       mimeo.
Docquier, R. N. and Rapoport, H. (1997). “La fuite des cerveaux, une chance pour les pays en
       developpement?’’. Annual Meeting on French Economic Association, Paris, September.



                                                      23
Eatwell et al., (1996). New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Vol. 2. p. 682.

Findlay, R. (1978) “Relative Backwardness, Direct Foreign Investment, and the Transfer of Technology:
       A simple dynamic model” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 92, 1-16

Galor, O. and Tsiddon, D. (1997). “The Distribution of Human Capital and Economic Growth”. Journal
       of Economic Growth, Vol. 2. No. 1. pp 93-124.
Hanushek, E. and D. Kim (1995) “ Schooling, Labor Force Quality and Economic Growth” Rochester
       Center for Economic Research, Working Paper no. 411, September.

Hatton T.J. and J.G. Williamson (2000), “Out of Africa? Using the Past toProject Future African
       Demand for Emigration” Conference on Globalization: Trade, Financial and Political Economy
       Aspects, Delphi, Greece, May

Haque, Ul. N. and Aziz J. (1998) “The Quality of Governance : ‘Second –Generation’ Civil Service
      Reform in Africa” IMF Working Paper No. 164.

Haque Ul. N. and Khan, A. (1997) “Institutional Development: Skill Transference Through a Reversal
      of ‘Human Capital Flight’ or Technical Assistance” IMF Working Paper No. 89.

Haque, N. U. and Kim, S.-J. (1995). “Human Capital Flight: Impact of Migration on Income and
      Growth”. I.M.F Staff Papers, Vol. 42, No. 3 pp. 377-607.

Integrated Regional Information Networks (IRIN), 2001: “Southern Africa: New Initiative to Tackle
        Brain Drain” A Bulletin.

International Organization for Migration - IOM (2000) “Migration in Africa: Globalization and
        Prospects for Regional Mechanisms” A Statement by Brunson McKinley, Director General,
        Addis Ababa October 18.

Lee Jong-Wha and Barro, Robert J. (1997). “Schooling Quality in a Cross-section of Countries”. NBER
       Working Paper, No. 6198.
Lindbaek, J. (1997). “Emerging Economies: How Long Will The Low-Wage Advantage Last?”.
       Background paper for a speech by IFC Excecutive Vice President. APPI Meeting. October, 3rd
       1997. Helsinki,

Miyagiwa, K. (1991). “Scale Economies in Education and the Brain Drain Problem”. International
      Economic Review, Vol. 32. No. 3. pp. 743-759.

Mountford, A. (1997). “Can Brain Drain be Good for Growth in the Source Economy?”. Journal of
      Development Economics, Vol. 53. No. 2. pp. 287-303.

Ndulu B. J. (2001). “From Vision to Reality of African Economic Integration: Priority Actions and the
      Institutional Framework For the Way Forward” a paper presented to the Conference of the
      Association Of African Central Banks, Johannesburg, South Africa.



                                                     24
Ndulu, B. J. (1996). “Africa’s New Realities Challenge Policy Institutes”. Center for International
       Private Enterprise.
OED (1994) “The World Bank’s Role in Human Resource Development in Sub-Saharan Africa:
       Education, Training and Technical Assistance”, Sector Study no. 13449, World Bank.

Oyowe, A. (1996) Brain Drain: “Colossal loss of Investment for Developing Countries” Europe's Forum
     on International Cooperation. Article No. 159.

Piketty, T. (1997). “Immigration et Justice Sociale’’. Revue Economique, Vol. 48 No. 5 pp. 1291-1309.

Pires, M.J., R. Kassimir,and M. Brhane (1999) Investing in Return : Rates of Return of African Ph.D.s
       Trained in North America. New York: Social Science Research Council

Prewitt, K. (2001) “ Higher Education, Society and Government: Changing Dynamics”

UNDP (1992) Human Development Report

UNHCR, 2001: A Bulletin; Key Findings, Refugees and migration

Vidal, J.-P. (1998). “The Effect of Emigration on Human Capital Formation”. Journal of Population
       Economics, Vol. 11. No. 4.

Zeleza, P. T. (1998) African Labor and Intellectual Migrations to the North: Building New Transatlantic
       Bridges.




                                                     25
   Table 1: Estimates of Brain Drain from Sub-Saharan Africa
                                 Total emigration of highly
          Period                                                      Average Per year.
                                skilled migrants from Africa
1960-75                                    27,000                            1,800
1975-84                                    40,000                            4,400
1974-87                                    70,000                           23,000
                              50,000 – 60,000 middle and high level managers emigrated
1986-90
                              from the continent
1960-87                       100,000 trained and qualified Africans abroad. 30% of its highly
                              skilled manpower.
1960s                         More than Half of the Africans who went overseas to study
                              physics and chemistry in the 1960s never went back home.


Source:Haque and Aziz(1998)




           Table 2: Foreign and National Adult populations classified by level of
                          education in selected OECD countries
                             1995 - 98 average, Percentages

                     Lower Secondary      Upper Secondary     Third level (Tertiary)
                   Foreigners Nationals Foreigners Nationals Foreigners Nationals
           USA         35       15.7       24.1        35       40.9         49.3
           Germany    48.5      13.2        37       62.2       14.4         24.6
           France     63.3      33.4       22.9      45.4       13.8         21.1
           Italy      47.1      56.3       38.3      34.3       14.6          9.3
           U.K        65.1      43.9       14.7      32.5       20.2         23.7
           Canada     22.2      23.1       54.9      60.3       22.9         16.6
           Sweden     30.8      20.4       41.5      50.3       27.3         29.3

           Source: compiled from OECD, Trends in International Migration, various issues




                                                26
Table3. Migration to the USA by Education Attainment for Selected African Countries 1990

                                             schooling level                     Secondary
                                                                       Secondary
                                                                                 Plus        Tertiary as
                                                                       Plus
                                                                                 Tertiary as a Percent of
                                                                       Tertiary
                                                                                 a perent of Total
   Country of origin        total   primary or less secondary Tertiary           Total
Algeria                    3904           60          1280     2564       3844       98         65.68
Benin                       180           20            80       80        160       89         44.44
Cameroon                   1694           60           200     1434       1634       96         84.65
Central African Republic    160            0            60      100        160      100         62.50
Congo                       200           0            20       180        200      100         90.00
Egypt                      53261         980          13020    39261     52281       98         73.71
Gambia                      747          100           120      527        647       87         70.55
Ghana                      12544          40          3400     9104      12504      100         72.58
Kenya                       8372          40          1420     6912       8332      100         82.56
Lesotho                     160            0            20      140        160      100         87.50
Malawi                      381            0           120      261        381      100         68.50
Mali                        220            0           100      120        220      100         54.55
Mauritius                  1100            0           260      840       1100      100         76.36
Mozambique                  920           80           280      560        840       91         60.87
Rwanda                      200            0            20      180        200      100         90.00
Senegal                    1370          180           420      770       1190       87         56.20
Siera leone                4155           80          1060     3015       4075       98         72.56
South Africa               22678         200          4980     17498     22478       99         77.16
Sudan                      2496            0           760     1736       2496      100         69.55
Togo                        460           20           140      300        440       96         65.22
Tunisia                    2816           60          1120     1636       2756       98         58.10
Uganda                     5060          120          1000     3940       4940       98         77.87
Zambia                     1613            0           340     1273       1613      100         78.92
Zimbabwe                   3161           20           420     2721       3141       99         86.08
Total / Average            127852       2060         30640 95152 125792             98%       74.42%

    Source: Carrington and Detragiache (1998) table1.


Note: Most of the individuals reflected in the above estimates have received their academic
qualifications in their home countries.




                                                   27
Table 4: Return Status By Country of African Ph.D. Recipients in North America, 1986-1996

50% or Greater
Return "Home"                           Return Rates (%)
                      Total PhDs       home     Africa Stay        Other
Benin                      4             50      50
Botswana                  19             94               6
Bukina Faso               25             79      13       8
Burundi                   14             57              43
Cape Vede                  2            100
Chad                       2            100
Congo-Brazzaville          5                     67      33
Guinea                    11             70              20          10
Ivory Coast               42             59       4      37
Kenya                    155            65        5      28          2
Lesotho                   12             90      10
Madagascar                18             67      11      11          11
Malawi                    39             81       8      11
Mali                      17             77              23
Mauritania                 7             50              25          25
Mozambique                 6             80              20
Namibia                    2            100
Níger                     21             62              38
Senegal                   16             62              38
South Africa             223             67              30
Swaziland                 31             80      10      10
Tanzania                  58             79       2      19
Togo                      24            68        5      26
Uganda                    54             79       3      17
Zambial                   38             79       4      18
Zimbabwe                  51             83       7      10

50% or Greater Stay                       Return Status
Angola                      1                             100
Cameroon                   62           33         5       60        3
Gambia                      7           33         17      50
Ghana                     166           34         5       61
Liberia                    23           21         21      58
Mauritius                   8           40                 60
Nigeria                   261           34         3       62        2
Siera Leone                30           22         6       72
Somalia                    17           33         11      56

Dispersed Location                       Return Status
Ethiopia                   89           47        4       47         2
Rwanda                     16           36       14       43          7
Sudan                      92           48        5       35         11
Congo Dem. Rep             33           42       17       42

Other                                     Return status
Guinea-Bisau               4                                        100
Source: Zeleza (1998)




                                                    28
Table 5: Scientists and Engineers Doing R&D in the United States (1993)

                                     Total          Education                Industry        Government
                            All                  All                  All                  All
                            degree      Ph.D.s   degree      Ph.D.s   degree      Ph.D.s   degree   Ph.D.s
                            levels               levels               levels               levels
Total engaged in U.S.
                            2,685,000 345,000 592,000 179,000 1,747,000 135,000 346,000 31,000
R&D
 U.S.-born                  2,254,000 244,000 470,000 128,000 1,477,000 90,000             307,000 26,000
 Foreign-born               431,000   101,000 122,000 51,000 270,000    45,000             39,000 5,000
   Location of S&E
degree
Foreign school              138,000     32,000   41,000      16,000   87,000      14,000   9,000    2,000
 U.S. school*               293,000     70,000   81,000      35,000   183,000     31,000   29,000   4,000
 Foreign-Born in R&D
as percent of total         16.1        29.3     20.7        28.5     15.5        33.2     11.2     17.3
engaged in R&D
 U.S school as percent of
                            67.9        68.7     56.1        67.9     67.6        69.6     75.8     69.2
foreign-born in R&D


*Location of highest earned S&E degree. Source: National Science Foundation, Division of
Science Resources Studies, SESTAT database.




                                                        29
