                   90288

 INTRODUCTION
      TO
POVERTY ANALYSIS
                                 Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1: THE CONCEPT OF POVERTY AND WELL-BEING
1.1 The concept of well-being and poverty
1.2 why measure poverty
CHAPTER 2: MEASURING POVERTY
2.1 Steps in measuring poverty
2.2 Household surveys
2.3 Measuring poverty: choose an indicator of welfare
CHAPTER 3:   POVERTY LINE
3.1   how to define a poverty line
3.2   Issues in choosing poverty line
3.3   Solution A: objective poverty lines
3.4   Solution B: subjective poverty lines
CHAPTER 4: POVERTY MEASURES

4.1   Headcount index
4.2   Poverty gap index
4.3   Squared poverty gap index
4.4   Sen index
4.5   Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index
4.6   Time taken to exit
4.7   Other measures
CHAPTER 5: POVERTY INDEXES--COMPARISON OF MEASURES

5.1   Introduction
5.2   Measurement errors
5.3   Equivalence scales
5.4   Robustness of ordinal poverty comparisons
5.5   Summary
CHAPTER 6: INEQUALITY MEASURES
6.1   Definition of inequality
6.2   Commonly used measures of inequality
6.3   Inequality comparisons
6.4   Decomposition of income inequality
CHAPTER 7: DESCRIBING POVERTY: POVERTY PROFILES

7.1   What is poverty profile
7.2   Additive poverty measures
7.3   Profile presentation
7.4   Poverty comparison over time
7.5   Excerpts from poverty profiles for Indonesia and Cambodia
7.6   Poverty mapping


                                          2
CHAPTER 8: UNDERSTANDING THE DETERMINANTS OF POVERTY

8.1   What causes poverty
8.2   regional level characteristics
8.3   community level characteristics
8.4   Household and individual level characteristics
8.5   Understanding the quantitative determinants
8.6   Understanding the qualitative determinants
8.7   Analyzing the determinants of poverty
CHAPTER 9: POVERTY REDUCTION POLICIES

9.1 A framework for action
9.2 Practice and good examples




                                         3
                                           An Overview

         This manual presents an introductory course on poverty analysis. The course is designed
as part of a broader training program of the World Bank Institute called the Poverty Analysis
Initiative (PAI). Its objective is to improve in-country capacity in poverty analysis in poor
countries; it focuses especially on developing the skills of statisticians, policy analysts, and
researchers in the analysis of data emerging from household surveys, in order to support the
policy work related to the PRSP (Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper) process involving poverty
identification, measurement, monitoring, and evaluation. This manual covers introductory topics
related to poverty measurement and diagnostics, and applies these methods using household
survey data. The topics included in this manual are: the concept of well-being, why measure
poverty, how measure poverty, setting poverty lines, poverty indices and their comparisons,
inequality measures, poverty profiles, the determinants of poverty, and how poverty analysis is
linked to poverty reduction policies.

        The manual includes discussions of these topics with illustrations from different
countries. Many of the materials included in this manual are drawn from the work of Martin
Ravallion of the World Bank’s Development Research Group. The manual has benefited from
work of others from inside and outside the World Bank. These course materials were used for
training in a Regional workshop in the Philippines and a national workshop in Cambodia. This
manual has been prepared under the general direction of Shahid Khandker of the World Bank
Institute with contributions from Jonathan Haughton, Kathleen Beegle, Celia Reyes, and Nidhiya
Menon. The STATA exercises were prepared by Hussain Samad and Changqing Sun.

        The manual provides the tools for carrying out basic poverty analysis with household
data, using STATA software. It includes tailor-made exercises to illustrate the techniques and
measures discussed in different chapters. The manual provides a course curriculum with an
outline of a full-time 9-day training program of morning lectures and afternoon practice
exercises..

        The manual will be updated in the future with new exercises based on other software
such as SPSS and SAS. This will also provide links to other poverty analysis tools as well as on-
line software such as DAD.

        We hope that the course materials presented here are useful for self-learning. If you have
any questions, please contact Shahid Khandker at skhandker@worldbank.org. Your opinions
and suggestions will help improve the presentation of the course materials and make them more
useful. The ultimate goal of this course is to enhance local capacity in poverty analysis. We
hope that this manual will contribute to this goal.




                                                    4
                                                CHAPTER 1

                           The Concept of Poverty and Well-being


1.1 The concept of well-being and poverty
         There are many different definitions and concepts of well-being. For example, we can think of
one’s well-being as the command over commodities in general; people are better off if they have a greater
command over resources. Or, we can think of the ability to obtain a specific type of consumption good
(e.g. food, housing). People who have a lack of “capabilities” might have lower well-being (Sen 1987).
Lack of capability means inability to achieve certain "functioning" ("being and doings"), lack of well-
being, and vulnerability to income and weather shocks. Thus, poverty means either lack of command over
commodities in general (i.e., a severe constriction of the choice set (Watts 1968)) or a specific type of
consumption (e.g., too little food energy intake) deemed essential to constitute a reasonable standard of
living in a society, or lack of "ability" to function in a society.

        This course focuses on what is typically referred to as poverty, namely whether households or
individuals have enough resources or abilities to meet their needs. This aspect is based on the comparison
of individuals' income, consumption, education or other attributes with some defined threshold below
which they are considered as being poor in that attribute. Poverty is a deprivation of essential assets and
opportunities to which every human being is entitled. Thus, clearly, one can think of poverty from a non-
monetary perspective. Although widely used, monetary poverty is not the exclusive paradigm for poverty
measurement and non-monetary dimensions of poverty are useful in assessing poverty components,
particularly for case study research.

         Poverty is also associated with insufficient outcomes with respect to health, nutrition and literacy,
to deficient social relations, to insecurity, and to low self-confidence and powerlessness. In some cases, it
is feasible to apply the tools that have been developed for monetary poverty measurement to non-
monetary indicators of well-being. A few examples of dimensions of well-being for which the techniques
could be used include:

•   Health and nutrition poverty:
            The health status of household members can be taken as an important indicator of well-being.
    One could focus on the nutritional status of children as a measure of outcome, as well as on the
    incidence of specific diseases (diarrhea, malaria, respiratory diseases), or life expectancy for different
    groups within the population.
•   Education poverty:
            In the field of education, one could use the level of literacy as the defining characteristic, and
    some level judged as the threshold for illiteracy as the “poverty line”. Another alternative consists in
    comparing the number of years of education completed to the expected number of years of education
    that should be in principle completed.

         There are certainly other concepts of well-being beyond poverty, both measured through
monetary concepts and non-monetary dimensions. Consider inequality. Inequality focuses on the
distribution of attributes, such as income or consumption, across the population. This is based on the
premise that the relative position of individual of households in society is an important aspect of their
welfare. In addition, the overall level of inequality in a country, region or population group, in terms of


                                                          5
monetary and on-monetary dimensions, is also an important summary indicator of the level of welfare in
that group. Another notion of well-being is vulnerability. This is defined as the probability or risk today
of being in poverty, or falling deeper in to poverty, in the future. Vulnerability is a key dimension of
well-being since it affects individuals’ behavior (in terms of investment, production patterns, coping
strategies) and the perceptions of their own situations.

        According to the World Bank (World Bank 2000), “poverty is pronounced deprivation in well-
being”, where well-being can be measured by an individual’s possession of income, health, nutrition,
education, assets, housing, and certain rights in a society such as freedom of speech. Also poverty is a
lack of opportunities, powerlessness, and vulnerability. Poverty is truly a multi-dimensional phenomenon
in such a setting and requires multi-dimensional policy and program interventions in order to improve the
well-being of individuals and, hence, make them free from poverty.

         For example, economic growth is crucial to the creation of opportunities. However, growth is not
enough; the poor and the vulnerable may not be able to benefit from growth, because they lack health, or
skills, or access to basic infrastructure. Empowerment is crucial for the poor to take advantage of
opportunities created by growth. What do we mean by empowerment? Empowerment means increasing
the capacity of poor people to affect the decisions that have a bearing on their lives, by investing in them
and by removing barriers that they face to engaging in political, social and economic activities. Again,
growth and empowerment may not be enough for a large number of poor in a society. There may be a lot
of people who are vulnerable to risks such as illness and injury, economic downturns, and natural
disasters, which limit their opportunities as well as capabilities to avail of these opportunities created by
growth. Consequently, these people are forced to choose low-risk, low-return activities, and cause them
to loose productive assets and be set back further into poverty. Thus, public safety net mechanisms
should be there to reduce the impact of such shocks on the poor and help the poor manage the
consequences of these shocks.

        Although the concepts, measures and analytical tools can be applied to numerous dimensions of
well-being, such as income, consumption, health, education, asset ownership, and vulnerability, this
course focuses primarily on the consumption dimension and only casually refers to the other dimensions
of poverty.



1.2 Why measure poverty
        Why measure poverty? Perhaps the strongest justification is that provided by Ravallion (1998),
who argued that "a credible measure of poverty can be a powerful instrument for focusing the attention of
policy makers on the living conditions of the poor." Poverty data can inform policies intended to reduce
poverty. A good measure of poverty would:

•   allow one to assess the effects of projects, or crises, or government policies, on poverty,
•   permit one to compare poverty over time,
•   enable one to make comparisons with other countries, and
•   target the poor with a view to improving their position.

        Alternatively, we could think of four questions we want to answer with poverty analysis:

•   How many are poor or how bad is the poverty problem?           Measuring poverty.
•   Who is poor?                                                   The poverty profile.
•   Why are they poor?                                             The determinants of poverty.


                                                          6
•   What happens to poverty if…?                                  Policy implications.

        “Our dream is a world free of poverty,” writes the World Bank, and its first mission statement is
“to fight poverty with passion and professionalism for lasting results.” The institution’s success in
pursuing this goal can only be judged if there are adequate measures of poverty. For policy purposes, the
most important reason for measuring poverty is not the need for a descriptive number, but to make
poverty comparisons in order to develop antipoverty programs and monitor development progress and
growth strategies.

         Poverty profiles are typically developed from our measures of poverty. For a straightforward
example, see Nicholas Prescott and Menno Pradhan, A Poverty Profile of Cambodia (1997). Answering
basic policy questions on poverty in Cambodia, for example, requires a systematic information base on
the distribution of living standards among the population. Constructing a nationwide poverty profile
supports the government’s effort to strengthen poverty reduction policies. A poverty profile sets out the
major facts on poverty (and, typically, inequality), and then examines the pattern of poverty, to see how it
varies by geography (by region, urban/rural, mountain/plain, etc.), by community characteristics (e.g. in
communities with and without a school, etc.), and by household characteristics (e.g. by education of
household head, by size of household). A well-presented poverty profile is invaluable. Although it
typically uses rather basic techniques such as tables and graphs, it can be immensely informative.

        Whatever the justification for measuring poverty, it is commonly done based on data gathered
from household surveys. All developed countries, and about two-thirds of developing countries, have
undertaken nationally representative household surveys to collect information on consumption and/or
income; in many cases, these surveys have been repeated over time.


1.2.1 Why measure poverty: developing a growth strategy
        Understanding the characteristics of poverty can help policy makers think about the impact of
growth strategies. For example, with measures of poverty over time, we can assess if poverty has
increased or decreased, or whether general economic growth helped the poor. With changes in relative
prices, we can evaluate how these changes affect the poor. We can use poverty data to inform economy-
wide policy reforms and how the poor are affected by such reforms.

         Poverty reduction was the central goal of Cambodia’s first Socioeconomic Development Plan
(1996-2000). Better and up-to-date information about the poor is essential to assist the Government in
designing effective policies for attacking poverty. Who are the poor? How many poor are there? Where
do they live? What are their sources of income? Policies intended to help the poor can not succeed
unless the Government knows who the poor are and how they are likely to respond different growth
strategies.


1.2.2   Why measure poverty: social spending
        By collecting information on households and their economic status, we can assess who uses
public services and who gains from government subsidies. If programs are cut or there is retrenchment of
the public sector, poverty data help inform us of the effects of these plans on the poor. Using information
on poverty, we can simulate the impact of different policies.




                                                         7
1.2.3 Why measure poverty: targeted interventions
         With data on household poverty status, we can evaluate the impact of programs on the poor and
determine whether these programs meet their goals with respect to targeting certain households.
Targeting the design and placement of anti-poverty programs is essential to effectively and efficiently
reach disadvantaged groups and backward areas. Poverty profiles can help governments identify potential
targeting by region, employment, education and gender.

        Probably the most important use of the poverty profile is to support efforts to target development
resources towards poorer areas, aiming to reduce aggregate poverty through regional targeting. Which
regions should command priority in targeting? This question can only be answered at a highly aggregate
level by most survey data (like the Cambodian SESC of 1993/94 and the CSES of 1999) because of the
limited number of geographic domains that were sampled. So, while this provides a broad sense of the
appropriate policy orientation in regional targeting, it is obviously of somewhat limited practical value for
choosing the geographic placement of project interventions. However, the poverty rates from these
surveys can still be of broad use for targeting. For example, in the CSES 1999, poverty is lowest in
Phnom Penh where the headcount poverty rate was 15% compared to the national poverty rate of 51%
from the CSES 1999.

        Another type of targeting is employment targeting. The ability of the vast majority of households
in Cambodia to escape poverty will depend on their earnings from employment. Thus it is important to
examine the relationship between poverty and the types of employment of working-age household
members. Looking first at the distribution of poverty incidence, the highest poverty rate was found
among people living in households headed by farmers (46% in 1993/94 in Cambodia). By contrast,
households headed by someone working in the government are least likely to be poor; in these
occupations the poverty rate was 20% (1993/94). Clearly policies that aim at reducing poverty through
enhancing income-generating capabilities should be targeted towards the agricultural sector.

         The relationship between poverty and education is particularly important because of the key role
played by education in raising economic growth and reducing poverty. The better educated have higher
incomes and thus are much less likely to be poor. Cambodians living in households with an uneducated
household head are more likely to be poor, with a poverty rate of 47% in 1993/94. With higher levels of
education, the likelihood of being poor falls considerably. Raising education attainment is clearly a high
priority in order to improve living standards and reduce poverty.

         The relationship between gender and poverty may also indicate another targeting strategy for
poverty reduction. One indicator of the gender gap is whether female-headed household are worse off
than those headed by males. This might be a concern in Cambodia since about 25% of the population
lives in households headed by women. In fact, the CSES 1999 data show that female-headed households
in Cambodia are not more likely to be poor than male-headed households. There was no difference in
poverty rates between the population of female-headed and male-headed households. In fact, the poverty
rate was slight lower among female-headed households in the CSES 1999 (48% compared to 52% for
male-headed households).


1.2.4 Why measure poverty: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)
        Counting the poor is very important to help policymakers to design programs and policies to fight
poverty. The World Bank introduced the Poverty Reduction Strategies Paper (PRSP) for the Highly
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) in 1999, which is supposed to be a country-driven policy paper setting
out a strategy for fighting poverty. The PRSP is becoming a central instrument of the Bank’s lending
programs in many poor countries. The underlying principles of the PRSP are that this policy paper on

                                                         8
fighting poverty should becountry-driven, results-oriented and comprehensive, based on the participation
of civil societies along with partnerships from donors. The basic thrust of the PRSP process is that this is
a long-term perspective of a country’s development plan to reduce poverty. The key step for developing
the PRSP lies in understanding the characteristics and causes of poverty, once it is known how many poor
are there in a country. Thus, measuring poverty is the central theme of policy papers such as the PRSP.
But this is only a means to achieving an end. The end is reducing the number of poor. Thus, once
poverty is measured and the poor are identified, the next steps in the PRSP are to choose public actions
and programs that have the greatest impact on poverty, identify indicators of progress, and monitor
change in a systematic manner. Poverty measurement and diagnostics are therefore central to informing
policy making for poverty reduction in many countries.




                                                         9
                                              Chapter 2


                                      Measuring Poverty


2.1 Steps in measuring poverty
         The goal of this chapter is to set out a method for measuring poverty. There is an enormous
literature on the subject, so we just set out the main practical issues, with some suggestions for further
reading for those interested in pursuing the subject in more depth.

        Three steps need to be taken in measuring poverty (for more discussion see Ravallion, 1998).
These include:

        •   defining an indicator of welfare,
        •   establishing a minimum acceptable standard of that indicator to separate the poor and the
            non-poor (often known as a poverty line), and
        •   generating a summary statistic to aggregate the information from the distribution of this
            welfare indicator and its position relative to minimum acceptable standards.

         This chapter focuses on the indicators of welfare, while chapter 3 discusses the issues involved in
setting a poverty line and chapter 4 dwells on measures of aggregate welfare and its distribution.



2.2 Household surveys

2.2.1 Key survey issues
        Before discussing the various indicators of welfare, let us look briefly at household surveys,
which are the main instruments for collecting data to support poverty analysis. Household surveys are
extremely important in making poverty comparisons, but care must be taken in setting up and interpreting
the data that are obtained from such surveys. The analyst should be aware of the following issues (see
Ravallion (1999) for details):

i)      The sample frame: The survey may represent a whole country's population, or some more
        narrowly defined sub-set, such as workers or residents of one region. The appropriateness
        of a survey's particular sample frame will depend on the inferences one wants to draw
        from it.

ii)     The unit of observation: This can be the household itself or the individuals within the
        household. A household is usually defined as a group of persons eating and living together.

iii)    The number of observations over time: A single cross-section, based on one or two
        interviews, is the most common. Longitudinal surveys in which the same household is re-

                                                        10
          surveyed over an extended period (also called panel data sets) have been done in a
          number of countries.

iv)       The principal living standard indicator collected: The most common indicators used in
          practice are based on household consumption expenditure and household income. The most
          common survey used in poverty analysis is a single cross-section for a nationally representative
          sample, with the household as the unit of observation, and it includes either consumption or
          income data. This form of survey is cheaper per household surveyed than most alternatives, and
          this allows a larger sample than with longitudinal and or individual based survey. A larger sample
          of household-level data gives greater accuracy in estimating certain population parameters, such
          as average consumption per capita, but, of course, it can lose accuracy in estimating other
          variables, such as the number of under-nourished children in a population (which may require
          oversampling of the target group). It should not, however, be presumed that the large household
          consumption survey is more cost-effective for all purposes than alternatives, such as using
          smaller samples of individual data.


2.2.2 Common survey problems
       The following are the main problems for the practitioner to be aware of when interpreting
household consumption or income data from a household survey.


2.2.2.1       Survey design

         Even very large samples may give biased estimates for poverty measurement if the survey is not
random, or if the data extracted from it have not been corrected for possible biases, such as due to sample
stratification. A random sample requires that each person in the population or each sub-group in a
stratified sample - have an equal chance of being selected. This guarantees statistical independence, the
assumption that underlies most of the results used routinely in making statistical inferences about
population parameters from sample surveys.

        However, the poor may not be properly represented in sample surveys; for example they may be
harder to interview because they live in remote areas, or are itinerant, or live illegally in the cities and so
do not appear on the rosters of the local authorities. Household surveys often miss one distinct sub-group
of the poor: those who are homeless. Also, some of the surveys that have been used to measure poverty
were not designed for this purpose, in that their sample frames were not intended to span the entire
population; examples include the labor force surveys (widely used for poverty assessments in Latin
America) for which the sample frame is typically restricted to the "economically active population,"
which precludes certain sub-groups of the poor.

          Key questions to ask about the survey are:
       a) Does the sample frame (the initial listing of the population from which the sample was drawn)
          span the entire population?
       b) Is there likely to be a response bias, in that the likelihood of cooperating with the interviewer
          is not random?

       There are various methods of sampling that can help achieve a more cost-effective survey than
would be possible with simple random sampling. Stratified random sampling –whereby different sub-
groups of the population have different (but known) chances of being selected but all have an equal


                                                          11
chance in any given subgroup - can increase the precision in poverty measurement obtainable with a
given number of interviews; for example, one can over-sample certain regions where the poor are thought
to be concentrated.




2.2.2.2     Goods coverage and valuation

        The coverage of goods and income sources in the survey should be comprehensive, covering both
food and non-food goods, and all income sources. Consumption should cover all monetary expenditures
on goods and services consumed plus the monetary value of all consumption from income in kind, such
as food produced on the family farm and the rental value of owner-occupied housing. Similarly, the
income definition should include income in kind. Local market prices often provide a good guide for
valuation of own-farm production or owner occupied housing. However, whenever prices are unknown,
or are an unreliable guide to reflect opportunity costs, serious valuation problems can arise. The valuation
of access to public services is also difficult, though important. For transfers of in-kind goods, prevailing
equivalent market prices are generally considered to be satisfactory for valuation. Non-market goods
present a more serious problem, and there is no widely preferred method; we return to this problem in
more detail below


2.2.2.3     Variability and the time period of measurement

        Inter-temporal variability has implications for a number of the choices made in measurement
using survey data. One is the choice between income-based and consumption-based measures. One
reason for preferring current consumption to current income as the indicator of living standards is because
current income usually varies significantly more than current consumption. The incomes of the poor
often vary over time in fairly predictable ways, particularly in underdeveloped rural economies depending
on rain-fed agriculture. Typically, some kinds of consumption smoothing mechanisms available to the
poor, such as through savings and community-based mutual risk-sharing arrangement. This observation
has two distinct implications for welfare measurement:

i) current consumption will almost certainly be a better indicator than current income of current standard
of living because current consumption reflects more accurately how much resource households control,
and

ii) current consumption may then also be a good indicator of long-term well-being, as it will reveal
information about incomes at other dates, in the past and future.

        However, a number of factors can make current consumption a "noisy" welfare indicator. Even
with ideal smoothing, consumption will still (as a rule) vary over the life-cycle. This may be less of a
problem in traditional societies where resource pooling within an extended family is still the norm,
though that is rapidly changing. More importantly, there are other sources of noise in the relationship
between current consumption and long-term standard of living. Different households may face different
constraints on their opportunities for consumption smoothing. It is generally thought that the poor are far
more constrained in their ability to smooth consumption due to lack of borrowing options than the non-
poor (also suggesting that life-time wealth is not the only parameter of life-time welfare).




                                                        12
2.2.2.4      Comparisons across households at similar consumption levels

         Household size and demographic composition vary across households, as do prices, including
wage rates. As a result, it takes different resources to make ends meet for different households. In other
words, at given a given level of household expenditure, different households may achieve different levels
of well-being. There are various welfarist approaches based on demand analysis, including equivalence
scales, true cost-of-living indices, and equivalent income measures, which try to deal with this problem.
The basic idea of these methods of welfare measurement is to use demand patterns to reveal consumer
preferences over market goods. The consumer is assumed to maximize utility, and a utility metric is
derived that is consistent with observed demand behavior, relating consumption to prices, incomes,
household size, and demographic composition. The resulting measure of household utility will typically
vary positively with total household expenditures, and negatively with household size and the prices
faced.

         The most general formulation of this approach is the concept of "equivalent income", defined as
the minimum total expenditure that would be required for a consumer to achieve his or her actual utility
level but evaluated at pre-determined (and arbitrary) reference prices and demographics fixed over all
households. This gives an exact monetary measure of utility (and, indeed, it is sometimes called "money
metric utility"). Quite generally, equivalent income can be thought of as money expenditures (including
the value of own production) normalized by two deflators: a suitable price index (if prices vary over the
domain of the poverty comparison) and an equivalence scale (since household size and composition
varies). The precise form of these deflators will depend on preferences, which (in practice) are usually
taken to be revealed by demand behavior. These deflators are discussed further in the next section. There
are a number of problems that one should be aware of in all such behavioral welfare measures. A serious
problem arises when access to non-market goods (public services, and community characteristics) varies
across households. The consumption of market goods only reveal preferences conditional on these non-
market goods; they do not, in general, reveal unconditional preferences over both market and non-market
goods. A revealed set of conditional preferences over market goods may be consistent with infinitely
many utility functions representing preferences over all goods. It is then a big step to assume that a
particular utility function that can be found to support observed consumption behavior at an optimum is
also the one that should be used in measuring well-being.

        Ideally we should not have to rely solely on a household level survey in making interpersonal
comparisons of welfare. A separate community survey (done at the same time as the interviews, and
possibly by the same interviewers) can provide useful supplementary data on the local prices of a range of
goods and local public services. By matching these to the household level data one can greatly improve
the accuracy and coverage of household welfare assessments. This has become common practice in the
World Bank's LSMS surveys.


2.2.3     Key features of LSMS surveys

         The LSMS surveys have two key features: multi-topic questionnaires, and considerable attention
to quality control. Let's consider each in more detail.


2.2.3.1      Multi-topic questionnaires




                                                       13
       The LSMS surveys ask about a wide variety of topics, and not just demographic
characteristics or health experience or some other narrow issue.

•   The most important single questionnaire is the household questionnaire, which often runs to 100
    pages or more. Although there is an LSMS template, each country needs to adapt and test its own
    version. The questionnaire is designed to ask questions of the best-informed household member. The
    household questionnaire asks about household composition, consumption patterns including food and
    non-food, assets including housing, landholding and other durables, income and employment in
    agriculture/non-agriculture and wage/self-employment, socio-demographic variables including
    education, health, migration, fertility, and anthropometric information (especially the height and
    weight of each household member).
•   There is also a community questionnaire, which asks community leaders (teachers, health
    workers, village officials) for information about the whole community, such as the number of
    health clinics, access to schools, tax collections, demographic data, and agricultural patterns.
    Sometimes there are separate community questionnaires for health and education.
•   The third part is the price questionnaire, which collects information about a large number of
    commodity prices in each community where the survey is undertaken. This is useful because it
    allows analysts to correct for differences in price levels by region, and over time.


2.2.3.2       Quality control:

        The LSMS surveys are distinguished by their attention to quality control. Here are some
of the key features:

    •     Most importantly, they devote a lot of attention to obtaining a representative national sample (or
          regional sample, in a few cases). Thus the results can usually be taken as nationally
          representative. It is surprising how many surveys are undertaken with less attention to sampling,
          so one does not know how well they really represent conditions in the country.
    •     The surveys make extensive use of "screening questions" and associated skip patterns. For
          instance, a question might ask whether a family member is currently attending school; if yes, one
          jumps to page x and asks for details; if no, then the interviewer jumps to page y and asks other
          questions. This cuts down on interviewer errors.
    •     Numbered response codes are printed on the questionnaire, so the interviewer can write a
          numerical answer directly on the questionnaire. This makes subsequent computer entry easier,
          more accurate, and faster.
    •     The questionnaires are designed to be easy to change (and to translate), which makes it
          straightforward to modify them in the light of field tests.
    •     The data are collected by decentralized teams. Typically each team has a supervisor, two
          interviewers, a driver/cook, an anthropometrist, and someone who does the data entry onto a
          laptop computer. The household questionnaire is so long that it requires two visits for collecting
          the data. After the first visit, the data are entered; if errors arise, they can be corrected on the
          second visit, which is typically two weeks after the first visit. In most cases the data are entered
          onto printed questionnaires, and then typed into a computer, but some surveys now enter the
          information directly into computers.
    •     The data entered are subject to a series of range checks. For instance, if an age variable is greater
          than 100, then it is likely that there is an error, which needs to be corrected.

          This concern with quality has some important implications, notably:


                                                           14
•   The LSMS data is usually of high quality, with accurate entries and few missing values;
•   Since it is expensive to maintain high quality, the surveys are usually quite small; the median LSMS
    survey covers just 4,200 households. This is a large enough sample for accurate information at the
    national level, and at the level of half a dozen regions, but not at a lower level of disaggregation (e.g.
    province, department, county).
•   The LSMS data have a fairly rapid turnaround time, with some producing a statistical abstract (at
    least in draft form) within 2-6 months of the last interview.



2.3 Measuring poverty: choose an indicator of welfare

        There are a number of conceptual approaches to the measurement of well-being. The
most common approach is to measure economic welfare based on household consumption
expenditure or household income, which is then assigned each resident in the household a share
of the total amount. This is a per capita measure of consumption/expenditure or income. Of
course, there are non-monetary measures of individual welfare, which can include indicators
such as infant mortality rates in the region, life expectancy, proportion of spending devoted to
food, housing conditions, and child schooling. Well-being is a broader concept than economic
welfare, which only measures a person’s command over commodities.

        In brief, if we choose to assess poverty based on household consumption or expenditure per
capita, use of an expenditure function will facilitate a lucid analysis. In simple terms, an expenditure
function shows the minimum expense required to meet a given level of utility u, which is derived from a
vector of goods x, at prices p. It can be derived from an optimization problem in which the objective
function (for expenditure) is minimized subject to a set level of utility, in a framework where prices are
fixed. The expenditure function thus provides the minimum amount of resources required to attain a set
level of well-being, which is essentially what the poverty line is (see chapter 3). The function fits
naturally into the framework of poverty assessment, and is the first step needed in most analyses of
deprivation.

      Let the consumption measure for the household i be denoted by yi. Then an expenditure
measure of welfare may be denoted by:

        (2.1)                             y i = p ⋅ q = e( p , x , u )

where p is a vector of prices of goods and services, q is a vector of quantities of goods and services
consumed, e(.) is an expenditure function, x is a vector of household characteristics (e.g. number of
adults, number of young children, etc.) and u is the level of "utility" or well-being achieved by the
household. Put another way, given the prices (p) that it faces, and its demographic characteristics (x), yi
measures the spending that is needed to reach utility level u.

       Typically, we compute the actual level of yi from household survey data that include information
on consumption. The details of this are discussed below. Once we have computed yi , we can construct
per capita household consumption for every individual in the household. Thus, for all people in the
household’s survey we have one measure of their individual-level well-being, based on consumption.
Note that this approach, combined with our poverty line, assumes that all individuals in the household


                                                           15
have the same needs. In reality, different individuals have different needs based on their individual
characteristics (age, sex, job, etc).

         While estimating per capita consumption might seem straightforward, there are several factors
that complicate its estimation. Table 2.1 reports both nominal and real (adjusted for inflation) estimates
from three different household surveys in Cambodia. Using the 1997 Cambodia Socio-economic Survey
(CSES), for example, nominal and real per capita consumption were 2,223 and 1,887 riels, respectively.
Across years, the estimates in real terms for 1993/94 may not be directly comparable with the 1999
estimates because the surveys did not have the same set of questions regarding consumption. For
example, consumption per capita was computed as 2,262 riels for 1993/94. Using the data from 1999, the
estimate was 1,799. However, as is noted later, since the surveys are not exactly the same, the difference
may not be real but rather an artifact of the different ways in which questions were asked. These issues
will be discussed in more detail below.

        Table 2.1: Summary of per capita consumption from Cambodian Surveys
               Surveys                                       Nominal                     Riels
         SESC 1993/94                                         1,833                      2,262
         CSES 1997 (adjusted)                                 2,223                      2,530
         CSES 1997 (unadjusted)                               1,887                      2,153
         CSES 1999 (Round 1)                                  2,037                      1,630
         CSES 1999 (Round 2)                                  2,432                      1,964
         CSES 1999 (both Rounds)                              2,238                      1,799
                 Note: All values are in Riels per person per day. Real values are estimated in 1993/94 Phnom
       Penh prices, as deflated by the value of the food poverty lines. Adjusted figures from 1997 incorporate
       corrections for possible underestimation of certain types of consumption (see Knowles 1998, and Gibson
       1999 for details). Differences between Rounds 1 & 2 in 1999 are detailed in Gibson (1999).
       Source: Gibson (1999)

        Traditionally, we need a monetary measure to value household welfare. The two most obvious
candidates are income and expenditure.


2.3.1 Candidate 1: Income

        It is tempting to measure household welfare by looking at household income. Practical problems
arise immediately: what is income? and can it be measured accurately? The most generally accepted
measure of income is the one formulated by Haig and Simons:

                           Income ≡ consumption + change in net worth.

        Example: Suppose I had assets of $10,000 at the beginning of the year. During the year
I spent $3,000 on consumption. And at the end of the year I had $11,000 in assets. Then my
income was $4,000, of which $3,000 was spent, and the remaining $1,000 added to my assets.


         The first problem with this definition is that it is not clear what time period is appropriate.
Should we look at someone's income over a year? Five years? A lifetime? Many students are poor now,
but have good lifetime prospects, and we may not want to consider them as being truly poor. On the other
hand if we wait until we have information about someone's lifetime income, it will be too late to help him
or her in moments of poverty.

                                                               16
        The second problem is measurement. It is easy enough to measure components of income such
as wages and salaries. It may be possible to get adequate (if understated) information on interest,
dividends, and income from some types of self-employment. But it is likely to be hard to get an accurate
measure of farm income; or of the value of housing services; or of capital gains (e.g. the increase in the
value of animals on a farm, or the change in the value of a house that one owns).

        For instance, the Vietnam Living Standard Survey (VLSS; undertaken in 1993 and again in 1998)
collected information on the value of farm animals at the time of the survey, but not the value a year
before. Thus it was not possible to measure the change in the value of animal assets. Many farms that
reported negative cash income may in fact have been building up assets, and truly had positive income.

         It is typically the case, particularly in societies with large agricultural or self-employed
populations, that income is seriously understated. This certainly appears to be the case for Vietnam.
Table 2.2 shows income per capita for households in 1993 for each of five expenditure quintiles: a
quintile is a fifth of the sample, and quintile 1 contains the poorest fifth of individuals, etc. For every
quintile, households on average reported less income than expenditure, which is simply not plausible.
This would imply that households must be running down their assets, or taking on much more debt, which
was unlikely in a boom year like 1993.

Table 2.2: Income and expenditure by per capita expenditure quintiles, Vietnam
                                          (In dong per capita per year, 1992/93)
                           Lowest       Lower-mid       Middle        Mid-upper    Highest   Overall
 Income/capita              494           694            956          1,191        2,190     1,105
 Expenditure/capita         518           756            984          1,338        2,540     1,227
 Memo: food
 … spending/capita          378           526            643              807      1,382      747
 …    as     %     of
                              73           70             65              60         54        61
 expenditure
Note: In 1993, exchange rate was about 10,000 dong/US$. Source: VLSS93.

    There are a number of reasons why income tends to be understated:
    • People forget, particularly when asked in a single interview about items they may have purchased
       up to a year before.
    • People may be reluctant to disclose the full extent of their income, lest the tax collector, or
       neighbors, get wind of the details.
    • People may be reluctant to report income earned illegally - for instance from smuggling, or
       corruption, or poppy cultivation, or prostitution.
    • Some parts of income are difficult to observe - e.g. the extent to which the family buffalo has
       risen in value.

        Research based on the 1969-70 socio-economic survey in Sri Lanka estimated that wages were
understated by 30%, business income by 39%, and rent, interest and dividends by 78%. It is not clear
how much these figures are applicable elsewhere, but they do give a sense of the potential magnitude of
the understatement problem.


2.3.2    Candidate 2: Consumption expenditure




                                                               17
       Note that consumption includes both goods and services that are purchased, and those that are
provided from one's own production ("in-kind").

         In developed countries, a strong case can be made that consumption is a better indicator of
lifetime welfare than is income. Income fluctuates from year to year, and in addition typically rises and
then falls in the course of one's lifetime, whereas consumption remains relatively stable. The smoothing
of short-term fluctuations in income is also a hallmark of the permanent income hypothesis, under which
transitory income is saved while long-term ("permanent") income is largely consumed.

        The life cycle of income and consumption is captured graphically in figure 1. However the
available evidence does not provide strong support for this life-cycle hypothesis in the context of less-
developed countries although households do appear to smooth out the substantial seasonal fluctuations in
income that they face during the year (see Alderman and Paxson 1994; Paxson 1993).

    A more practical case for using consumption, rather than income, is that households may be more
able, or willing, to recall what they have spend rather than what they earned. Even so, consumption is
likely to be systematically understated, because:




            $



                                                                Consumption


                                                             Income




                                                             Age


        Figure 2.1 Life Cycle Hypothesis: Income and Consumption Profile over Time
    •   Households tend to under-declare what they spend on luxuries (e.g. alcohol, cakes) or illicit items
        (drugs, prostitution). For instance, the amount that households said they spent on alcohol,
        according to the 1972-73 household budget survey in the US, was just half the amount that
        companies said they sold!
    •   Questions matter. According to VLSS93, households devoted 1.7% of their expenditure to
        tobacco; the VLSS98 figures showed that this had risen to 3%. An increase of this magnitude is
        simply not plausible, and not in line with sales reported by the cigarette and tobacco companies.
        A more plausible explanation is that VLSS98 had more detailed questions about tobacco use.
        When the questions are more detailed, respondents are likely to remember in more detail, and
        report higher spending.




                                                        18
2.3.2.1      Measure durable goods
        In measuring poverty it might be argued that only food, the ultimate basic need (which anyway
constitutes three quarters of the spending of poor households), should be included. On the other hand
even households that cannot afford adequate quantities of food devote some expenditures to other items
(clothing, shelter, etc.). It is reasonable to suppose that if these items are getting priority over food
purchases, then they must represent very basic needs of the household, and so should be included in the
poverty line. This argument also applies to durable goods (housing, pots and pans, etc.).

        The problem here is that durable goods, such as bicycles and TVs, are bought at a point in time,
and then consumed (i.e. eaten up and destroyed) over a period of several years. Consumption should only
include the amount of a durable good that is eaten up during the year, which can be measured by the
change in the value of the asset during the year, plus the cost of locking up my money in the asset.

       For instance, if my watch was worth $25 a year ago, and is worth $19 now, then I used $6 worth
of watch during the year; I also tied up $25 worth of assets in the watch, money that could have earned
me $2.50 in interest (assuming 10%) during the year. Thus the true cost of the watch during the year was
$8.50.

         A comparable calculation needs to be done for each durable good that the household owns.
Clearly the margin of potential measurement error is large, since the price of each asset may not be
known with much accuracy, and the interest rate used is somewhat arbitrary. The VLSS surveys asked
for information about when each good was acquired, and at what price, and the estimated current value of
the good. This suffices to compute the current consumption of the durable item, as the illustration in the
following box shows.


Box: Calculating the consumption of durable goods - an illustration.
        A household is surveyed in April 1998, and says it bought a TV two years earlier for
1.1m dong (about $100). The TV is now believed to be worth 1m dong. Overall prices rose by
10% over the past two years. How much of the TV was consumed over the year prior to the
survey?

    a. Recompute the values in today's prices. Thus the TV, purchased for 1.1m dong in 1996,
       would have cost 1.21m dong (=1.1m dong × (1+10%)) now.
    b. Compute the depreciation. The TV lost 0.21m dong in value in two years, or 0.105m
       dong per year (i.e. about $7).
    c. Computer the interest cost. At a real interest rate of 3%, the cost of locking up 1m dong
       in the TV is now 0.03m dong per annum.

          Thus the total consumption cost of the TV was 0.135m dong (= 0.105 + 0.03), or about
$10.


        One might wonder why attention needs to be paid to calculating the value of durable goods
consumption when the focus is on poverty - in practice mainly the ability to acquire enough food. The
answer is that when expenditure is used as a yardstick of welfare, it is important to achieve comparability
across households. If the value of durable goods were not included, one might have the impression that a
household that spends $100 on food and $5 on renting a bicycle is better off than a household that spends



                                                        19
$100 on food and owns a bicycle (that it could rent out for $5), when in fact both households are equally
well off (ceteris paribus).


2.3.2.2     Measure the value of housing services

         If you own your house (or apartment), it provides housing services, which should be considered
as part of consumption. The most satisfactory way to measure the values of these services is to ask how
much you would have to pay if, instead of owning your home, you had to rent it.

         The standard procedure is to estimate, for those households that rent their dwellings, a function
that relates the rental payment to such housing characteristics as the size of the house (in sq. ft. of floor
space), the year in which it was built, the type of roof, whether there is running water, etc. This gives

Rent = f(area, running water, year built, type of roof, location, number of bathrooms, … )

This equation is then used to impute the value of rent for those households that own, rather than rent, their
housing.

        In the case of Vietnam there is a problem with this approach: almost nobody rents housing! And
of those that do, most pay a nominal rent for a government apartment. Only 13 of the 5,999 households
surveyed in VLSS98 paid private-sector rental rates. On the other hand the VLSS surveys did ask each
household to put a (capital) value on their house (or apartment). In computing consumption expenditure,
the rental value of housing was assumed to be 3 percent of the capital value of the housing. This is a
somewhat arbitrary procedure, but the 3 percent is almost certainly too low.


2.3.2.3     How to account for spending on weddings.

       Families spend money on weddings. Such spending is often excluded when measuring
household consumption expenditure. The logic is that the money spent on weddings mainly
gives utility to the guests, not the spender. Of course if one were to be strictly correct, then
expenditure should include the value of the food and drink that one enjoys as a guest at other
people's weddings, although in practice this is rarely (if ever) included.

2.3.2.4     Accounting for household composition differences

        Households differ in size and composition, and so a simple comparison of aggregate household
consumption can be quite misleading about the well-being of individuals in a given household. Most
researchers recognize this problem and use some form of normalization. The most straightforward
method is to convert from household consumption to individual consumption by dividing household
expenditures by the number of people in the household. Then, total household expenditure per capita is
the measure of welfare assigned to each member of the household. Although this is by far the commonest
procedure, it is not very satisfactory, for two reasons:

•   First, different individuals have different needs. A young child typically needs less food than
    an adult, and a manual laborer requires more food than an office workers.


                                                         20
•   Second, there are economies of scale in consumption (at least of non-food items). It costs
    less to house a couple than to house two single individuals.

        For example, suppose we have a household with 2 members and monthly expenditure of $150
total. We would then assign each individual $75 as their monthly per capita expenditure. If we have
another household with 3 members, it would appear that each member is worse off with only $50 per
capita per month. However, suppose we know that the 2-person household contains two adult males age
35 whereas the second household contains 1 adult female and 2 young children. This added information
may change our interpretation of the level of well-being in the second household, since we suppose that
young children may have much lower costs (at least this is true for food) than adults.

        The solution to this problem is to apply a system of weights. For a household of any given size
and demographic composition (such as one male adult, one female adult, and two children), an
equivalence scale measures the number of adult males (typically) which that household is deemed to be
equivalent to. So each member of the household counts as some fraction of an adult male. Effectively,
household size is the sum of these fractions and is not measured in numbers of persons but in numbers of
adult equivalents.     Economies of scale can be allowed for by transforming the number of adult
equivalents into “effective” adult equivalents.

        In the abstract, the notion of equivalence scale is compelling. It is much less persuasive
in practice, because of the problem of picking an appropriate scale. How these weights should be
calculated and whether it makes sense to even try is still subject to debate. There is no consensus
in the matter. However, equivalence scales are not necessarily unimportant. For example, take
the simple argument that typically, in most household surveys, per capita consumption decreases
with household size. This is generally taken as evidence that there are economies of scale to
expenditure and not necessarily proof that large households are worse off or have a lower
standard of living.

        There are two possible solutions to this problem: either pick a scale that seems reasonable
on the grounds that even a bad equivalence scale is better than none at all, or try to estimate a
scale typically based on observed consumption behavior from household surveys. Often the
equivalence scales are based on the different calorie needs of individuals of different ages.
OECD scale
       Commonly used is the “OECD scale,” which may be written as


       (2.2)                    AE = 1 + 0.7( N adults − 1) + 0.5N children
where AE refers to “adult equivalent.” A one-adult household would have an adult equivalent of 1, a two-
adult household would have an AE of 1.7, and a three-adult household would have an AE of 2.4. Thus the
0.7 reflects economies of scale; the smaller this parameter, the more important economies of scale are
considered to be. The 0.5 is the weight given to children, and presumably reflects the lower needs (for
food, housing space, etc.) of children. Osberg and Xu (1999) use this scale in their study of poverty in
Canada.




                                                        21
Other scales.
         Many other scales have been used. For instance, a number of researchers used the following
scale in analyzing the results of the living standards measurement surveys that were undertaken in Ghana,
Peru and the Côte D’Ivoire:

         Age                       0-6                     7-12                  13-17               >17
        (years)
          Weight                   0.2                     0.3                    0.5                 1.0


Estimate an equivalence scale.
        It is also possible estimate an equivalence scale, by essentially looking at how aggregate
household consumption of various goods during some survey period tends to vary with household size
and composition. A common method is to construct a demand model in which the budget share devoted
to food consumption of each household is regressed on the total consumption per person. Deaton (1997)
gives an example using Engel’s method with India and Pakistan household expenditure survey
data. Specifically, household food share is regressed on per capita expenditure, household size,
household composition variables such as ratio of adults and ratios of children at different ages.
The equivalence scales or the ratio of costs of a couple with a child to a couple without children
can be calculated with the estimated coefficients and displayed in table 2.3:

                             Table 2.3: Equivalence scales using Engel’s method
                               Age                      Maharashtra,                     Pakistan
                                                       India
                                0-4                           1.24                        1.28
                                5-9                           1.28                        1.36
                              10-14                           1.30                        1.38
                              15-54                           1.34                        1.42
          Note: Reproduced from Deaton (1997) table 4.6.
         The numbers show the estimated costs of a family of two adults plus one additional person of
various ages calculated relative to the costs of a childless couple. So, for example, a child between 0 and
4 years is equivalent to 0.24 of a couple, or 0.48 of an adult. As the age of the additional member gets
older, the extra costs associated with the child rise. We can compare these estimates with the last row,
which shows the equivalence scale when an additional adult is added to the household. The third adult is
less than half the costs of one adult. That is, an additional adult costs 34% more for the couple, or 68% of
one member of the couple. So, by these calculations, these households experience economies of scale to
additional adults, plus younger members are not equivalent to adults in terms of costs.

       There are a number of problems with this method that will not be detailed here (see Ravallion,
1994 and Deaton 1997). However, consider the example from Ravallion (1994) where there are two
hypothetical households as described in table 2.4.

                       Table 2.4: Consumption within two hypothetical households
              Male adult         Female         First child       Second child   Per person Per equivalent


                                                                 22
                                   adult                                              male adult
Household A         40              20         10           10             20           40
Household B         30               -          -            -             30           30
        Source: Ravallion (1994)

         In this example, four persons live in household A while just one in household B. The government
can make a transfer to the household that is deemed to be the poorest, but it cannot observe the
distribution of consumption within the households. All the government knows is the aggregate
expenditure and the household composition. In this case, which of the two households should have
priority for assistance? In terms of household consumption per capita, household A looks worse off with
a lower average per capita consumption. But using equivalence scales as calculated here, household B
would receive assistance priority. This example demonstrates two key points. First, while observable
consumption behavior is important data, assumptions about unobservables (e.g. how the aggregate is split
between the household) will be required. Second, assumptions in computing consumption for individuals
using household data can have considerable bearing on policy choices.


2.3.3 Candidate 3. Other measures of household welfare

        Even if they were measured perfectly, neither income nor expenditure would be a perfect measure
of household well-being. For instance, neither measure puts a value on the leisure time enjoyed by the
household; neither measures the value of publicly-provided goods (such as education, or public health
services); and neither values intangibles such as peace and security.

        There are other possible measures of well-being. Among the more compelling are:

•   Calories consumed per person per day. If one accepts the notion that adequate nutrition is a
    prerequisite for a decent level of well-being, then we could just look at the quantity of calories
    consumed per person. Anyone consuming less than a reasonable minimum - often set at 2,100
    Calories per person per day - would be considered poor. This is an attractive idea, and we will return
    to it in chapter 3. At this point we just note that it is not always easy to measure calorie intake,
    particularly if one wants to distinguish between different members of a given household. Not is it
    easy to establish the appropriate minimum amount of calories per person, as this will depend on the
    age, gender, and working activities of the individual.

                  Figure 2.2. Engel curve: food spending rises less quickly than income




                                                       23
Spending
on food


                                                      Spending on
                                                      food




                                                       Income

•   Food consumption as a fraction of total expenditure. Over a century ago Ernst Engel observed, in
    Germany, that as household income (per capita) rises, spending on food rises too, but less quickly;
    this relationship is shown in figure 2.2. As a result, the proportion of expenditure devoted to food
    falls as per capita income rises. One could use this finding, which is quite robust and is found
    everywhere, to come up with a measure of well-being and hence poverty. For instance, households
    that devote more than (say) 60% of their expenditures to food might be considered as poor. The main
    problem with this measure is that the share of spending going to food also depends on the proportion
    of young to old family members (more children, a higher proportion of spending on food), and on the
    relative price of food (if food is relatively expensive, the proportion of spending going to food will
    tend to be higher).

•   Measures of outcomes rather than inputs. Food is an input, but nutritional status (are you
    underweight?) is an output. So one could measure poverty by looking at malnutrition. Of course, this
    requires establishing a baseline anthropometric standard against which to judge whether someone is
    malnourished. Anthropometric indicators have the advantage that they can reveal living conditions
    within the household (rather than assigning the overall household consumption measure across all
    members of the household without really knowing how consumption expenditure is divided among
    household members). However, there is one further point about these measures: by some accounts,
    the use of child anthropometric measures to indicate nutritional need is questionable when broader
    concepts of well-being are invoked. For example, it has been found that seemingly satisfactory
    physical growth rates in children are sometimes maintained at low food-energy intake levels by not
    playing. That is clearly a serious food-related deprivation for any child.

•   Anthropological method. Close observation at the household level over an extended period can
    provide useful supplementary information on living standards in small samples. However, this is
    unlikely to be a feasible method for national poverty measurement and comparisons. Lanjouw and
    Stern (1991) used subjective assessments of poverty in a north Indian village, based on classifying
    households into seven groups (very poor, poor, modest, secure, prosperous, rich and very rich) on the
    basis of observations and discussion with villages over that year.




                                                       24
            An issue of concern about this method is clearly its objectivity. The investigator may be
    working on the basis of an overly stylized characterization of poverty. For example, the poor in
    village India are widely assumed to be landless and underemployed. From the poverty profiles given
    by Lanjouw and Stern (1991) we find that being a landless agricultural laborer in their surveyed
    village is virtually a sufficient condition for being deemed poor. By their anthropological method,
    99% of such households are deemed poor, though this is only so for 54% when their measurement of
    permanent income is used. It is clear that the perception of poverty is much more strongly linked to
    landlessness than income data suggest. But it is far from clear which type of data is telling us the
    most about the reality of poverty.

        When one is looking at a community (e.g. province, region) rather than individual households, it
might make sense to judge the poverty of the community by life expectancy, or the infant mortality rate,
although these are not always measured very accurately. School enrollments (a measure of investing in
the future generation) represent another outcome that might indicate the relative well-being of the
population. Certainly, all of these other measures of well-being are not replacements for consumption per
capita – and nor does consumption per capita replace these measures. Rather, together, we can get a more
complete and multidimensional view of the well-being of a population. Consider the statistics in table 2.5
for 11 different countries. How countries are ranked in terms of living standards clearly depends on
which measure or indicator is considered.

                                Table 2.5: Poverty and quality of life indicators
  Countries       GNP per           % population      Female life      Prevalence of        Female adult
                   capita           below poverty    expectancy at         child         illiteracy rate, %
                   (1999                 line         birth, years    malnutrition, %         of people
                  dollars)                              (1998)       children <5 years   15+years, (1998)
                                                                       (1992-1998)
 Algeria           1,550            22.6 (1995)           72                13                  46
 Bangladesh          370            35.6 (1995/96)        59                56                  71
 Cambodia            260            36.1 (1997)           55                na                  80
 Colombia          2,250            17.7 (1992)           73                 8                   9
 Indonesia           580            20.3 (1998)           67                34                  20
 Jordan            1,500            11.7 (1997)           73                 5                  17
 Morocco           1,200            19.0 (1998/99)        69                10                  66
 Nigeria             310            34.1 (1992/93)        55                39                  48
 Peru              2,390            49.0 (1997)           71                 8                  16
 Sri Lanka           820            35.3 (1990/91)        76                38                  12
 Tunisia           2,100            14.1 (1990)           74                 9                  42
        Source: World Bank (2000)

       In sum, there is no perfect measure of well-being. The implication is simple: all measures of
poverty are imperfect. That is not an argument for avoiding measuring poverty, but rather for
approaching all measures of poverty with a degree of caution, and for asking in some detail about how the
measures were constructed.




                                                     CHAPTER 3


                                                               25
                                               Poverty Lines


3.1 How to define a poverty line
        Let us assume that we have chosen a measure of household well-being - say consumption
expenditure. The next step is to choose a poverty line. Households whose consumption expenditure falls
below this line are considered to be poor.

        Following a common practice, the poor are defined as those who lack command over basic
consumption needs, including food and non-food components. The poverty line, thus, is obtained by
specifying a consumption bundle considered adequate for basic consumption needs and then by
estimating the costs of these basic needs. In other words, the poverty line is conceptualized as a minimum
standard required by an individual to fulfill his or her basic food and non-food needs.

        Once we have computed a household’s consumption, we need to evaluate if that amount places
the household “in poverty”, or defines the household as “poor”. The threshold that we use for this is the
poverty line. The poverty line defines the level of consumption (or income) needed for a household to
escape poverty. It might appear that the notion of a poverty line implies a distinct “turning point” in the
welfare function. That is, by rising from just below to just above the poverty line, households (and
individuals therein) move from considerable misery to an adequate minimum amount of well-being.
Given that well-being follows a continuum, and given how arbitrary the choice of poverty line is, the
notion of such a “turning point” is not very compelling. In fact, it may make sense to define more than
one poverty line. For example, one poverty line may mark households that are "poor" and another lower
level could indicate those that are "extremely poor." Another approach is to construct a “food poverty
line,” which is based on some notion of minimum amount of money a household needs to purchase some
basic-needs food bundle. If the cost of basic non-food needs is estimated, then the food poverty line
added to the non-food needs will equal the overall poverty line.

        More formally, the poverty line for a household, zI, may be defined as the minimum
spending/consumption (or income, or other measure) needed to achieve at least the minimum utility level
uz, so:
        (3.1)                                     z i = e ( p, x , u Z )
       In practice we cannot measure uz, or even e(.), and so a more pragmatic approach is needed.
There are two approaches. One is to compute a poverty line for each household, adjusting it from
household to household to take into account differences in the prices they face and their demographic
composition. For example, a small household in a rural area may face low housing costs and relatively
inexpensive food prices. Thus, their zi may be low compared to a large household living in a city where
housing is more expensive and food prices are perhaps higher. This gives different poverty lines for each
household.

        A second approach is to construct one per capita poverty line for all individuals, but to adjust per
capita yi for differences in prices and household composition. The adjusted per capita yi is then
compared with the one poverty line to determine if the individual is living below the poverty line.

        The approach taken for Cambodia in 1999 is somewhere between these two extremes. Separate
poverty lines were constructed for each of three major “regions”, based on the prices prevailing in those
areas; whether a household in any given region is poor is then determined by comparing its expenditure
per capita with the appropriate regional poverty line. These poverty lines are shown in table 3.1, based on


                                                          26
Gibson’s (1999) poverty profile of Cambodia using the CSES 1999 data and Prescott and Pradhan (1997)
using the SESC 1993/94 data. We will discuss the construction of these poverty lines in detail below.

                                 Table 3.1: Summary of Cambodia poverty lines
                                         1993/94 SESC                           1999 CSES
                                   Food             Poverty               Food           Poverty
                                Poverty Line         Line              Poverty Line       Line
         Phnom Penh                1185              1578                 1737            2470
         Other Urban                995              1264                 1583            2093
         Rural                      881              1117                 1379            1777
        Note: All values are in Riels per person per day
        Source: Prescott and Pradhan (1997); Gibson (1999)

        As shown in table 3.1, poverty lines Phnom Penh, the capital of Cambodia, are higher than other
areas. This is consistent with other countries. For example, in Vietnam, Duong and Trinh (1999) note
that the World Bank concluded that households would need to spend at least 1,071,000 dong (about
US$95) per person per year to be out of poverty. However, for urban areas, the amount was estimated to
be 1,342,000 dong; in rural areas it was 1,054,000 dong. This reflects that fact that costs are higher in
cities.

         Over time, we expect poverty lines to change for a population. This is due to two factors. First,
poverty lines reflect the costs of purchasing food and non-food items. As prices change (typically
inflation), nominal poverty lines increase. This is what underlies the rising nominal poverty lines in
Cambodia, shown in Table 3.1.

         The second factor could be a change in the way the poverty line is constructed. So, for Thailand
in table 3.2, for example, we see that the poverty line is increasing over time. But without further
information we cannot tell whether the rises in the poverty line merely reflect changes in prices, or also
represent a revision in the real poverty threshold. This raises the question of whether we should look at
relative, or absolute, poverty lines. We now consider each in turn.
                                   Table 3.2: Average poverty line of Thailand
                                    Year                           Poverty Line
                                    1988                               473
                                    1990                               522
                                    1992                               600
                                    1994                               636
                                    1996                               737
                                    1998                               878
                                    1999                               886
                    Note: All values are in Baht per person per month.
                    Source: Thailand Socio-Economic Survey conducted by the National Statistical
                    Office




3.1.1 Relative poverty
        Sometimes we are interested in focusing on the poorest segment (e.g. a fifth, or two-
fifths) of the population; these are the relatively poor. When defined in this way, it is a truism



                                                              27
that "the poor are always with us." It is often helpful to have a measure such as this in order to
target programs that are geared to helping the poor.

        In practice, rich countries have higher poverty lines than do poor countries, as shown clearly in
figure 3.1 (from Ravallion 1998, p.26, based on an earlier paper by Ravallion, Datt and van de Walle).
This explains why, for instance, the official poverty rate in the early 1990s was close to 15% in the United
States and also close to 15% in (much poorer) Indonesia. Many of those counted as poor in the U.S.
would be considered to be comfortably well off by Indonesian standards.

         As countries become better off, they have a tendency to revise the poverty line upwards – with
the notably exception of the United States, where the line has (in principle) remained unchanged for
almost four decades. For instance, the European Union typically defines the poor as those whose per
capita incomes fall below 50% of the median. As median incomes rise, so does the poverty line.




                                 Figure 3.1. Poverty lines across countries.
         Based on a sample of 36 countries, Ravallion, Datt and van de Walle estimated the following
relationship:
         (3.2)         ln z i = 6.704 − 1.773 ln( C / cap ) + 0.228[ln( C / cap )] 2 + v i
                                t=5.1 t=-3.6                  t=5.1


                                                        28
where R2=0.89. They found that at the mean value of per capita consumption (which they measured in
purchasing power parity terms), the elasticity of the poverty line with respect to consumption per capita
was 0.71. This means that if per capita consumption were to rise 10%, then the poverty line would rise
7.1% on average. But the non-linear relationship implies that the elasticity of the poverty line with
respect to consumption per capita was close to 0 in low-income countries, and was almost 1 in high-
income countries.

        To the extent that it is to identify and target today’s poor, then a relative poverty line is
appropriate, and needs to be tailored to the overall level of development of the country. For instance, a $1
per day poverty line might be useful in Vietnam, where 27% of the population would be considered poor
by this standard in 1998 (Haughton 2000), but would be of little relevance in the United States where
almost nobody would be poor by this standard.


3.1.2 Absolute poverty
        An absolute poverty line is “fixed in terms of the standard of living it commands over the domain
of poverty comparisons.” The United States poverty line does not change from year to year, so that the
poverty rate today may be compared with the poverty rate of a decade ago, knowing that the definition of
what constitutes poverty has not changed.

         An absolute poverty line is essential if one is trying to judge the effect of anti-poverty policies
over time, or to estimate the impact of a project (e.g. microcredit) on poverty. Legitimate comparisons of
poverty rates between one country and another can only be made if the same absolute poverty line is used
in both countries. The World Bank needs absolute poverty lines in order to be able to compare poverty
rates across countries – useful in determining where to channel resources, and also in assessing progress
in the war on poverty. It commonly uses two measures: a) an estimated 1,200 million people worldwide
live on less than US $1 per day, and b) over 2 billion people worldwide live on less than $2 per day.
These are absolute poverty lines.

                                       Box: The $1 per day standard

         Cross-country comparisons of poverty rates are notoriously difficult, but the World Bank
has tried to get around this problem by computing the proportion of the population in different
countries living on less than $1 per capita per day (in purchasing power parity terms, and in 1985
US dollars). The numbers shown below suggest that the poverty rate in Vietnam (computed by
Haughton 2000) compares favorably with that of India, but lags behind (more affluent) China and
Indonesia. One possible lesson that may be drawn from these numbers is that the easy gains in
poverty reduction in Vietnam are probably over, and the country will have difficulty reducing its
poverty rate substantially in the decade ahead, even if economic growth continues at its current
relatively robust rate of between 6% and 7% annually.

               % in poverty                                                 % in poverty
Vietnam             45              1993               Indonesia                  8             1996
Vietnam             27              1998                Nigeria                  31            1992-93
China               22              1995              Philippines                27             1994
India               47              4994
Sources: World Bank. 1999c. Entering the 21st Century: World Development Report 1999/2000. Washington DC.
Haughton 2000.




                                                           29
   3.2 Issues in choosing an absolute poverty line

3.2.1   Decide the standard of living
           There is an important conceptual problem that comes up when working with absolute poverty
   lines, which arises from the issue of what is meant by “the standard of living” (Ravallion, 1998, on which
   much of this discussion is based).

           In practice, almost all absolute poverty lines are set in terms of the cost of buying a basket of
   goods (the “commodity-based poverty line,” which we denote by z). If we assume that
           (3.3)                                    u = f(y),

   which says that utility or “standard of living” (u) depends on income or expenditure (y), then

           (3.4)                                    y = f-1(u).

   This says that for any given level of utility, there is some income (or expenditure) level that is needed to
   achieve it. If uz is the utility that just suffices to avoid being poor, then

           (3.5)                                    z = f-1(uz).

   In other words, given a poverty line that is absolute in the space of welfare (i.e. gives uz) there is a
   corresponding absolute commodity-based poverty line.

           But suppose we make another equally plausible assumption, which is that utilities are
   interdependent. My well-being may depend not just on what I consume, but on how my consumption
   stacks up against that of the rest of society. A household of four with an income of $12,000 per year
   would not be considered poor in Indonesia, but when this household compares its position with average
   incomes in the U.S., it may feel very poor. We may capture this idea by assuming
                                                               y
           (3.6)                                    u = g ( y , ),
                                                               y

   where y is the mean income in the society. In this case
                                                               z
           (3.7)                                     uz = g( z, )
                                                               y
   and so, making the standard assumption of invertibility,




           (3.8)                                     z=g−1(y,uz).
   This means that for a poverty line to be absolute in the space of welfare (i.e. to yield uz), the commodity-
   based poverty line (i.e. z) may have to rise as y rises. The commodity-based poverty line would then look
   more like a relative poverty line!




                                                              30
3.2.2   Decide uz and g(.)
       Even if we assume that the commodity-based poverty line remains constant, we are still left with
two problems.

    a) The Referencing problem. What is the appropriate value of uz – i.e. the utility of the poverty line?
       The choice is of course arbitrary, but “a degree of consensus about the choice of the reference
       utility level in a specific society may well be crucial to mobilizing resources for fighting poverty”
       (Ravallion, 1998, p.6).

    b) The Identification problem. Given uz, what is the correct value of z – i.e. of the commodity value
       of the poverty line. This problem arises both because the size and demographic composition of
       households vary – an issue we return to in the discussion of equivalence scales below – but also
       because “the view that we can measure welfare by looking solely at demand behavior is
       untenable” (Ravallion, 1998, p.7).

        The implication is that external information and judgments will be required to answer the
referencing and identification problems, and hence to determine the absolute poverty line in practice. But
how is this to be done in practice?

         Table 3.3 presents absolute and relative poverty rates for different regions in the world. How
regions compare with each other depends on which poverty measure is used. For example, by the
absolute measure of less than US $1 a day, Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest portion of the population
living in poverty. On the other hand, countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have the highest
portion of their population living below one-third the average national consumption.

                                Table 3.3: Absolute and Relative Poverty rates
                                        Share of population living    Share of the population living on less
                                        on less than $1 per day (in    than one-third of average national
                                                   1998)                consumption for 1993 (in 1998)
East Asia and Pacific                               15.3                              19.6
East Asia and Pacific excluding China               11.3                              24.6
Europe and Central Asia                              5.1                              25.6
Latin America and the Caribbean                     15.6                              51.4
Middle East and North Africa                         1.9                              10.8
South Asia                                          40.0                              40.2
Sub-Saharan Africa                                  46.3                              50.5
Total                                               24.0                              32.1
Total excluding China                               26.2                              37.0
Source: World Bank (2000)

         In passing we might note that an absolute poverty line is best thought of as one which is fixed in
terms of living standards, and fixed over the entire domain of the poverty comparison (Ravallion). Thus
absolute poverty comparisons will deem two persons at the same standard of living to both be either
“poor” or “not poor” irrespective of the time or place being considered, or with or without some policy
change, within the relevant domain. The poverty comparison is then “consistent” in the specific sense
that individuals who are identical in all relevant respects are treated identically. However, depending on
the purpose of the comparison, the relevant domain may vary. For example, a global comparison of
absolute consumption poverty may entail using a poverty line (e.g. $1 consumption per capita per day)
that is low by the standards of rich countries. If, however, one is trying to form a poverty profile for one
country only, the choice of an absolute poverty line should be appropriate to that country (e.g. a poverty


                                                           31
line of $1 per day might be appropriate in Vietnam, and $10 per day might be suitable in the United
States). Judgments of what constitutes a reasonable absolute poverty line must first specify the domain of
comparisons, and recognize that the answer may change if the domain changes.



3.3   Solution A: objective poverty lines.
         How then are we to determine poverty lines. One possibility is to pick an “objective” poverty
line. The key idea here is that the poverty line should be set at a level that enables individuals to achieve
certain capabilities, including a healthy and active life and full participation in society. In practice this
almost certainly would imply that the commodity-based poverty line would rise as a country becomes
more affluent, because the minimum resources needed to participate fully in society probably rise over
time. In Sen’s rather dense prose (Sen 1983, p.168), “an absolute approach in the space of capabilities
translates into a relative approach in the space of commodities.”

        A common, and fairly satisfactory, way of approaching capabilities is to begin with nutritional
requirements. Two common ways of making this operational are the Cost-of-Basic-Needs (CBN)
approach, and the Food Energy Intake (FEI) method.


3.3.1    Food Energy Intake method
       The goal here is to find the level of consumption expenditure (or income) that allows the
household to obtain enough food to meet its energy requirements. Note that consumption will include
non-food as well as food items; even underfed households typically consume some clothing and shelter,
which means that at the margin these “basic needs” must be as valuable as additional food.

        The basic idea is captured in figure 3.2, which shows a calorie income function; as income (or
expenditure) rises, food energy intake also rises, although typically more slowly. Given some level of
just-adequate food energy intake k, one may use this curve to determine the poverty-line level of
expenditure, z. Formally, the function shows

        (3.9)                                      k = f ( y)
                                                                                             −1
        So, given monotonicity,(3.10)                                                 y= f        (k ),
or, given a minimum adequate level of calorie kmin, we have
                                                          −1
        (3.11)                                     z= f        (k min )
where z is the poverty line. Notice that this approach is parsimonious in one respect: it does not require
any information about the prices of goods consumed.


         Food
         energy
         intake
         (Cals/day)
                                                                  Calorie
                                                                   income
             2100                                                 function




                                                          32
                                               z
                                                      Income (or expenditure)    ,y
                                      Figure 3.2: Calorie income function
        First one needs to determine the amount of food that is adequate. Vietnam pegs this level at
2,100 Calories per person per day, in line with FAO recommendations, but it is recognized that
individuals may need more or less food than this – clearly the needs of young children, growing
teenagers, manual workers, pregnant women, or sedentary office workers may differ quite markedly;
physical stature also plays a role. Not all countries have set the same cut-off point, as table 3.3 shows:



          Table 3.3: Per Capita Daily Calorie Intake Used in Poverty LineConstruction
                        Vietnam                                 2,100
                        Indonesia                               2,100
                        Philippines                             2,000
                        Thailand                                1,978
                        China                                   2,150

         A variant of this approach was used to measure poverty in Vietnam, using data from the Vietnam
Living Standards Survey of 1993. Separate food expenditure lines were estimated for urban and rural
areas in each of seven provinces; the cost of obtaining 2,100 Calories of food per person per day was then
computed, and the associated poverty lines – one for each rural and urban area in each province. This
gave a headcount index of 55% (Dollar et al. 1995).

         The Food Energy Intake method is however seriously flawed, and should not be used unless the
alternatives are infeasible. The weaknesses of the method were pointed out in an important article by
Ravallion and Bidani (1994); in the next few paragraphs we summarize their approach and findings. The
method also failed in a recent analysis of data from Vietnam, for slightly different reasons, also
summarized below.


3.3.1.1      The urban-rural problem
        The problem begins when one recognizes that food energy – typically shown on the Calorie
income function – depends on other factors as well as income. The other influences include the tastes of
the household (e.g. urban tastes in food may differ from rural tastes); the level of activity of household
members; the relative prices of different foods, and of food to non-food items; and the presence of
publicly-provided goods.

        Figure 3 shows hypothetical (but plausible) calorie income functions for urban and rural
households. Rural households can obtain food more cheaply, and tend to be engaged in physically more
demanding activities, so their calorie income function will typically be higher than that of urban
households. The implication is that for a given level of food energy intake, the poverty line in the rural
area will be lower than in the urban area, as figure 3 makes clear. To the extent that this reflects
differences in the cost of living, it is not a problem to have two poverty lines of this kind.

        The key finding of Ravallion and Bidani (1994), based on 1990 data from the SUSENAS
household survey in Indonesia, was that the urban poverty line (20,614 rupiah per person per month) was
much higher than the rural one (13,295 Rp./person/month). This gap far exceeded the difference in the
cost of living between urban and rural areas. Using these poverty lines, Ravallion and Bidani (1994)
found that that poverty in Indonesia appeared to be higher in the urban than in the rural areas (Table 3.4),
a completely implausible result. The point is also illustrated in figure 3.4, which shows the cumulative



                                                        33
distribution of consumption per capita, for rural and urban areas, and marks the poverty lines and
headcount poverty rates.



Food                                                  Rural
energy
intake
(Cals/day)                                              Urban


    2100




                                zr     zu
                                              Income (or expenditure), y


                    Figure 3.3. Calorie income functions for urban and rural Indonesia



        Table 3.4: Poverty Lines in Indonesia using Food Energy Intake Method, 1990
                               Indonesia overall        Urban areas        Rural areas
           P0                        15.1                  16.8               14.3
           P1                        2.42                  3.23               1.06
           P2                        0.66                  0.94               0.53
Source: Ravallion and Bidani 1994.




                                                        34
                                 1               20

      Figure 3.4 Cumulative distribution functions for consumption, Indonesia, 1990
          (Source: Ravallion and Bidani 1994.)


3.3.1.2     The relative price problem
         When researchers tried to apply the Food Energy Intake approach to data from the Vietnam
Living Standards Survey of 1998, the method failed. As with the 1993 data, the idea was to compute
food expenditure functions, find the cost of 2,100 Calories of food, and then find the related level of
expenditure per capita, which would then serve as a poverty line. After undertaking this exercise,
researchers found a higher level of poverty in 1998 than in 1993, an implausible result in an economy
whose real GDP grew by 9% annually between 1993 and 1998, and where there was a widespread sense
that the benefits of this growth had spread widely.

        What went wrong? Figure 5 shows the situation. The food expenditure function shifted down
between 1993 and 1998; in other words, for a given (real) income, households in 1998 would buy less
food than in 1993. The main reason was that the price of food rose by 70% between 1993 and 1998,
while the price of non-food items rose by just 25%; in other words, food because relatively much more
expensive. As a result consumers shifted away from food to non-food consumption. This meant that the
poverty line rose from z93 to z98 (see figure 5), a jump that turned out to be implausibly large.




                                                      35
Food                                                  VLSS93
energy
intake
(Cals/day)                                               VLSS98


    2100




                             z93     z98
                                            Income (or expenditure), y


              Figure 3.5 The determination of poverty lines for Vietnam, 1993 and 1998

3.3.2   The Cost-of-Basic-Needs method:
        A more satisfactory approach to building up a poverty line, while remaining in the spirit of trying
to ensure that the line covers basic needs, proceeds as follows:
    • Stipulate a consumption bundle that is deemed to be adequate, with both food and non-food
        components; and
    • Estimate the cost of the bundle for each subgroup (urban/rural, each region, etc.).

         This is essentially the approach taken by Seebohm Rowntree in his seminal study of poverty in
York, undertaken in 1936. Note that although we begin with a consumption bundle – so much food, so
much housing space, so much electricity, etc. – the poverty line is measured in money. We are therefore
not insisting that each basic need be met, only that it could be met. Operationally, the steps to follow are
these:

    •   Pick a nutritional requirement for good health, such as 2,100 Calories per person per day.
    •   Estimate the cost of meeting this food energy requirement, using a diet that reflects the habits of
        households near the poverty line (e.g. those in the lowest, or second-lowest, quintile of the
        income distribution; or those consuming between 2,000 and 2,200 Calories). This may not be
        easy if diets vary widely across the country. Call this food component zF.
    •   Add a non-food component (zNF). There is a lot of disagreement about how to do this; we offer
        some more thoughts on this issue below.
    •   Then the basic needs poverty line is given by


        (3.12)                             z BN = z F + z NF




                                                        36
           Box. The US poverty line
In 1963 and 1964, Mollie Orshansky of the Social Security Administration computed the cost of
an ‘adequate’ amount of food intake, to get zF. She then multiplied this number by 3 to get zBN.
Why? Because at the time, the average food share for all consumers in the United States was 1/3.
This line is still used, updated regularly for price changes.
Source: Dalaker and Naifeh (1998).

        To illustrate how this might work, suppose that we use a food energy threshold of 2,100 Calories
per day. Let there be three foodstuffs: rice, corn and eggs. Table 5 shows the expenditure on each item,
and the amount consumed by a household in the second (from bottom) quintile; since such a household
consumes, we suppose, just 2,000 Calories per day, the figures here have to be grossed up to give the cost
of purchasing 2,100 Calories. In this example the cost comes to 105 pesos per day.

        Table 3.5: Illustration of Construction of Cost of Food Component of Poverty Line
                        Calories       Expenditure per        Calories, Adjusted   Expenditure, adjusted
                                         day (pesos)            to give 2,100         to cover 2,100
                                                                   Calories              Calories
           Rice          1,400                60                      1,470                 63
           Corn            400               20                         420                 21
           Eggs            200               20                         210                 21
           Total         2,000               100                      2,100                105

         The choice of which diet to use when estimating the cost of obtaining 2,100 Calories is not a
trivial one, a point emphasized in the context of Indonesia by Pradhan et al. (2000)1. To illustrate,
consider the information in Table 6, drawn from the Vietnam Living Standards Survey of 1992-93.
Households in the poorest quintile paid 0.68 dong per Calorie; those in the richest expenditure quintile
paid almost twice as much (1.38 dong/Calorie). Depending on which one uses, the poverty line could
vary widely.

                   Table 3.6: Food consumption by expenditure quintile, Vietnam, 1992-93.
        Quintile           Expenditure per       % of expenditure       Calories per capita   Dong per Calorie
                            capita, ‘000         devoted to food             per day
                             dong/year
Lowest                          562                      70                   1,591                  0.68
Low-mid                         821                      65                   1,855                  0.79
Middle                         1,075                     60                   2,020                  0.87
Mid-upper                      1,467                     54                   2,160                  1.00
Upper                          2,939                     47                   2,751                  1.38
Source: Vietnam Living Standards Survey 1992-93

        In practice, researchers in this case used the price of food for households in the middle quintile,
on the grounds that those households were close to the poverty line because they were consuming almost

1
    Pradhan et al. (2000) favor an interative procedure: pick a reference population that is relatively poor and compute
     their cost of Calories; now recompute the poverty line; take as the new reference population those households
     close to this poverty line and re-calculate the cost of Calories; compute the poverty line again; and so on, until the
     poverty line stabilizes.


                                                                   37
2,100 Calories per year. The food expenditure of the middle quintile, grossed up to pay for 2,100
Calories, came to 750,228 dong per capita in 1993; the non-food expenditure of this same group of
households was taken to be adequate for those at the poverty line (after a similar grossing up). This gave
an overall poverty line of 1,160,842. Individual households lived in regions with different prices, so their
expenditure per capita was first deflated, and then compared to this poverty line. The result was an
estimated headcount poverty rate of 58% (World Bank 1999).

        To compare poverty over time, this poverty line was updated to 1998. The cost of each item in
the poverty-line diet of 1993 was recomputed using the prices of 1998 (as taken from the price
questionnaire component of the VLSS, mainly); non-food expenditure was inflated using data from the
General Statistical Office’s price index. This yielded a poverty line of 1,793,903, and an associated
poverty rate of 37%. The details are summarized in Table 7.

                   Table 3.7: Poverty Lines and Headcount Measures of Poverty, Vietnam
                                                   Poverty line (m                     Headcount poverty rate
                                                   dong/capita/yr)
Poverty overall
            1993                                        1,160 ($92)                                 58
            1998                                        1,790 ($128)                                37
Food poverty
            1993                                          750                                       25
            1998                                        1,287                                       15
Note: The food poverty rate excludes any provision for non-food items; it sets the poverty line at zF.
Sources: Vietnam Living Standards Surveys of 1992-93 and 1997-98.

         There is no wholly satisfactory way to measure the non-food component of the poverty line, and
the procedures followed tend to be somewhat ad hoc. We saw above that for Vietnam, researchers
essentially used the (slightly adjusted) level of non-food spending by households that were in the middle
expenditure quintile in 1993. The poverty lines developed for South Korea (KIHASA 2000) measure the
cost of food plus the cost of housing that meets the official minimum apartment size plus the cost of non-
food items as measured by average spending by households in the poorest two-fifths of the income
distribution.

        Is there a better way to proceed? Probably not. Even the theory calls for compromise. Consider
the food expenditure function shown in figure 3.6. Following Ravallion (1998), let bF be the cost of
buying 2,100 Calories. Then an upper poverty line might be given by
                                                        −1
(3.13)                                              f        (b F ) = z F
 which measures the income level at which the household would buy 2,100 Calories of food; this is
essentially the poverty line used in Vietnam. The non-food component is given by A.

A lower poverty line might be given by
                                       F
(3.14)                               zL  = bF
which measures the income level at which the household could just buy enough food, but would not have
any money left over to buy anything else; in Vietnam this is referred to as the food poverty line. But even
in this case, households will typically buy non-food items, as shown by C in figure 6. Ravallion suggests
one might want to compromise, and measure non-food at the mid-point between these two extremes,
giving B. In each case, the poverty line would be given by
          (3.15)                        z = zF + A (or +B or +C)


                                                                      38
Food
                                                       45o
= f(y)

                                                     A Food
         F                                     B
     b
                                       C




                                                 f-1(bF)
                                     Expenditure per capita (= y)
                                        Figure 3.6 Food Expenditure Function.
        When Ravallion and Bidani apply the Cost of Basic Needs approach to Indonesia, using
the SUSENAS data of 1990, they find the poverty rates shown in Table 8. These are radically
different from the ones obtained using the Food Energy Intake method. They computed poverty
rates using these two measures, for each of the main regions of Indonesia, and found almost no
correlation between the two measures.

                         Table 3.8: Headcount Measures of Poverty in Indonesia, 1990
                                     Cost of Basic Needs Method        Food Energy Intake Method
                                     Food           Food + non-food
   Indonesia overall                  7.9                19.6                       15.1
        Urban                         2.8                10.7                       16.8
        Rural                        10.2                23.6                       14.3
Source: Ravallion and Bidani 1994.

        This is a serious indictment of the Food Energy Intake method. But it should also be clear that
every measure of poverty can be faulted, because it rests in part on arbitrary assumptions. In measuring
poverty, there is no single truth.



3.4 Solution B: Subjective poverty lines
        We could measure poverty by asking people to define a poverty line, and using this to measure
the extent of poverty. For instance, in a survey one might ask
                     “What income level do you personally consider to be absolutely minimal? That
             is to say that with less you could not make ends meet.”

         The answers will vary from person to person (and by size of household), but they could be
plotted, and a line fitted through them, to get a subjective poverty line such as z* in figure 3.7. It may also



                                                             39
be possible to get adequate results by asking “do you consider your current consumption to be adequate to
make ends meet?”

         Mahar Mangahas has amassed extensive information on subjective poverty in the Philippines as
part of the social weather stations project. Collected biannually since 1985, and quarterly since 1992, the
surveys poll about 1,200 households. Each household is shown a card with a line running across it; below
the line is marked “poor” and above the line “non-poor”, and each household is asked to mark on the card
where it fits. Separately, households are also asked to define a poverty line.


         S u b je c t iv e
         m in im u m                                                                         45o
         in c o m e


                                                                                   *             *
                                                                  *                    *
                                                          *                    *             *       *
                                         *            *       *            *
                                 *    * *      *
                             *   *

                             *




                                                                      z*           y ( = a c t u a l in c o m e )

                                          S u b je c t iv e p o v e r t y lin e


                                 Figure 3.7 Estimating a subjective poverty line.

Gaurav Datt of the World Bank has analyzed the Filipino data in some detail. Here are some of his more
interesting findings:
• Self-rated poverty lines are high. In 1997 the median poverty line was about 10,000 pesos per month
    for a “typical” household; this compares with the government’s “basic needs” poverty line, which at
    that time stood at 4,495 pesos/month. The implication is that self-rated poverty rates are high – 60%
    of all households in 1997, compared to 25% using the basic needs line.
• The self-rated poverty line has risen rapidly over time, by about 60-70% between 1985 and 1997.
    One consequence is that there is no trend in self-rated poverty over time. Another implication is that
    even when there is an economic slowdown, as occurred in 1997-98, the self-rated poverty rate hardly
    changes: it rose from 59% in 1996-97 to 61% in 1998.
• Perhaps surprisingly, the self-rated poverty line given by poor households is only slightly lower than
    that for non-poor households, and in fact the difference is not statistically significant. One might
    have expected poor households to have a less generous measure of the poverty line.
• There is a clear urban/rural difference in perceptions of the poverty line, with urban households
    setting a (money) poverty line at about twice the level of rural households, giving:


        (3.16)
                                               u
                                             z self   − rated         ≈ 2 z self
                                                                            r
                                                                                   − rated




                                                                      40
    The cost of living is certainly higher in urban areas, but by a factor of 1.2-1.5 rather than by a factor
    of 2. Thus the urban self-rated poverty line is, in real terms, higher than its rural counterpart. Why?
    • One possibility is that there is more inequality in the urban areas, and that this raises expectations.
    • Another plausible explanation is that households in urban areas may have more exposure to the
        media, and may have been affected more thoroughly by consumerism.
    • A third explanation is that urban households may be more attuned to political processes, and their
        estimates of the poverty line may include an element of strategic behavior – trying to influence
        policy makers.

        Self-rated measures of poverty are rarely collected. If the Filipino experience is at all
representative, it is clear that they cannot usefully supplant the more traditional “objective” measures of
poverty.




                                                         41
                                                   CHAPTER 4

                                            Measures of Poverty
       What does Aggregate Poverty Measure? Given information on (say) per capita consumption, and
a poverty line, then the only remaining problem is deciding on an appropriate summary measure of
aggregate poverty. There are a number of aggregate measures of poverty that can be computed.



4.1 Headcount index
        By far the most widely-used measure is the headcount index, which simply measures the
proportion of the population that is counted as poor, often denoted by P0. Formally,

                                         1 N                Np
(4.1)                             P0 =     ¦ I ( y i ≤ z) =    ,
                                         N i =1             N

where N is the total population and I(.) is an indicator function that takes on a value of 1 if the bracketed
expression is true, and 0 otherwise. So if expenditure (yi) is less than the poverty line (z), then I(.) equals
to 1 and the household would be counted as poor. Np is the total number of the poor.

        The great virtue of the headcount index is that it is simple to construct and easy to understand.
These are important qualities. However the measure has at least three weaknesses:

The headcount index does not take the intensity of poverty into account. Consider the following two
income distributions:
           Headcount Poverty Rates in A and B, assuming poverty line of 125
                                      Expenditure for each individual in       Headcount poverty
                                      country                                  rate (P0)
           Expenditure in country A     100        100      150         150             50%
           Expenditure in country B     124        124      150         150             50%


            Clearly there is greater poverty in country A, but the headcount index does not capture this.
    As a welfare function, the headcount index violates the transfer principle – an idea first formulated by
    Dalton (1920) that states that transfers from a richer to a poorer person should improve the measure of
    welfare. Here if a somewhat poor household were to give to a very poor household, the headcount
    index would be unchanged, even though it is reasonable to suppose that poverty overall has lessened.
    The headcount index implies that there is a “jump” in welfare, at about the poverty line, so it is
    meaningful to speak of the poor and the non-poor. In practice, such a jump is not found (Ravallion
    1996, p.1330).

•   The head-count index does not indicate how poor the poor are, and, hence, does not change if people
    below the poverty line become poorer. Moreover, the easiest way to reduce the headcount index is to
    target benefits to people just below the poverty line, because they are the ones who are cheapest to
    move across the line. But by most normative standards, people just below the poverty line are the
    least deserving of the poor. Thus, despite its popularity, many problems result from an undue
    concentration on the head-count statistic.



                                                             42
•   It is also important to note that the poverty estimates should be calculated for individuals and not
    households. What we calculate using the head-count index is the percentage of individuals who are
    poor and not the percentage of households. To be able to do so, we make a critical assumption that
    all household members enjoy the same level of well-being. This assumption may not hold in many
    situations. For example, some elderly members of a household may be much poorer than other
    members of the same household. In reality, not all consumption is evenly shared across household
    members.



4.2 Poverty gap index
        A moderately popular measure of poverty is the poverty gap index, which adds up the extent to
which individuals fall below the poverty line (if they do), and expresses it as a percentage of the poverty
line. More specifically, define the poverty gap (Gn) as the poverty line (z) less actual income (yi) for poor
individuals; the gap is considered to be zero for everyone else. Using the index function, we have

(4.2)                                     G n = ( z − y i ).I ( y i ≤ z ).

Then the poverty gap index (P1) may be written as
                                                 1 N Gn
(4.3)                                     P1 =     ¦      .
                                                 N i =1 z

         This measure is the mean proportionate poverty gap in the population (where the non-poor have
zero poverty gap). Some people think of this measure as the cost of eliminating poverty (relative to the
poverty line), because it shows how much would have to be transferred to the poor to bring their incomes
(or expenditure) up to the poverty line. The minimum cost of eliminating poverty using targeted transfers
is simply the sum of all the poverty gaps in a population; every gap is filled up to the poverty line.
However this interpretation is only reasonable if the transfers could be made perfectly efficiently, for
instance with lump sum transfers, which is implausible. Clearly this assumes that the policymaker has a
lot of information; one should not be surprised to find that a very “pro-poor” government would need to
spend far more than this in the name of poverty reduction.

        At the other extreme, one can consider the maximum cost of eliminating poverty, assuming that
the policymaker knows nothing about who is poor and who is not. From the form of the index, it can be
seen that the ratio of the minimum cost of eliminating poverty with perfect targeting (i.e. Gn) to the
maximum cost with no targeting (i.e. z, which would involve providing everyone with enough to ensure
they are not below the poverty line) is simply the poverty gap index. Thus this measure is an indicator of
the potential saving to the poverty alleviation budget from targeting.

        The poverty gap measure has the virtue that it does not imply that there is a discontinuity
(“jump”) at the poverty line. Yet a serious shortcoming of this measure is that it may not convincingly
capture differences in the severity of poverty amongst the poor. For example, consider two distributions
of consumption for four person; the A distribution is (1,2,3,4) and the B is (2,2,2,4). For a poverty line
z=3 (so that the headcount index is 0.75 in both cases), A and B have the same value for the poverty gap
index (i.e. 0.25). However, the poorest person in A has only half the consumption of the poorest in B.
One can think of B as being generated from A by a transfer from the least poor of the poor persons (the
individual with ‘3’ in A) to the poorest. The poverty gap will be unaffected by such a transfer. Its main
drawback is that it ignores inequality among the poor. To see this, consider the following example:




                                                               43
Poverty Gap Poverty Rates in A and B, assuming poverty line of 125
                              Expenditure for each individual in country          Poverty gap rate (P1)
Expenditure in country A        100        100         150         150                  0.10
Expenditure in country B         80        120         150         150                  0.10

For both of these countries, the poverty gap rate is 0.10, but most people would argue that country B has
more serious poverty because it has an extremely poor member.

         To summarize, the Poverty Gap Index is the average over all people, of the gaps between poor
people’s standard of living and the poverty line, expressed as a ratio to the poverty line. The aggregate
poverty gap shows the cost of eliminating poverty by making perfectly targeted transfers to the poor (i.e.,
closing all poverty gaps), in the absence of transactions costs and disincentive effects. This is clearly
unrealistic but it does convey useful information about the minimum scale of the financial resources
needed to tackle the poverty problem. Moreover, the poverty gap index can show the value of using
survey information to learn about the characteristics of the poor. A costly way of eliminating poverty
would be to make completely untargeted poverty line-sized transfers to everyone in the population. The
poverty gap index gives the ratio of the cost of eliminating poverty using perfectly targeted transfers
compared with using completely untargeted transfers. Thus, the smaller is the poverty gap index, the
greater the potential economies for a poverty alleviation budget from identifying the characteristics of the
poor so as to target benefits and programs.



4.3 Squared poverty gap index
         To solve the problem of inequality among the poor, some researchers use the squared poverty gap
index. This is simply a weighted sum of poverty gaps (as a proportion of the poverty line), where the
weights are the proportionate poverty gaps themselves; a poverty gap of (say) 10% of the poverty line is
given a weight of 10% while one of 50% is given a weight of 50%; this is in contrast with the poverty gap
index, where they are weighted equally. Hence, by squaring the poverty gap index, the measure
implicitly puts more weight on observations that fall well below the poverty line. Formally:

                                                      N
                                                  1          Gn 2
(4.4)                                      P2 =
                                                  N
                                                      ¦(
                                                      i =1    z
                                                                ) .


        The measure lacks intuitive appeal, because it is not easy to interpret and so it is not used very
widely. It may be thought of as one of a family of measures proposed by Foster, Greer and Thorbecke
(1984), which may be written as

                                                                α
                                                  1 N § Gn ·
(4.5)                                      Pα =     ¦¨      ¸       ,   (α ≥ 0)
                                                  N i =1¨   ¸
                                                        © z ¹

where α is a measure of the sensitivity of the index to poverty and the poverty line is z, the value of
expenditure per capita for the j-th person’s household is xj, and the poverty gap for individual j is Gj=z-
xj(with Gj=0 when xj>z) When parameter α=0, P0 is simply the head-count index. When α=1, the index is
the poverty gap index P1, and when α is set equal to 2, P2 is the poverty severity index. For all α > 0, the
measure is strictly decreasing in the living standard of the poor (the lower your standard of living, the
poorer you are deemed to be). Furthermore, for α > 1 it also has the property that the increase in
measured poverty due to a fall in one’s standard of living will be deemed greater the poorer one is. The


                                                              44
measure is then said to be "strictly convex" in incomes (and "weakly convex" for α=1). Another
convenient feature of the FGT class of poverty measures is that they can be disaggregated for population
sub-groups and the contribution of each sub-group to national poverty can be calculated.

        The work by Foster, Greer and Thorbecke provides an elegant unifying framework for measures
of poverty. However it begs the question of what the best value of α. Some of these measures also lack
emotional appeal.

        The measures of depth and severity of poverty provide complementary information on the
incidence of poverty. It might be the case that some groups have a high poverty incidence but low
poverty gap (when numerous members are just below the poverty line), while other groups have a low
poverty incidence but a high poverty gap for those who are poor (when relatively few members are below
the poverty line but with extremely low levels of consumption). Table 4.1 provides an example from
Madagascar. According to the headcount, unskilled workers show the third highest poverty rate, while
the group is in the fifth rank according to the poverty severity. Comparing them with the herders shows
that they have a higher risk of being in poverty, but that the poverty tends to be less sever or deep. The
types of interventions needed to help the two groups are therefore likely to be different.

                         Table 4.1: Poverty Indices By sub-groups, Madagascar, 1994
                               Head count: %      Rank    Poverty gap: %    Rank   Poverty severity: %   Rank

 Small farmers                       81.6         1            41.0         1             24.6           1
 Large farmers                       77.0         2            34.6         2             19.0           2
 Unskilled workers                   62.7         3            25.5         4             14.0           5
 Herders/fishermen                   51.4         4            27.9         3             16.1           3
 Retirees/handicapped                50.6         5            23.6         5             14.1           4
Source: Coudouel, Hentschel and Wodon (2001)




4.4 Sen Index.
       Sen (1976) proposed an index that sought to combine the effects of the number of poor,
the depth of their poverty, and the distribution of poverty within the group. The index is given
by
                                                         P µ
                                                             P
       (4.6)                          Ps = P0 (1 − (1 − G )    ),
                                                            z

where P0 is the headcount index, µP is the mean income (or expenditure) of the poor, and GP is the Gini
coefficient of inequality among the poor. The Gini coefficient ranges from 0 (perfect equality) to 1
(perfect inequality), and is discussed further below in the context of measuring inequality. The Sen Index
can also be written as the average of the headcount and poverty gap measures weighted by the Gini
coefficient of the poor, giving:

          (4.7)                                Ps = P0G P + P1 (1 − G P )

         The Sen index has been widely discussed, and has the virtue of taking the income distribution
among the poor into account. However the index lacks intuitive appeal, and cannot be decomposed
satisfactorily into its constituent components, which explains why it is rarely used in practice.

                                                             45
4.5 The Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index.
       The Sen index has been modified by others, and perhaps the most compelling version is the Sen-
Shorrocks-Thon (SST) index, defined as

(4.8)                                                       ˆ P),
                                         PSST = P0 P1P (1 + G

which is the product of the headcount index, the poverty gap index (applied to the poor only), and a term
with the Gini coefficient of the poverty gap ratios (i.e. of the Gn’s). This Gini coefficient typically is
close to 1, indicating great inequality in the incidence of poverty gaps.

Example
In 1996, 12.4% of the population of Quebec province (Canada) was in poverty. The poverty gap
index, applied to the poor only, stood at 0.272. And the Gini coefficient of the poverty gap ratios
was 0.924. Thus the Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index was 0.065 (=0.124 × 0.272 × (1+0.924)).

         Osberg and Xu (1999) use the SST index to compare poverty across the 10 Canadian provinces
for 1984, 1989, 1994, 1995 and 1995, as well as to put the degree of Canadian provincial poverty into an
international context. A number of graphs from their study are reproduced below. Figure 1 provides an
international comparison, using the SST index, and shows that the US is an outlier with its relatively high
poverty rate (as measured by the SST). A comparison of the US and Canada over time (figure 2) shows
that while poverty was similar in the two countries a generation ago, it is now higher in the US. Figure 3
provides information on some Canadian provinces: Newfoundland was the poorest in 1984, but by 1996
had become much less of an outlier.

        One strength of the SST index is that it can help give a good sense of the sources of change in
poverty over time. This is because the index may be decomposed into

(4.9)                                                                      ˆ P),
                                 ∆ ln PSST = ∆ ln P0 + ∆ ln P1P + ∆ ln(1 + G

which may be interpreted as, % change in SST index = % change in headcount index + % change in
poverty gap index ( among poor) + % change in (1+Gini coefficient of poverty gaps).

        In plain English, this allows us to decompose poverty into three aspects: are there more poor? are
the poor poorer? and is there higher inequality among the poor?




                                                        46
47
Example:
The information in table 4.2 comes from Osberg and Xu, and traces the evolution of poverty in
the Canadian province of Newfoundland between 1984 and 1996. It is clear that most of the
change in the poverty rate over time was due to variations in the number of people in poverty
(P1), rather than in the size of the poverty gap per poor person (P1P) or the distribution of poverty
among the poor (GP).

Table 4.2: Decomposition of poverty, and changes in poverty, in Newfoundland
             SST          P0           PP1          1+GP          ∆lnSST       ∆LnP0        ∆lnPP1       ∆ln(1+GP)
             index                                                index
1984         .137         .245         .304         1.844
1989         .095         .169         .296         1.897         -.370*       -.372*       -.027        .028
1994         .105         .184         .304         1.884         .104         .086         .026         -.007
1995         .125         .212         .316         1.864         .168         .141         .038         -.010
1996         .092         .164         .294         1.897         -.307        -.254        -.071        .018
Notes: * denotes statistically significant at the 95% level. Poverty line is half of median equivalent income, using the “OECD
scale” (i.e. equivalent income = 1 + 0.7(Nadults-1)+0.5(Nchildren).
Source: Osberg and Xu, 1999.

         Note that the values of the Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index provided by Osberg and Xu do not give
just a single point estimate for each province; they also provide a confidence interval. Because the SST
index is complex, it is not possible to compute these confidence intervals analytically. Instead, they are


                                                                  48
computed artificially using bootstrapping. The basic idea behind the bootstrap is straightforward and
clever. Suppose we have a survey sample of 2,000 households. Now pick a sample of 2,000 from this
sample with replacement – i.e. pick a household, then put it back into the sample, pick another household,
put it back into the sample, and so on, until you have picked 2,000 households. Compute the SST index
using this artificial sample. Then repeat the process many times; Osberg and Xu use 300 repetitions. The
result is a distribution of values of the SST, from which it is easy to find (say) the 95% confidence
interval. A sample code to generate confidence intervals for the SST index is given in the exercise for
Chapter Five.


4.6 Time taken to exit
        Previous poverty profiles for Cambodia, and indeed for most countries, rely on the three basic
classes of Foster Greer Thorbecke poverty statistics discussed above. But when thinking about poverty
reduction strategies, it may be useful to show how long it would take, at different potential economic
growth rates, for the average poor person to exit poverty. A poverty statistic with this property is derived
by Morduch (1998); the statistic is decomposable by population sub-groups and is also distributionally
sensitive. For the jth person below the poverty line, the expected time to exit poverty (i.e., to reach the
poverty line), if consumption per capita grows at positive rate g per year is:

                                           ln( z ) − ln( x j )
(4.10)                            t gj ≈                         .
                                                   g

         What effect can economic growth have on the elimination of poverty? Figure 4 shows the average
time it would take to raise the consumption level of a poor person in Cambodia to the poverty line, for
various hypothetical growth rates. It is assumed that this growth rate is continuous, is in real terms, and is
distributionally neutral among the poor. If the economic growth rate enjoyed by the poor is only one
percent per year, it would take over 20 years for the average poor person to exit poverty. But at a growth
rate of four percent per year it would take less than six years for the average poor person to exit poverty.
Hence, economic growth that acts to raise the real consumption levels of the poor can have a powerful
effect on the elimination of poverty.




                                                                     49
                   25


                   20


                   15
           Years




                   10


                    5


                    0
                        0   0.01      0.02        0.03          0.04    0.05   0.06      0.07       0.08
                                                          Growth Rate
                             Figure 4.4: Average exit time from poverty
         Despite the potency of economic growth, it will take more than just growth to rapidly improve the
lives of the very poor. The expected time to exit poverty for those people who are so poor that they are
below the food poverty line in Cambodia – i.e. they cannot even afford enough food, even if they were to
devote all their consumption spending to food – is more than 15 years, even at a three percent continuous
annual growth rate. Thus, targeted programs are needed to deliver benefits to the poor, in the form of
improvements in their human and physical assets and through interventions (e.g., infrastructure, markets)
that improve the returns they get from those assets.



4.7 Other Measures
         There are other additive poverty measures that are distribution sensitive. For example, the first
distribution sensitive poverty measure was proposed by Watts (1968), and takes the form:

                                                    N
                                              1
(4.11)                                  W =
                                              N
                                                  ¦ log( z y )
                                                   i =1             i


Following Atkinson (1987), one can characterize a general class of additive measures, encompassing W,
the FGT (Foster, Greer and Thorbecke) class of measures, and some other measures (such as the second
measure proposed by Clark, Hemming and Ulph, 1981), as taking the following form:

                                                  N
                                              1
(4.12)                                   P=
                                              N
                                                  ¦ p ( z, y )
                                                  i =1
                                                                i



where p(z, yi) is the individual poverty measure, taking the value zero for the non-poor (yi>z) and some
positive number for the poor, the value of which is a function of both the poverty line and the individual
living standard, non-decreasing in the former and non-increasing in the latter. The class of measures
defined by (4.12) has strong appeal in constructing poverty profiles, as discussed in Chapter Seven.


                                                           50
                                                 Chapter 5

                        Poverty Indices: Comparison of Measures


5.1 Introduction
         Given the intellectual energy that has gone into the theory of poverty measurement over the last
15 years, and the virtual plethora of poverty measures from which one can now choose, it is of interest to
ask: Does it really matter in poverty comparisons which of these measures one uses? The answer
depends on whether, and how, relative inequalities in society have changed across the situations being
compared. If all consumption levels (poor and non-poor) have changed by the same proportion - a
"distributionally neutral" growth or contraction – then all of these poverty measures will yield the same
ranking in the poverty comparison, and the ranking in terms of absolute poverty will depend solely on the
direction of change in the mean of the distribution.

         However, the differences between these measures can become quite pronounced. Consider, for
example, two policies: Policy A entails a small redistribution from people around the mode of the
distribution, which is also where the poverty line happens to be located, to the poorest households. (This
is actually a fair characterization of how a reduction in the prices of domestically produced food-staples
would affect the distribution of welfare in some Asian countries). Policy B entails the opposite change -
the poorest lose while those at the mode gain. (An increase in food-staple prices in the above example).
A moment's reflection will confirm that the head-count index (H) will prefer policy B; since changes in H
depend solely on which direction people are crossing the poverty line (under policy A, people who were
just on the poverty line would now fall below it since they transfer resources to the very poor, thus the
total number of poor increases). However, a measure such as the Squared Poverty Gap Index will
indicate the opposite ranking, since it will respond relatively more to the gains among the poorest than
among the not-so-poor.

        The need to examine higher order poverty measures, such as the Poverty Gap Index and
the Squared Poverty Gap Index, also depends on whether or not the poverty comparison in terms
of the head-count index has considered more than one poverty line. If only one poverty line is
used then it is especially important to check the higher-order measures. If, for a given poverty
line, the higher order measure gives a different result to the head-count index, then this will also
hold for a head-count index of "ultra-poverty" based on a sufficiently low poverty line.

5.2 Measurement errors
        Poverty measures can be quite sensitive to certain sorts of measurement error in the underlying
parameters, and quite robust to others. To give a stark example, suppose that the observed welfare
indicator contains an additive random error with zero mean; one gets the indicator's value right on
average, but there is an error in any one observation. Suppose also (for the purpose of this example) that
the poverty line is at the mode of the distribution. Then it can be shown that the expected value of the
observed head-count index will be locally un-affected by changes in the degree of imprecision in the
welfare measurements; on average one will predict the same index with a noisy indicator as a precise one,
and the mean will be unbiased. However, this need not hold for other poverty lines or for higher order
poverty measures; Ravallion (1988) gives a general statement of the necessary and sufficient conditions


                                                       51
for greater variability in the welfare indicator to increase the expected value of a poverty measure defined
on that indicator. Under plausible assumptions, greater imprecision in the welfare indicator will yield
higher estimates of any smooth distribution-sensitive poverty measure, such as P2.

        Now consider, instead, errors in the mean of the distribution on which the poverty measure is
being estimated; suppose, for instance, that consumption is systematically underestimated. It may be
demonstrated that the elasticity of the head-count index to errors in the mean, holding the Lorenz curve
constant, is simply the elasticity of the cumulative distribution function evaluated at the poverty line. This
may be estimated, and values around two are quite common, at least for developing countries. Thus a
five percent under-estimation of mean consumption at all consumption levels could easily translate into a
10 percent over-estimation in the head-count index and, hence, the number of poor. Furthermore,
amongst the FGT class of measures, the elasticities tend to be higher, the higher the value of alpha.

         Note that this assumes that there is no corresponding error in the Lorenz curve – i.e. where errors
occur, they are not systematically higher for one income group than for another. However, it is generally
thought to be more likely that survey measurement errors will tend to lead to an under-estimation of the
extent of inequality, because the rich are proportionally more likely to under-declare their income (or
expenditure). Indeed, it may well be that surveys overestimate the consumption of the poor (through
social stigma facing respondents or because the sample frame excludes sub-groups of the poor, such as
the homeless, who are amongst the poorest), and underestimate that of the rich (such as through their fear
of revealing black market transactions or tax evasion). Bu, it is less clear how this will translate into
poverty measurement errors. For example, if the under-estimation of income or consumption were
entirely above the poverty line then it would make no difference to measured poverty. More than this,
there is little that one can say in general about the effects on the head-count index of measurement error in
the Lorenz curve when the estimated consumption of the is are affected. However, for the poverty gap
index and the squared poverty gap index, survey underestimation of consumption by the poor will lead to
overestimation of poverty. Furthermore, the higher the value of alpha, the more sensitive the measure
will be to consumption measurement errors for the poorest.

        Inflation raises the nominal value both of expenditure and of the poverty line, and so has no net
effect on the measures of poverty.



5.3 Equivalence scales
        Poverty studies usually measure living standards using expenditure (or income) per
capita. As we have discussed in Chapter Two, because needs vary among household members,
and because there are economies of scale in consumption, poverty measures based on per capita
welfare indicators may not be good estimates. An alternative is to base our poverty measures on
expenditure (or income) per adult equivalent. If poverty estimates are not affected by the adult
equivalence weights that we choose, it is safe to say that those poverty estimates are not biased
because of weighting procedure.

         Kathleen Short et al. have recently investigated the sensitivity of the US 1997 poverty rate to
various variations on the OECD equivalence scales (Experimental Poverty Measures, June 1999). The
results are summarized in the table below. While different definitions of adult equivalent do change the
measured poverty rate, the most striking feature of this table is how small these differences are.
                                Table 5.1: Sensitivity of Adult Equivalence Scale
Measuring the sensitivity of the US poverty rate (P0) to different definitions of adult equivalence.


                                                               52
                                                                           Headcount poverty rate, %
Na+Nc (i.e. use income per capita)                                                   13.3
(Na + 0.7 Nc)0.65                                                                    13.1
(Na + 0.7 Nc)0.70                                                                    12.3
(Na + 0.7 Nc)0.75                                                                    12.7
(Na + 0.7 Nc)0.5                                                                     13.4
(Na + 0.7 Nc)0.6                                                                     12.7
(Na + 0.85 Nc)0.65                                                                   12.7
1 + 0.4(Na – 1) + 0.4(child 1) + 0.3 (Nc –1) (Canadian scale)                        13.8
One adult: 1. Two adults: 1.41. Single parents: (Na + 0.8 + 0.5 Nc                   13.1
–1). All other families: (Na + 0.5 Nc)0.7
Source: Short et al., 1999.
Notes: Na = number of adults. Nc = number of children.

        Table 5.2 displays adult equivalence weights that have been in India and in Taiwan. A study of
the importance of weights computed the correlation coefficient between (unweighted) expenditure per
capita and expenditure per adult equivalent using these weights, using data from Sri Lanka (1969-70),
Taiwan (1974) and Peninsular Malaysia (1973). All the correlation coefficients were 0.96 or higher; they
are shown in table 5.2 below.. The implication? Equivalence scales give similar results to expenditure per
capita.

                                  Table 5.2: Adult equivalents, India and Taiwan
               India: adult equivalents                              Taiwan: adult equivalents
      Age               Male              Female           Age                Male             Female
       0                  .43               .43             0-1                 .3               .3
      1-3                 .54               .54             2-4                 .4               .4
      4-6                 .72               .72             5-7                 .5               .5
      7-9                 .87               .87            8-10                 .7               .7
     10-12               1.03               .93           11-14                 .8               .8
     13-15                .97               .80           15-20                 .9               .9
     16-19               1.02               .75            21+                 1.0               .9
     20-39               1.00               .71
     40-49                .95               .68
     20-59                .90               .64
     60-69                .80               .51
      70+                 .70               .50



    Table 5.3: Correlation coefficients, expenditure per capita with expenditure per adult
                                           equivalent
        Survey                        Years               India weights               Taiwan weights
Sri Lanka                            1969-70                  0.99                         0.96
Taiwan                                1974                    0.98                         0.96
Peninsular Malaysia                   1973                    0.99                         0.97



5.4 Robustness of ordinal poverty comparisons
       At a number of points in the discussion so far we have seen that there is pervasive uncertainty
about possibly crucial aspects of a poverty comparison. There are likely to be errors in our living


                                                           53
standards data, unknown differences in needs between households at similar consumption levels,
uncertainty and arbitrariness about both the poverty line and precise poverty measures. Given these
problems, how robust are poverty comparisons? Would they alter if we made alternative assumptions? A
recent strand of research in poverty analysis has shown how we can answer such questions, drawing on
and developing results from the theory of stochastic dominance. Ravallion (1998) gives an elementary
exposition of the approach, again oriented to the needs of the analyst trying to make a reasonably robust
poverty comparison. The analysis is easier for a single dimension of well-being, but Ravallion (1998) also
gives an introduction to multi-dimensional dominance.

5.4.1   A single measure of standard of living
         As mentioned before, it is always a good idea to consider one or more extra poverty lines. Let us
take this a step further, and imagine the curve that is traced out as one plots the head-count index H on the
vertical axis and the poverty line on the horizontal axis, allowing the latter to vary from zero to the
maximum consumption. This is simply the cumulative distribution function, which can be thought of as
the "poverty incidence curve" F(z) – each point on the curve gives the proportion of the population
consuming less than the amount given on the horizontal axis (figure 5.1). If one calculates the area under
this curve up to each point and then plots it against the poverty line, one traces out the "poverty deficit
curve" D(z). In fact, each point on this curve is simply the value of the poverty gap (or, equivalently, the
poverty gap index times the poverty line z.

        If one again calculates the area under the poverty deficit curve at each point and plots it against
the poverty line, then one obtains a new curve, which can be termed the "poverty severity curve" S(z);
each point on this curve is directly proportional to the FGT measure P2.




                   Figure 5.1: Poverty incidence curve for two distributions A and B

         Although the measures discussed above generally meet the set of desirable axioms it is possible
that they will rank the same set of distributions in different ways, simply because of their differing
sensitivity to incomes in different parts of the distributions. When rankings are ambiguous, the alternative
method of stochastic dominance can be applied. We discuss first- and second- order stochastic dominance
below, before moving on to consider the one dominance category that is associated with unambiguous
comparisons of inequality across distributions: mean-normalised second-order dominance, or Lorenz
dominance.




                                                         54
5.4.1.1       First order stochastic dominance
         Consider two income distributions y1 and y2 with cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) F(y1)
and F(y2). If F(y1) lies nowhere above and at least somewhere below F(y2) then distribution y1 displays
first order stochastic dominance over distribution y2: F(y1)£ F(y2) for all y. Hence in distribution y1 there
are no more individuals with income less than a given income level than in distribution y2, for all levels of
income. We can express this in an alternative way using the inverse function y=F-1(p) where p is the share
of the population with income less than a given income level: first order dominance is attained if F1-1(p)³
F2-1(p) for all p. The inverse function F-1(p) simply plots incomes against cumulative population, usually
using ranked income quintiles. First order stochastic dominance of distribution y1 over y2 implies that any
social welfare function that is increasing in income will record higher levels of welfare in distribution y1
than in distribution y2.

5.4.1.2       Second order stochastic dominance
          Consider now the deficit functions (the integral of the CDF) of distributions y1 and y2:
                                                        y1

(5.1)                                      G ( yi ,k ) = ³ F ( yi )dy
                                                        0


where i=1,2. If the deficit function of distribution y1 lies nowhere above and somewhere below that of
distribution y2, then distribution y1 displays second order stochastic dominance over distribution y2:
G(y1,k)£ G(y2,k) for all yk. The dual of the deficit curve is the Generalized Lorenz curve defined as
                                                       y1

(5.2)                                      GL( p ) =   ³ ydF ( y ) ,
                                                       0


which plots the cumulative income shares, scaled by the mean of the distribution, against cumulative
population, where the height of the curve at p is given by the mean of the distribution below p. Second
order dominance established by comparisons of the deficit curves for complete, uncensored distributions
implies and is implied by Generalized Lorenz dominance: GL1(p)³ GL2(p) for all p. Second order
dominance of distribution y1 over distribution y2 implies that any social welfare function that is increasing
and concave in income will record higher levels of welfare in y1 than in y2. It should now be apparent that
second order stochastic dominance is therefore implied by first order stochastic dominance, although the
reverse is not true.

         Let us now apply these ideas to the study of poverty analysis. Suppose we do not know the
poverty line z, but we can be sure that it does not exceed zmax. Nor do we know the poverty measure, but
we can identify some desirable properties for such a measure, including the additivity property. Then it
can be shown that poverty will unambiguously fall, between year 1 and year 2, if the poverty incidence
curve (the cumulative distribution) for the year 2 lies nowhere above that for year 1, up to zmax. Poverty
falls unambiguously since the overall probability reflected by the cumulative distribution is smaller if the
poverty incidence curve lies nowhere above. This is called the First-Order Dominance Condition (FOD).
Figure 5.1 illustrates first-order dominance. When we plot the cumulative frequency distributions
(cumulative percentages of the population below various consumption levels) in states A and B, we find
that the curve for A is everywhere above that for B. Poverty is higher in state A than in B, no matter what
the poverty line or measure. If the curves intersect (and they may intersect more than once), then the
ranking is ambiguous. Some poverty lines and some poverty measures will rank the distributions


                                                             55
differently to others. One can restrict the range of poverty lines, or one can impose more structure on the
poverty measure.

        If one excludes the head-count index, and restricts attention to additive measures that do reflect
the depth of poverty such as the poverty gap index (P1) and the squared poverty gap index (P2 ) (i.e.,
measures that are strictly decreasing and at least weakly convex in incomes of the poor) then we can use a
Second-Order Dominance Condition (SOD). A fall in poverty then requires that the poverty deficit
curve, given by the area under the cumulative distribution, is nowhere lower for year 1 at all points up to
the maximum poverty line, and at least somewhere higher. What happens above the zmax is not relevant,
and in fact the overall probability need not be smaller under the lower poverty deficit curve, and could in
even be higher; this case is illustrated in figure 5.2.




                              Figure 5.2: Second-Order Dominance Condition
         Second-order dominance over the entire distribution is equivalent to generalized Lorenz curve
dominance. The generalized Lorenz curve (GLC) is simply the ordinary Lorenz curve scaled up by the
mean; thus it plots (on the vertical axis) the cumulative value of the welfare indicator (normalized by the
population size) for the poorest p percent of the population ranked by that indicator (on the horizontal
axis). If the GLC of distribution A is everywhere above that of B, then the area under A's cumulative
frequency distribution must be everywhere lower than B's. Notice that the highest point on the GLC is
the mean; thus a necessary condition for poverty to fall for all possible poverty lines and all measures
reflecting the depth of poverty is that the mean has not fallen. By similar reasoning, another necessary
condition is that the lowest level of living has not fallen (the lowest point on the GLC - just before it hits
zero - is the lowest level of living). If zmax is the highest income then it is immaterial whether one tests
SOD using the poverty deficit curve or the generalized Lorenz curve, though for lower values of zmax it is
better to use the poverty deficit curve.

5.4.1.3     Third order stochastic dominance
        When second-order dominance is inconclusive, one can further restrict the range of admissible
poverty measures. If one is content to rely solely on distributionsensitive measures such as P2 (but now
excluding P0 and P1 ) then a Third-Order Dominance Condition (TOD) can be tested; an unambiguous
poverty comparison for all poverty lines then requires that the poverty severity curve is everywhere
higher in one of the two situations being compared. If necessary, one can go on to test higher order
dominance, though the interpretation of the (increasingly) restricted class of measures becomes less clear.

       To illustrate the three dominance tests, consider an initial state in which three persons have
consumptions in amounts (1, 2, 3). Any final state in which one or more of these persons has a higher
consumption, and none have a lower consumption, will imply a lower poverty incidence curve (strictly
lower and no higher anywhere), and hence no higher poverty for any poverty line or poverty measure;
examples of such final states are (2, 2, 3) or (1, 2, 4). Now suppose that the final state is in fact (2, 2, 2).

                                                          56
The poverty incidence curves now cross each other: some poverty lines and some poverty measures will
judge this final state to be an improvement, while others will judge it to be worse than the initial state.
(Compare the head-count indices for z=1.9 and z=2.1.) However, the poverty deficit curves do not cross
each other; for the initial state the poverty deficit curve is (1, 3, 6) (corresponding to consumptions 1, 2,
and 3), while it is (0, 3, 6) for the final state (2, 2, 2). Thus poverty will have fallen (or at least not
increased) for all poverty lines and all measures that are decreasing in consumptions of the poor, such as
P1 and P2. But what if the final state has consumption vector (1.5, 1.5, 2)? Table 5.3 gives the poverty
incidence, deficit and severity curves. Even if we confine attention to distribution-sensitive poverty
measures, some poverty lines will rank the states differently to others. But note that the intersection point
of the poverty severity curves is above 2; any poverty line less than this point will indicate that poverty
has fallen for all distribution sensitive measures, such as P2.

                        Table 5.3: Poverty Incidence, Depth and Severity Curves
Consumption         Poverty Incidence Curve         Poverty Depth Curve           Poverty Severity Curve
(z)                           F(z)                          D(z)                           S(z)
                    Initial          Final          Initial       Final           Initial          Final
1                    1/3               0             1/3            0              1/3               0
1.5                  1/3              2/3            2/3           2/3              1               2/3
2                    2/3               1             4/3           5/3             7/3              7/3
3                     1                1             7/3           8/3             14/3            15/3
Note: three people with initial consumption (1,2,3) and final consumption (1.5,1.5,2)

        When two frequency distributions are quite close, we may also want to assess whether the
difference between them is statistically significant. For first-order dominance, this can be done quite
easily using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, based on the largest vertical distance between the two
cumulative frequency curves; expositions on this simple test, and tabulations of critical values are readily
available. Statistical inference is more difficult for higher order dominance, and more advanced methods
are needed.

5.4.2   Robustness: More than One Dimension
        Similar ideas can be applied in circumstances in which poverty lines vary across households or
individuals in an unknown way. For example, errors in measuring the standard of living may mean that
we are not identifying the true poverty lines for different individuals. Unknown differences in "needs" at
given consumption levels could also mean that the true poverty lines vary. There may be considerable,
unknown, inter-individual variation in nutritional requirements. Errors in accounting for differences
between households in their demographic composition or the prices they face may also entail some
underlying variation in the appropriate poverty lines.

        Poverty comparisons are clearly more difficult when the poverty line has an unknown
distribution, but even then unambiguous conclusions may be possible if one is willing to make
some assumptions. Provided that the distribution of poverty lines is the same for the two (or
more) situations being compared and is independent of the distribution of living standards, first-
order dominance of one distribution over another implies an unambiguous poverty ranking. This
holds no matter what the underlying distribution of poverty lines may be.

        Another case of interest is when one knows the distribution of "needs" (such as family
size) as well as consumption, but one does not know precisely how these two variables interact
to determine welfare. For two dimensions of welfare, such as aggregate consumption and family
size, one can derive "bi-variate dominance tests," which are more or less stringent depending on

                                                         57
the assumptions one is willing to make about the way in which differences in "needs" interact
with consumption in determining well-being; the precise tests depend on (amongst other things)
whether the marginal social valuation of consumption is higher or lower in larger families. In
the special case in which the marginal valuation of consumption is independent of family size,
and the marginal distribution of size is fixed, the problem collapses back to the standard
dominance tests above.

        Let us suppose first that we know nothing about how needs interact with consumption in
determining poverty. For additive poverty measures and a fixed distribution of the population
across different needs, all of the above dominance tests can be applied separately to each of the
groups identified as having different needs. Thus one can test for first-order dominance amongst
(say) rural households, separately for urban households, or large families separately from small
families. If we find that FOD holds for each group separately then we can conclude that FOD
also holds for the aggregate, no matter what the difference in needs is between the groups. If
FOD fails then, by restricting attention to measures of the depth and severity of poverty, one can
then test for second-order dominance for each "needs" group separately, or third-order
dominance if necessary.

        These will often be quite stringent tests. Weaker tests can be invoked if one is willing to
rank needs groups in terms of the marginal welfare attached to an increment of consumption.
Suppose one can, and let group 1 have the highest marginal social valuation of consumption (i.e.,
the steepest individual poverty measure, typically the poorest group). Let us also assume that
this ranking is the same at all possible consumption levels, so group 1 always has the highest
marginal valuation of consumption. When ranking distributions in terms of poverty measures we
will also need to assume that the poverty measure, as a function of consumption, is not
discontinuous at the poverty line. This precludes the head-count index, but few other measures;
the condition holds for P1 and P2. Under these conditions one can apply simple partial
dominance tests, where the test is done cumulatively by the ranked needs of groups starting from
group 1, rather than separately for each group. Thus dominance is tested on the cumulative
frequency distributions for group 1 in the two situations compared, then for the population
weighted sum of groups 1 and 2, then for 1,2, and 3, etc. This makes dominance more likely.
For example, although poverty may increase in some needs groups, aggregate poverty may be
found to have fallen as a result of some policy change.

        However, these tests have to be modified further when the distribution of needs also
changes, such as when the proportion of the population living in urban areas has increased over
the period of the poverty comparison, as is typically the case in inter-temporal poverty
comparisons for developing countries. It is theoretically possible that first-order dominance may
hold separately for each of urban and rural areas, and yet not hold in the aggregate for all
possible distributions of needs between the two sectors and all possible ways in which
consumption and needs interact to determine well-being. More general tests can be devised for
such situations, though they are difficult to explain non-mathematically and unlikely to be very
convincing to policy makers.




                                                    58
5.5 Summary
Dominance testing can be a useful tool for making poverty comparisons. The tests can be robust to many
of the measurement problems that routinely confound poverty assessments and they are easy to apply.
For the first-order test (which assumes very little about how poverty is measured, but is thus the hardest
test to pass) it is simply a matter of plotting the cumulative frequencies of consumption in each of the
situations being compared up to the maximum admissible poverty line. The ordinal poverty comparison
is unambiguous as long as the two curves do not cross over. When the test is inconclusive, a second-
order test may prove useful, based on the area under the plotted cumulative distribution. However this
restricts attention to measures that reflect the depth of poverty. Higher order tests can then be applied, if
needed. There are also tests that can handle multiple dimensions of well-being that cannot be precisely
aggregated. On-going research on this topic will probably further enhance the advantages of this
approach in situations where data are imperfect and measurement is inherently controversial.




                                                         59
                                           CHAPTER 6

                                          Inequality Measures


6.1 Definition of inequality
         The poverty measures we have discussed depend on the average level of income or consumption
in a country, and the distribution of income or consumption. Based on these two elements, poverty
measures then focus on the situation of those individuals or households at the bottom of the distribution.
Inequality is a broader concept than poverty in that it is defined over the entire population, not only for
the population below a certain poverty line. Most inequality measures do not depend on the mean of the
distribution, and it this property of mean independence is considered to be a desirable property of an
inequality measure. Instead, inequality is concerned with the distribution.

        Inequality indicators can be harder to develop than income/consumption poverty indicators
because they essentially summarize one dimension of a two-dimensional variable. Note that inequality
measures can be calculated for any distribution, not just for consumption, income or other monetary
variables, but also for land and other continuous and cardinal variables.

        Sometimes we are more interested in measuring inequality than poverty per se. The commonest
way to begin is by dividing the population into fifths (quintiles) from poorest to richest, and reporting the
levels or proportions of income (or expenditure) that accrue to each level. Table 6.1 shows the level of
expenditure per capita, in '000 dong per year, for Vietnam in 1993, based on data from the Vietnam
Living Standards Survey. A fifth of the individuals (not households) included in the survey were
allocated to each expenditure quintile. The figures show that 8.4% of all expenditures were made by the
poorest fifth of households, and 41.4% by the top fifth. Quintile information is easy to understand, but
sometimes one wants a summary measure rather than a whole table of figures.

              Table 6.1: Breakdown of expenditure per capita by quintile, Vietnam 1993
                                              Expenditure quintiles
                            Lowest     Low-mid     Middle      Mid-upper       Upper       Overall
Per capita expenditure       518        756        984          1,338        2,540        1,227
('000 dong/year)
% of expenditure              8.4       12.3        16.0         21.8         41.4        100.0
Source: Vietnam Living Standards Survey 1993.


6.2   Commonly used measures of inequality

6.2.1 Gini coefficient of inequality
        The most widely used single measure of inequality is the Gini coefficient. The Gini coefficient is
based on the Lorenz curve, a cumulative frequency curve that compares the distribution of a specific
variable (eg. income) with the uniform distribution that represents equality. To construct the Gini
coefficient, graph the cumulative percentage of households (from poor to rich) on the horizontal axis and
the cumulative percentage of expenditure (or income) on the vertical axis. This gives the Lorenz curve as
shown in figure 1. The diagonal line represents perfect equality. The Gini coefficient is defined as

                                                           60
A/(A+B), where A and B are as shown on the graph. If A=0 the Gini coefficient becomes 0 which means
perfect equality, whereas if B=0 the Gini coefficient becomes 1 which means complete inequality.


                                                                                Lorenz Curve
                                                100

                                                90

                                                80
                  Cumulative % of expenditure




                                                70

                                                60

                                                50
                                                                                                   A
                                                40

                                                30
                                                                                                           B
                                                20

                                                10

                                                 0
                                                      0               20               40                 60           80              100
                                                                                                               Cumulative % of population



                                                                           Figure 6.1. Lorenz Curve
        Let xi be a point on the X-axis, and yi a point on the Y-axis. Then
                                                               N
(6.1)                                             Gini = 1 − ¦ ( xi − xi −1 )( yi + yi −1 ).
                                                               i =1


When there are N equal intervals on the X-axis this simplifies to
                                                                                N
                                                                            1
(6.2)                                                      Gini = 1 −
                                                                            N
                                                                                ¦( y
                                                                                i =1
                                                                                       i    + y i −1 ).


The Gini coefficient is not entirely satisfactory. To see this, consider the criteria that make a good
measure of income inequality, namely:

•   Mean independence. This means that if all incomes were doubled, the measure would not change.
    The Gini satisfies this.
•   Population size independence. If the population were to change, the measure of inequality should not
    change, ceteris paribus. The Gini satisfies this too.
•   Symmetry. If you and I swap incomes, there should be no change in the measure of inequality. The
    Gini satisfies this.


                                                                                             61
•    Pigou-Dalton Transfer sensitivity. Under this criterion, the transfer of income from rich to poor
     reduces measured inequality. The Gini satisfies this too.
It is also desirable to have
• Decomposability. This means that inequality may be broken down by population groups or income
     sources or in other dimensions. The Gini index is not decomposable or additive across groups. That
     is, the total Gini of society is not equal to the sum of the Ginis for its subgroups.
• Statistical testability. One should be able to test for the significance of changes in the index over
     time. This is less of a problem than it used to be because confidence intervals can typically be
     generated using bootstrap techniques.


6.2.2   Generalized Entropy measures
        There are a number of measures of inequality that satisfy all six criteria. Among the most widely
used are the Theil indexes and the mean log deviation measure. Both belong to the family of generalized
entropy inequality measures. The general formula is given by:

                                                                 α
                                       1     ª1      N
                                                          § yi ·      º
(6.3)                    GE (α ) =           «
                                   α (α − 1) « N
                                                     ¦    ¨
                                                          ¨ ¸
                                                     i =1 © y ¹
                                                               ¸   − 1»
                                             ¬                        »
                                                                      ¼

where y is the mean income. The values of GE measures vary between 0 and ∞, with zero representing
an equal distribution and higher value representing a higher level of inequality. The parameter α in the
GE class represents the weight given to distances between incomes at different parts of the income
distribution, and can take any real value. For lower values of α, GE is more sensitive to changes in the
lower tail of the distribution, and for higher values GE is more sensitive to changes that affect the upper
tail. The commonest values of α used are 0,1 and 2. GE(1) is Theil’s T index, which may be written as

                                                         N
                                                1             yi     y
(6.4)                            GE ( 1 ) =
                                                N
                                                      ¦
                                                      i =1    y
                                                                 ln( i )
                                                                     y

GE(0), also known as Theil’s L, is called mean log deviation measure because it gives the standard
deviation of log(y)::

                                                                    N
                                                    1                                y
        (6.5)                            GE ( 0 ) =
                                                    N
                                                               ¦ ln(
                                                                i =1                 yi
                                                                                        )



6.2.3   Atkinson's inequality measures
        Another class of inequality measures was proposed by Atkinson. This class also has a weighting
parameter ε (which measures aversion to inequality) and some of its theoretical properties are similar to
those of the extended Gini Index. The Atkinson class is defined as:

                                                                        1
                                                              1−ε           (1−ε )
                                          ª1     N
                                                     § yi ·         º
(6.6)                            Aε = 1 − «
                                            N
                                                ¦    ¨ ¸
                                                     ¨
                                                i =1 © y ¹
                                                          ¸         »
                                          «
                                          ¬                         »
                                                                    ¼


                                                              62
6.2.4     Decile dispersion ratio
         A simple, and widely-used, measure is the decile dispersion ratio, which presents the ratio of the
average consumption of income of the richest 10 percent of the population divided by the average income
of the bottom 10 percent. This ratio can also be calculated for other percentiles (for instance, dividing the
average consumption of the richest 5 percent – the 95th percentile – by that of the poorest 5 percent – the
5th percentile). This ratio is readily interpretable, by expressing the income of the rich as multiples of that
of the poor.




6.3 Inequality comparisons
        Many of the tools used in the analysis of poverty can be similarly used for the analysis of
inequality. One could draw a profile of inequality, which would look at the extent of inequality among
certain groups of households. This provides information on the homogeneity of the various groups, an
important element to take into account when designing policy interventions.

         One may also analyze the nature of changes in inequality over time. One could focus on changes
for different groups of the population to show whether inequality changes have been similar for all or
have taken place, say, in a particular sector of the economy. In rural Tanzania, although rural incomes
increased substantially between 1983 and 1991, inequality increased (with the Gini coefficient increasing
from 0.52 to 0.72), especially among the poor. This can be linked to important reforms that took place in
agricultural price policy, which intensified inequalities, with the poor and less-efficient farmers unable to
participate in the growth experienced by wealthier, more efficient farmers (Ferreira, 1996).

        It is often instructive to analyze other dimensions of inequality. For instance, in a country where
public health provision is well developed and reaches all strata of the population, one could expect to see
lower levels of inequality in health outcomes than in income levels. This can be done using tabulations
along the lines of table 6.2, which presents measures of inequality for rural Egypt, applied to a number of
different measures.

        The analysis could also focus on the inequality of different consumption categories or income
sources. In Egypt, it was found that agricultural income represented the most important inequality-
increasing source of income, while non-farm income has the greatest inequality-reducing potential. Table
6.2 sets out this decomposition and shows that while agricultural income only represents 25% of total
income in rural areas, it accounts for 40% of the inequality.

                  Table 6.2: Decomposition of income inequality in rural Egypt, 1997
                   Percentage of           Share in     Gini coefficient for   Percentage contribution to
Income          households receiving     total income   the income source      overall income inequality
Source           the income source            (%)
non farm                 61                     42             0.63                       30
agricultural             67                     25             1.16                       40
Transfer                 51                     15             0.85                       12
livestock                70                      9             0.94                        6
Rental                   32                      8             0.92                       12
Total                   100                   100                                        100
Source:



                                                          63
6.4 Decomposition of income inequality
         The common inequality indicators mentioned above can be used to assess the major contributors
to inequality, by different subgroups of the population and regions as well as by income source. In static
decompositions, household and personal characteristics, such as education, gender, occupation, urban and
rural, and regional location, are determinants of household income. If that is the case, then at least part of
the value of any given inequality measure must reflect the fact that people have different educational
levels, occupations, genders, and so on. This inequality is referred to as the “between-group” component.

         But for any such partition of the population, whether by region, occupation, sector or any other
attribute, some inequality will also exist among those people within the same subgroup; this is the
“within-group” component. The Theil indexes, and those of the Generalized Entropy class, can be
decomposed across these partitions in an additive way, but the Gini index cannot.

       To decompose Theil’s T index (i.e. GE(1)), let Y be the total income of the population, Yj the
income of a subgroup, N the total population, and Nj the population in the subgroup. Using T to represent
GE(1)

                                   N
                                        y i § yi N · N y i   yN
                               T =¦        ln ¨
                                              ¨     ¸
                                                    ¸ = ¦ ln( i )
                                  i =1 N y    © y N ¹ i =1 Y  Y
(6.7)
                                   §Yj    ·        §Yj       · § Yj /Y ·
                               = ¦¨¨      ¸T j + ¦ ¨
                                          ¸        ¨Y        ¸    ¨       ¸
                                                             ¸ ln ¨ N / N ¸
                                 j © Y    ¹        ©         ¹ © j        ¹
        So the inequality measure can be decomposed into two components. The first term represents the
within-group inequality and the second term represents the between-group inequality. This
decomposability is very useful as it allows one to consider what is driving changes in inequality at the
national level.

        Similarly, GE(0) can also be decomposed. Using L to represent GE(0):

                         N
                               1 § Y ·              § Nj   ·              Nj   § N /N ·
                       ¦                       ¦                    ¦        ln¨        ¸.
                                                                                   j
                  L=            ln¨      ¸=         ¨      ¸L j +
(6.8)                          N ¨       ¸
                                  © Yi N ¹
                                                    ¨ N    ¸               N   ¨        ¸
                        i −1                    j   ©      ¹         j         © Yj / Y ¹

        Here are some examples of different measures of inequality (Dollar and Glewwe 1999, p.40):

                 Table 6.3: Expenditure Inequality in Selected Less Developed Countries
    Country                            Gini coefficient                    Theil T             Theil L
    Côte d'Ivoire, 1985-86                0.435                          0.353               0.325
    Ghana, 1987-88                        0.347                          0.214               0.205
    Jamaica, 1989                       n/a                              0.349               0.320
    Peru, 1985-86                         0.430                          0.353               0.319
    Vietnam, 1992-93                      0.344                          0.200               0.169
   Source: Reported in Dollar and Glewwe (1999), p.40.




                                                                    64
         For a typical decomposition of inequality, consider the following simple example, again from
Dollar and Glewwe (p.41) and for Vietnam in 1993. Using Theil’s T, 22% of the total inequality is
attributable to between-group inequality - i.e. to the difference in expenditure levels between urban and
rural areas. The remaining 78% of all inequality is due to the inequality in expenditure per capita that
occurs within each region.

                   Table 6.4: Decomposition of expenditure inequality by area, Vietnam
                                       Theil T             Between-group          Population share (%)
                                                             inequality
    All Vietnam                             0.200                                       100
     Urban                                  0.196         0.044 (22% of total)           20
     Rural                                  0.136                                        80
  Source: Dollar and Glewwe (1999), p.41.

        Similar results were found for Zimbabwe in 1995-96. There a decomposition of Theil’s T
coefficient showed that the within-area (within rural areas and within urban areas) contribution to
inequality was 72 percent, while the between–area (between urban and rural areas) component was 28
percent. In many Latin American countries, the between-area component of inequality explains a much
higher share of total inequality.

          Of equal interest is which of the different income sources, or components of a measure of well-
being, are primarily responsible for the observed level of inequality. For example, if total income can be
divided into self-employment income, wages, transfers, and property income, one can examine the
distribution of each income source. Raising one of the income sources by 1 percent, what would happen
to overall inequality? Table 6.5 shows the results for the Gini coefficient for both income and wealth
sources in Peru (1997). As the table shows, self-employment income is the most equalizing income
source, while agricultural property is the most equalizing wealth asset. An increase in some income
sources would actually lead to increased inequality, essentially when these sources are less equally
distributed than overall income). The results depend on two factors: (1) the importance of the income
source in total income (for larger ones, one percent increase is larger in absolute terms) and (2) the
distribution of that income source (if it is more unequal than overall income, it will lead to a reduction; if
it is less unequal, it will result in an increase in overall inequality). The size of the impact will be greater,
the greater the distance from the overall level of inequality.

            Table 6.5: Peru: Expected change in income inequality resulting from a one percent
                   change in income source, 1997 (as percentage of Gini change)
Income source                    Expected change     Wealth sources                 Expected change
Self-employment income                -4.9           Housing                            1.9
Wages                                  0.6           Durable goods                      -1.5
Transfers                              2.2           Urban property                     1.3
Property income                        2.1           Agricultural property              -1.6
                                                     Enterprises                        0




                                                           65
                                               CHAPTER 7

                             Describing Poverty: Poverty Profiles


7.1 What is poverty profile
         A poverty profile sets out the major facts on poverty (and typically, inequality), and then
examines the pattern of poverty, to see how it varies by geography (by region, urban/rural,
mountain/plain, etc.), by community characteristics (e.g. in communities with and without a school, etc.),
and by household characteristics (e.g. by education of household head, by size of household). Hence, a
"poverty profile" is simply a comprehensive poverty comparison, showing how poverty varies across sub-
groups of society, such as region of residence or sector of employment. A well-presented poverty profile
can be immensely informative and extremely useful in assessing how the sectoral or regional pattern of
economic change is likely to affect aggregate poverty, although it typically uses rather basic techniques
(tables, graphs).

         For example, regional poverty comparisons are important for targeting development programs to
poorer areas. A recent poverty study for Cambodia showed that headcount poverty rates were highest in
the rural sector and lowest in Phnom Penh in 1999 (Figure 7.1). Approximately 40% of the rural
population, 10% of the Phnom Penh population and 25% of other urban residents live in households that
are below the poverty line. Figure 1 also shows the 95% confidence interval that surround the estimates of
the headcount index for each area. These standard error bands can be helpful when the sub-populations
include only a small number of observations, because the bar charts may otherwise give a misleading
sense of confidence in the precision of the poverty comparison that is illustrated. The sampling errors are
sufficiently small to have full confidence in the conclusion that headcount poverty rates are lower in
Phnom Penh than in other urban areas, which are lower in turn than in rural areas. In terms of
contribution to the total amount of poverty, 90.5 % of people living below the poverty line live in rural
areas, 7.2% live in other urban areas and 2.3% live in Phnom Penh.




                                                        66
         100
                        Headcount index (+/- 2 std errors)

          80            Share of total


          60


          40


          20


            0
                        Phnom Penh                    Other Urban                          Rural

                               Figure 7.1: Headcount poverty by region
        Similarly, table 7.1 presents information on Ecuadorian households’ access to services, which
mainly differ at the community level. The table shows that the poor have, on average, lower access to
services. However, when looking at urban and rural areas separately, it appears that access to services
such as electricity is very similar for the poor and non-poor in urban areas.


                      Table 7.1: Some Characteristics of the Poor in Ecuador, 1994
          % with access to basic services          Urban               Rural             Total
                                               poor    Non-       poor     Non-     poor     Non-
                                                       poor                 poor              poor
          Sewerage connection                  57.3    83.4       12.4     28.2     29.6     63.8
          Electricity supply                   97.8     99.5      62       75.8     75.8     91.1
          Water from public net                61.2     78.8      18.3     23       34.8     59.3
          Waste collection                     59.7     76.7       1.1      5.6     23.5     51.5
       Source: World Bank (1996)

        By way of a further illustration, Table 7.2 shows poverty measures by household characteristics
— gender and education levels of household head – for Malawa in 1997-98. Clearly, the higher the
education level that household heads achieve, the less likely that the household is poor.


                Table 7.2: Poverty among various household groups in Malawi, 1997/98
      Household Characteristics             Headcount        Poverty gap        Squared Poverty Gap
      Gender of Head
        Male                                   57.9              0.22              0.11
        Female                                 65.6              0.28              0.15



                                                        67
        Education levels of Head
          no education                      70.6           0.31            0.17
          less than standard IV             63.2           0.25            0.13
          standard IV                       58.1           0.22            0.11
          Primary school                    47.2           0.15            0.06
          Secondary school                  29.8           0.08            0.03
          University                        15.5           0.07            0.04
Source: National Economic Council (2000)

       The World Bank’s Poverty Reduction Handbook (1992) sets out some key questions that one may
ask when preparing a poverty profile, as follows:
       1. Does poverty vary widely between different areas in the country?
       2. Are the most populated areas also the areas where most of the poor live?
       3. How is income poverty correlated with gender, age, urban and rural, racial, or ethnic
           characteristics?
       4. What are the main sources of income for the poor?
       5. On what sectors do the poor depend for their livelihood?
       6. What products or services—tradables and non-tradables—do the poor sell?
       7. To what extent are the rural poor engaged in agriculture? In off-farm employment?
       8. How large a factor is unemployment? Underemployment?
       9. Which are the important goods in the consumption basket of the poor? How high is the share
           of tradables and non-tradables
       10. How is income poverty linked with malnutrition or educational outcomes?
       11. What are fertility characteristics of the poor?
       12. To what public services do the poor have access? What is the quality of the service?
       13. How important are private costs of education and health for the poor?
       14. Can the poor access formal or informal credit markets?
       15. What assets—land, housing, and financial—do the poor own? Do property rights over such
           assets exist?
       16. How secure is their access to, and tenure over, natural resources?
       17. Is environmental degradation linked to poverty?
       18. How variable are the incomes of the poor? What risks do they face?
       19. Are certain population groups in society at a higher risk of being poor than others are?

        The extent to which a detailed poverty profile can be constructed depends on what data
are available. While certain variables such as educational, health indicators, and access to
essential services are the most basic components of a poverty profile, the relevance of many
other variables depends on country circumstances. The general rule is that all variables that
correlate with poverty and are relevant for policies under consideration should be included. By
this rule, income generating activities, asset positions, access to social and infrastructure
services, and the composition of consumption are all of interest. Cross-links to non-income
measures of poverty may also be useful.

7.2 Additive poverty measures
        The use of additive poverty measures can greatly facilitate poverty comparisons. Consider the
general class of Foster, Greer and Thorbecke poverty measures described by equation (5) of chapter 4.
Suppose the population can be divided into m mutually exclusive sub-groups. The poverty profile is



                                                     68
simply the list of poverty measures Pj for j=1, … ,m. Aggregate poverty can then be written as the
average of the sub-group poverty measures, weighted by their population:

                                                    m
                                               1
(7.1)                                     P=
                                               N
                                                   ¦P N
                                                   j =1
                                                               j    j


where
                                                        Nj
                                               1
(7.2)                                     Pj =
                                               Nj
                                                     ¦ p( z
                                                        i =1
                                                                        j   , y ij )


is the poverty measure for the sub-group j with population Nj. Here yij is the welfare indicator of
                                                                                                       m
individual i who belongs to the sub-group j, where i=1, … ,Nj. The total population N is equal to     ¦N      j
                                                                                                       j= 1

Analogously, one can also define "clusters" of sub-groups; as one disaggregates further and further, the
poverty profile at each step adds up to that of the previous step, using population weights.

        In addition to the computational convenience in forming poverty profiles, additive poverty
measures guarantee "subgroup consistency" in the sense that when poverty increases in any sub-group of
the population, aggregate poverty will also increase. Indeed, researchers have shown that (given certain
assumptions of technical nature) subgroup consistency implies, and is implied by, the class of measures
defined by equation (5) of chapter 4. This property is intuitively appealing for any poverty profile.
Indeed, an evaluation of the effects on aggregate poverty of targeted poverty alleviation schemes –
whereby the benefits are concentrated in certain sub-groups – may be quite misleading unless the poverty
measure used has this property; some measures of aggregate poverty may show an increase even if
poverty fell in the target group and there were no changes elsewhere. Subgroup consistency can thus be
viewed as a desirable property in evaluating anti-poverty policies.

         On possible objection to additivity is that it attaches no weight to one aspect of a poverty profile:
the differences between sub-groups in the extent of poverty. Consider two equal-sized groups - "rural"
and "urban" sectors - with initial poverty indices of 0.70 and 0.20 respectively. Aggregate poverty is 0.45
according to any (population weighted) additive measure. One is to choose between two policies X and
Y. Under policy X, the poverty profile changes to 0.70 and 0.10, while under policy Y the profile
becomes 0.60 and 0.20. By any additive poverty measure one should be indifferent between X and Y;
both yield an aggregate poverty index of 0.40. Yet, in contrast to X, the gains under policy Y have gone to
the poorer rural sector.Should we prefer policy Y? The answer is only "yes" if one is concerned about
inequalities between groups independently of absolute living standards, and it is by no means clear why
we should be.



7.3 Profile Presentation
        There are two main ways of presenting a poverty profile. The first ("type A") gives the incidence
of poverty or other poverty measure(s) for each sub-group defined in terms of some characteristic, such as
place of residence; this is done in Table 7.2. The second ("type B") gives the incidence of characteristics
amongst sub-groups defined in terms of their poverty status, such as "poor" and "non-poor", as is done in
the dark columns in Figure 7.1.




                                                                   69
         Which is more useful will depend on the purpose of the poverty profile. Suppose that one is
using the poverty profile to select a target region for a poverty alleviation scheme. The scheme will
allocate a small sum of money to all residents in the chosen target region (“indicator targeting”). It is an
imperfect form of targeting because (as is invariably the case) the policy maker does not know who has
which standard of living, even when a distribution of living standards can be constructed from a
household sample survey. The policy maker therefore has to make do with an imperfect indicator of
living standards, in this case region of residence. In this case a type A profile will be more useful, because
it identifies the areas (or groups) where poverty rates are highest, and hence where universal cash
transfers are least likely to be handed out to the non-poor.




7.4 Poverty Comparisons over time
        If several consecutive rounds of household surveys are available, changes in income poverty over
time can be assessed. This requires poverty measures that are comparable and that reflect differences over
time in the cost of living across regions. The commonest method for preparing comparisons over time
consists of converting nominal income or consumption data from different surveys and regions into real
income and consumption by deflating the indicators in space and time. A constant poverty line can then
be applied to these real values to infer poverty measures. Ideally, to obtain robust poverty comparisons
over time, one would want to use surveys with similar sampling frame and methods, with corrections for
prices differences, and with similar definitions of consumption or income. In practice, however,
differences exist in some of these dimensions. This does not imply that no comparison can be made. It
simply means that the analyst will need to:

    •   correct for major differences in the sampling frame and sampling method for the different surveys
        or the different rounds of a panel survey;
    •   use regional and temporal price indices to ensure an similar definition of the poverty line over
        time and across regions;
    •   adjust the definition of consumption or income aggregates over time to ensure a similar definition
        is used. Changes in definitions, and in particular in the degree to which home production is
        included in the definition, can lead to important distortions of poverty measurement.

         When several rounds of survey data are available, the analyst can investigate changes in the
regional distribution of poverty or in the major characteristics of the poor, such as ethnicity, gender, age,
urban and rural location, employment, access to social programs and basic services, etc. Although the
various population groups identified in the first period of time should clearly form the basis of the
analysis over time, it is also important to investigate whether or not ‘new’ groups of poor people have
appeared. This is particularly relevant for countries that undergo rapid changes linked to such factors as
economic reforms, conflicts, natural disasters, and epidemics such as HIV/AIDS. For example, comparing
the baseline poverty profile for Cambodia derived from the 1993/94 data with that of the CSES 1997
suggests that the food poverty line (consisting of the food poverty line plus a non-food allowance equal to
the level of non-food consumption of persons whose per capita consumption just equals the food poverty
line) increased from 1,578 to 1,819 riels per day in Phnom Penh (15%), from 1,264 to 1,407 riels per day
in other urban areas (11%), and from 1,117 to 1,210 riels (8%) in rural areas.
                    Table 7.3: Cambodia: Poverty Measures, 1993-94 and June 1997



                                                         70
                        Head count index (%)      Poverty gap index        Poverty severity index
                                                         (%)                        (%)
                         1993/94       1997      1993/94       1997       1993/94          1997
Food Poverty Line
 Phnom Penh                 6.2          3.4        1.3          0.5       0.4             0.1
 Other Urban               19.6         15.4        4.4          3.3       1.4             1.1
 Rural                     21.9         20.0        4.0          3.9       1.1             1.2
 Total                     20.0         17.9        3.7          3.5       1.1             1.1
Poverty Line
 Phnom Penh                11.4         11.1        3.1          2.2       1.2             0.6
 Other Urban               36.6         29.9        9.6          7.5       3.6             2.7
 Rural                     43.1         40.1       10.0          9.7       3.3             3.4
 Total                     39.0         36.1        9.2          8.7       3.1             3.1

         The estimates in table 7.3 indicate that the incidence of poverty declined modestly in Cambodia
as a whole (from 39% to 36%) during the period 1993/94 to June 1997. On a regional basis, poverty
declined significantly in other urban areas (from 37% to 30%), modestly in rural areas (from 43% to 40%)
and not at all in Phnom Penh (where it remained at 11%). During the same period, the estimates indicate
that two other measures of poverty (i.e. the poverty gap and poverty severity index) declined
significantly, both in Phnom Penh and in other urban areas but not in rural areas.

         One can also look at changes in the characteristics of different poverty groups. For example, the
distribution of access to services in the base year can be compared with the distribution of services in the
second year. This will then show whether changes made in the supply of the services have been pro-poor.

         Poverty measures sometimes are translated into the relative risks of being poor for different
household groups. These risks indicate whether the members of a given group are poor in relation to the
corresponding probability for all other households of society. This concept may be applied to examine
whether, over time, the relative poverty risk of specific population groups decreases or increases. Table
7.4 compares the relative poverty risk of various groups in Peru in 1994 and 1997. It shows, for example,
that the poverty risks of households of seven persons or more increased over time (from 71% to 106%),
while that of households where the spouse of the head is working diminished (from –11% to –21%).
                Table 7.4. Peru: Poverty Risks for Selected Groups of Households, (%)
         Household characteristic                                                      1994 1997
         Households using house for business purposes                                   -28  -29
         Rural households with at least one member in off-farm empl.                    -24  -23
         Households with head’s spouse working                                          -11  -21
         Households without water or sanitation                                          54   50
         Households without electricity                                                  63   69
         Households with head less than secondary education                              73   72
         Households of 7 persons or more                                                 71  106
         Source:




                                                          71
7.5 Excerpts from poverty profiles for Indonesia and Cambodia

7.5.1   Indonesia
        Table 7.5 gives an example of a poverty profile in which the sampled households in Indonesia's
1987 SUSENAS have been classified into 10 groups according to their principal income source. Results
are given for the three main poverty measures discussed above. The following points should be noted:

•   An urban-rural cost-of-living differential of 10% has been assumed. From the only empirical work
    that has been done, this appears to be a reasonable assumption, though it is lower than what has been
    assumed in most other poverty profiles for Indonesia.
•   The poverty measures are based on the estimated population distributions of persons ranked by
    household consumption per person, where each person in a given household is assumed to have the
    same consumption. Household specific sampling rates have been used in estimating the distributions.

                       Table 7.5: A Sectoral Poverty Profile for Indonesia in 1987
Principal sector of    Population share      Head-count index      Poverty gap index     FGT P2 measure
employment                 (1987)                  (%)                    (%)               (x100)
Farming
  Self-employed             41.1                  31.1                   6.42                  1.97
  Labourer                   8.6                  38.1                   7.62                  2.21
Industry
  Urban                      3.0                   8.1                   1.26                  0.32
  Rural                      3.4                  19.4                   3.00                  0.76
Construction                 4.3                  17.4                   2.92                  0.80
Trade
  Urban                      6.3                   5.0                   0.71                  0.17
  Rural                      7.6                  14.7                   2.42                  0.61
Transport                    4.1                  10.7                   1.53                  0.34
Services
  Urban                      7.6                   4.2                   0.61                  0.14
  Rural                      7.3                  11.6                   1.84                  0.49
Other                        6.7                  17.1                   3.55                  1.03
Total                      100.0                  21.7                   4.22                  1.24

•   In forming the poverty profile, households have been grouped by their stated "principal income
    source". Many households will have more than one income source. In principle one could form sub-
    groups according to the various interactions of primary and secondary income sources, but this would
    rapidly generate an unwieldy poverty profile. An alternative is to calculate average incomes from
    various sources for various consumption groups (for example, ultra-poor, poor, near-poor, etc.).
•   The three measures are in close agreement on the ranking of sectors in terms of poverty, with very
    few re-rankings. For example, the two farming sub-groups are the poorest for all three measures.

         Changes in the poverty profile may arise from the contributions of different sub-groups in the
poverty profile to changes over time in aggregate poverty. Table 7.6 provides information on the relative
contribution of various sectors to aggregate poverty alleviation in Indonesia between 1984 and 1987.
These are the "intra-sectoral effects", expressed as a percentage of the reduction in aggregate poverty for
each poverty measure. The table also gives the aggregate contribution of shifts in population and the
interaction effects between sectoral gains and population shifts.



                                                         72
Table 7.6: Sectoral Decomposition of the Change in Poverty in Indonesia, 1984-1987
                                                                Contribution of sectoral change in:
Principle sector of          Population share      Head-count index     Poverty gap index      FGT P2 measure
employment                       (1984)                  (%)                   (%)
Farming
  Self-employed                    45.0                 49.8                 54.6                 57.4
  Labourer                          9.0                 11.2                 14.8                 16.5
Industry
  Urban                             2.6                   0.8                  0.4                  0.3
  Rural                             3.3                   2.8                  3.1                  2.7
Construction                        4.1                   3.2                  2.6                  2.2
Trade
  Urban                             5.4                   2.2                  1.6                  1.4
  Rural                             6.6                   7.2                  5.6                  4.7
Transport                           3.8                   3.6                  2.7                  2.2
Services
  Urban                             6.5                  1.0                  1.0                  0.9
  Rural                             5.8                  2.9                  2.4                  2.0
Total sector effects                                    89.3                 93.8                 95.1
(incl. omitted sectors)
Contribution of                                         13.2                 10.4                   9.4
population shifts
Interaction effects                                     -2.6                 -4.3                 -4.5
Total                             100.0                100.0                100.0                100.0
Note: minor sectors omitted.
Source: Adapted from Huppi and Ravallion (1991).

        The drop in poverty among self-employed farmers had the largest influence on aggregate poverty
reduction, and most particularly on the reduction in the severity of poverty as measured by P2. About
50% of the reduction in the national head-count index was due to gains in this sector, while it accounted
for 57% of the gain in P2. The second most important contribution came from gains to farm workers,
whose reduction in poverty as measured by the head-count index contributed 11% to the reduction in the
aggregate index, while the decline in this sector's P2 measure contributed almost 17% of the aggregate
decline. These two groups jointly accounted for 61% of the reduction of the aggregate head-count index
and 74% of the reduction of the aggregate value of P2. Note that the rural farm sector's impressive
participation in the reduction of aggregate poverty is due to both significant declines in their poverty
measures, and the large share of national poverty accounted for by this sector.. Over 13% of the decline in
the national head-count index was due to population shifts between various sectors of employment, and
over 9% of the decline in the P2 measure can be traced back to these shifts. The sectors that gained in
population share were almost all urban (Huppi and Ravallion 1991), and had initially lower poverty
measures. This is the main factor underlying the contribution of population shifts to poverty alleviation.
The fact that population was moving out of the rural sector, where poverty was falling faster, accounts for
the negative interaction effects in Table 7.6.


7.5.2    Cambodia
       A basic breakdown of Cambodian poverty rates, by region, is given above in Table 7.3. The
numbers show that at least 85% of the poor are concentrated in rural areas.




                                                                73
         Some more recent figures are shown in table 7.7, using data from the CSES 1999. Data in 1999
were collected in two rounds, and table 7.7 contains estimates for each round (and the pooled sample) of
the three main poverty statistics, and also reports the results from the previous surveys for comparison.

                  Table 7.7: Comparisons of Poverty Estimates from Cambodian Surveys
                                                            Headcount            Poverty gap           Poverty severity
SESC 1993/94                                                   39.0                     9.2                  3.1
1997 CSES (as adjusted by Knowles)                             36.1                     8.7                  3.1
1997 CSES (unadjusted)                                         47.8                    13.7                  5.3
                                                                (1.5)                  (0.7)                (0.3)
CSES 1999 (Round 1)                                            64.4                    23.9                 11.3
                                                                (2.3)                  (1.3)                (0.8)
CSES 1999 (Round 2)                                            35.9                     6.5                  2.0
                                                                (2.4)                  (0.7)                (0.4)
CSES 1999 (both Rounds combined)                               51.1                    15.4                  6.7
                                                                (1.8)                  (0.9)                (0.5)
Note: No sampling errors (reported in parentheses for the other years) are reported by the two previous poverty profiles but the
relative errors for SESC 1993/94 and the adjusted 1997 CSES would likely be higher than the relative error in 1999 because the
sampling scheme used previously was not as efficient (fewer clusters and broader stratification). The poverty line used for the
unadjusted 1997 CSES results takes values of 1923 Riel per person per day in Phnom Penh, 1398 in other urban and 1195 in
rural.

         An interesting feature of these results is that there is a substantial discrepancy in the poverty
estimates from the two survey rounds in 1999. The headcount index is almost 30 percentage points higher
in Round 1 than in Round 2, while the poverty gap and poverty severity indexes are between four and six
times higher. These discrepancies are also large relative to the variation across previous survey estimates
of poverty in Cambodia. If the discrepancies between the two survey rounds are ignored, and the data are
pooled, the resulting poverty estimates are fairly similar to the unadjusted 1997 estimates, showing a
slight increase in all three poverty measures (table 7.7). This comparison can be considered the “do
nothing” one because it uses all of the survey data in both years.

         The pattern of poverty with respect to the age group of the household head is reported in table
7.8. It is apparent that poverty rates rise with age, reaching a maximum for the 36-40 year old group of
household heads, and then declining. A similar pattern was reported in the 1997 poverty profile. Once
again, the definition of headship and its economic interpretation may confound the results so more
detailed examination would be needed before any interventions might be designed on the basis of these
age patterns. For example, the household head need not be the major economic contributor to the
household, respondents may simply have nominated the oldest or most senior member. Thus, the
relatively low poverty rate for people living in households whose head is aged 61 years and above may
reflect the wealth accumulation that this elderly head has achieved or it could be that there is a younger
generation within the household whose economic success is sufficient to allow them to support their
elders within the same household.


                 Table 7.8: Distribution of Poverty by Age and Gender of Household Head
                                 Headcount                 Poverty gap                Poverty severity           Share of
                                 Index Contribution        Index Contribution         Index Contribution         total   pop
                                 (%)   to total (%)        (%)     to total (%)       (%)      to total (%)      (%)

Poverty Line                      35.9        100.0          6.5        100.0           2.0         100.0           100.0
 18-30 years                      36.7         10.7          5.6          9.1           1.4           7.5            10.5



                                                                   74
 31-35 years                     35.4      10.9       5.4         9.2       1.6        8.8      11.1
 36-40 years                     43.6      21.2       8.0        21.6       2.7       23.3      17.5
 41-45 years                     40.3      15.7       7.3        15.8       2.2       15.3      14.0
 46-50 years                     36.5      14.4       7.7        16.9       2.4       16.9      14.2
 51-60 years                     28.3      15.8       5.3        16.3       1.7       16.8      20.0
 61 and Above                    32.0      11.3       5.6        11.1       1.8       11.3      12.7

 Male                            36.4      84.4       6.6        84.2       2.1       85.1      83.3
 Female                          33.6      15.7       6.1        15.8       1.8       14.9      16.7
Source: Gibson(1999).

        In addition to the gender of the household head, marital status and widowhood (including male
widowers) is sometimes used as a sub-population characteristic for forming poverty profiles. There are
two reasons why widow-headed households, and households where there has been a dissolution (i.e.,
separation or divorce), could be at greater risk of poverty. The loss of an economically active household
member, as would occur with the death of a husband in war for example, is likely to cause a large income
shock that could push a household into poverty. The second factor, and the one that links marital status
with household size, is that widow-headed households tend to be smaller than average, which will
constrain the effective living standards of their residents if there are economies of household size.

        In Cambodia, the headcount poverty rate in 1999 increased smoothly with household size to a
maximum rate for households with eight members (figure 7.2). In the round 1 data the highest headcount
poverty rate is for households with nine members. A relationship like that shown in figure 7.2 might
normally be doubted because uncontrolled for household size economies may be the cause of the pattern:
large households may have lower expenditures not because their members are poor but because they don’t
need to spend as much per person to reach the same standard of living. But the available evidence
suggests that size economies may not be important for Cambodian households, so the pattern shown by
figure 7.2 may be a useful basis for identifying the poor.


                        60
                                 Headcount index
                        50       Share of total
           Percentage




                        40
                        30
                        20
                        10
                        0
                             1      2      3      4         5      6    7         8      9   10+
                                                      Household Size

                                        Figure 7.2: Poverty by household size
        Previous poverty profiles showed that poverty rates were relatively high among those whose
household head either has no schooling or has only primary schooling. Poverty rates then fall with the
attainment of lower secondary education, fall farther with upper secondary and are almost zero if the
household head is a university graduate. But those whose household head had a technical/vocational or


                                                            75
other form of education had a higher poverty rate than those with primary schooling (at least in the 1997
poverty profile).

       According to the survey estimates, there was no difference, in 1999, in poverty rates between
those whose household head has no schooling and those whose head has some primary education (figure
7.3). Although the survey estimate of the headcount poverty rate is slightly higher for the primary
schooled group, the estimates for both groups are




           60
                                                             Headcount index (+/- 2 std errors)
                                                             Share of total
           50


           40


           30


           20


           10


            0
                   None       Primary       Lower       Upper      Technical/    University        Other
                                          secondary   secondary    vocational

                    Figure 7.3: Poverty by education level of household head

surrounded by wide and overlapping confidence intervals, and the ranking reverses with the poverty gap
and poverty severity indexes and at the food poverty line (table 7.9).

Table 7.9: Cambodia: Distribution of Poverty by Education Level of Head
                                 Headcount           Poverty gap          Poverty severity        Share of
                             Index Contributio Index Contribution       Index Contribution        total pop
                              (%)     n to total (%)    to total (%)     (%)    to total (%)         (%)
                                         (%)
Poverty Line                  35.9    100.0        6.5 100.0              2.0    100.0            100.0
 No schooling                 37.6     28.5        7.0   29.3             2.2     30.1             27.3
 Primary                      38.8     49.3        6.8   47.9             2.1     48.2             45.7
 Lower secondary              32.3     16.9        6.0   17.4             1.8     16.4             18.8
 Upper secondary              23.9       4.5       4.5     4.7            1.3      4.5              6.8
 Technical/vocational         10.3       0.2       0.8     0.1            0.1      0.0              0.6
 University                    7.3       0.1       2.2     0.1            0.8      0.1              0.3
 Other                        32.8       0.5       6.7     0.5            2.4      0.6              0.5




                                                       76
 Literate                     35.2      73.1         6.3     72.7           2.0     72.1          74.7
 Illiterate                   38.2      26.9         7.0     27.3           2.2     27.9          25.3
Source: Gibson(1999).




         Table 7.10 reports poverty rates and contributions to the total according to the employment status
the household head. Among the major groups, it is those whose household head is self-employed that
have the highest headcount poverty rate, although this ranking changes when considering the other
poverty measures and using the food poverty line. The depth and severity of poverty appear to be greatest
for those people whose household head is an unpaid family worker and this is also reflected in their
relatively large contribution to total poverty (i.e., this group comprises 1.3% of the population and 1.2%
of the headcount poor but contribute 12.4% of the total poverty severity measure at the food poverty line).

                    Table 7.10: Distribution of Poverty by Employment Status of Head
                                 Headcount              Poverty gap          Poverty severity   Share of
                            Index Contribution     Index Contribution     Index Contribution total pop
                             (%)   to total (%)     (%)    to total (%)    (%)     to total (%)   (%)
Poverty Line                 35.9      100.0         6.5      100.0         2.0       100.0     100.0
Employee – private sect      34.8         6.6        7.5         7.9        2.4         8.0       6.8
Employee – public sect       19.4         5.1        3.7         5.4        1.1         5.2       9.5
Self-employed                38.8       80.5         6.6        75.8        1.9        71.6      74.5
Unpaid family worker         33.2         1.2       16.0         3.1       10.4         6.4       1.3
Other (incl. Employer)       33.3         0.2        7.5         0.3        1.8         0.2       0.2
Unemployed                   53.1         0.2        6.8         0.1        0.9         0.0       0.1
Not in the labour force      29.7         6.2        6.4         7.4        2.3         8.7       7.5
Source: Gibson(1999).


7.6 Poverty mapping
        Poverty analysis is often based on national level indicators that are compared over time or across
countries. The broad trends that can be identified using aggregate information are useful for evaluating
and monitoring the overall performance of a country. For many policy and research applications,
however, the information that can be extracted from aggregate indicators may not be sufficient, since they
hide significant local variation in living conditions within countries. For example, poverty within a region
can vary across districts. This makes small-area estimates of poverty very appealing. However, often we
are unable directly to compute poverty estimates for small areas like districts. Instead, we usually have
poverty estimates for regions or entire countries only.

        The main reason that poverty measures are computed for large areas and not usually available for
small areas is data availability. There are two main types of welfare-related information sources available
to policy-makers. Household surveys often include a detailed income and/or consumption expenditure
module (such as the Cambodian CSES 1999). However, due to relatively small sample size, the collected
information is usually only representative for broad regions of the country. For example, with the CSES
1999 we can compute poverty estimates for Phnom Penh, other urban areas and rural areas but not for
every district. Census data (and sometimes large household sample surveys) are available for all
households (or very large samples of households) and can provide reliable estimates at highly


                                                        77
disaggregated levels such as small municipalities, towns, and villages. But censuses do not contain the
income or consumption information necessary to yield reliable indicators of the level and distribution of
welfare such as poverty rates or inequality measures.

        However, it is possible to merge information from these two types of data sources (detailed
household surveys like the CSES 1999, and census data) so that “poverty maps” can be constructed.
These detailed poverty maps capture the heterogeneity of poverty within a country. That is, areas that are
better off and those that are worse off will be more clearly defined. Sometimes regions that have less
poverty overall may have substantial pockets of poverty that are lost in the aggregate poverty statistics.

         Poverty maps can improve the targeting of interventions. In designing poverty alleviation
projects and allocating subsidies, resources will be used more effectively if the most needy groups can be
better targeted. This reduces the leakage of transfer payments to non-poor persons, and it reduces the risk
that poor persons will be missed by a program. Many countries use geographic targeting schemes based
on relatively unreliable welfare indicators such as the “basic needs indicators”, which are ad hoc
combinations of various indicators into one index.

         Poverty maps can also help governments to articulate their policy objectives. Basing allocation
decisions on observed geographic poverty data rather than subjective rankings of regions increases the
transparency of government decision making. Such data can thus help limit the influence of special
interests in allocation decisions. There is a related role for well-defined poverty maps to lend credibility to
government and donor decision making.

         To create a poverty map, first use the household survey data to estimate a model of per capita
consumption expenditure (or any other household or individual-level indicator of well-being) as a
function of variables that are common to both the household survey and the census. Then use the resulting
estimated equation to predict per capita expenditures for each household in the census. The estimated
household-level measures of poverty and inequality may then aggregated for small areas, such as districts,
villages, or even neighborhoods. For a recent application to Vietnam, see Baulch and Minot (2001);
discussions of the methodology occur in Hentschel et al. (2000), Elbers, Lanjouw and Lanjouw (2000),
and Alderman et al. (2000).




                                                          78
                                                CHAPTER 8

                       Understanding the Determinants of Poverty


8.1 What causes poverty?
         The previous chapters have already touched on some of the determinants of poverty. The factors
could be macro, sector-specific, community, household and individual characteristics. This chapter
summarizes some of the characteristics of the poor by region, community, household and individual
characteristics followed by quantitative and qualitative description of the major determinants of poverty.
It then discusses how regression techniques can be used to determine the factors causing poverty, or at
least the factors correlated to poverty. Note that correlation means association but does not necessarily
mean causality.



8.2 Regional level characteristics
        At the regional level, there are numerous characteristics that might be associated with poverty.
The relationship of these characteristics with poverty is country specific. In general, however, poverty is
high in areas characterized by geographical isolation, a low resource base, low rainfall, and other
inhospitable climatic conditions. For example, many argue that economic development in Bangladesh is
severely retarded due to its susceptibility to annual floods. In the case of Cambodia, low purchasing
power and the remoteness of rural areas is responsible for generating food insecurity among the poor.
Inadequate public services, weak communications and infrastructure, as well as underdeveloped markets
are dominant features of life in rural Cambodia that contribute to poverty.

         Other important regional and national characteristics that affect poverty include good governance,
a sound environmental policy, economic, political and market stability, mass participation, global and
regional security, intellectual expression and a fair, functional, and effective judiciary. Regional-level
market reforms can boost growth and help poor people, but it is important to note that they can also be a
source of dislocation. The effect of market reforms are complex, deeply linked to institutions and to
political and social structures. The experience of transition, especially in countries of the former Soviet
Union, vividly illustrates that market reforms in the absence of effective domestic institutions can fail to
deliver growth and poverty reduction. There is also a case for bringing vulnerability and its management
to center stage. Participatory poverty work underlines the importance of vulnerability to economic,
health, and personal shocks. So do the financial crises of the 1990s – not least in East Asia, the shining
example of success in development and poverty reduction – and the sequence of devastating natural
disasters.

         Inequality is also back on the agenda. New work shows the importance of gender, ethnic, and
racial inequality as a dimension – and a cause – of poverty. Social, economic, and ethnic divisions in
regions are often sources of weak or failed development. In the extreme, vicious cycles of social division
and failed development erupt into internal conflict (within or across regions), as in Bosnia and Sierra
Leone, with devastating consequences for people.




                                                        79
8.3 Community level characteristics
As with regional characteristics, there are a variety of community-level characteristics that may be
associated with poverty for households in that community. At the community level, infrastructure is a
major determinant of poverty. Indicators of infrastructure development that have often been used in
econometric exercises include proximity to paved roads, whether or not the community has electricity,
proximity to large markets, availability of schools and medical clinics in the area, and distance to local
administrative centers. Other indicators of community level characteristics include human resource
development, equal access to employment, social mobility and representation, and land distribution.

         Recent research has also stressed the importance of social networks and institutions, and social
capital in the community. In addition to removing social barriers, effective efforts to reduce poverty
require complementary initiatives to build up and extend the social institutions of the poor. Social
institutions refer to the kinship systems, local organizations, and networks of the poor and can be thought
of as different dimensions of social capital. Research on the roles of different types of social networks in
poor communities confirms their importance. An analysis of poor villages in North India, for example,
shows that social groups play an important role in protecting the basic needs of poor people and in
mediating risk. Studies of agricultural traders in Madagascar show that social relationships are more
important to traders than input prices. Close relationships with other traders are used to lower the
transactions costs of exchange, while ties to creditors and others who can help out during times of
financial hardship are vital sources of security and insurance.

         How does social capital affect development? The narrowest view holds social capital to be the
social skills of an individual – one’s propensity for cooperative behavior, conflict resolution, tolerance
and the like. A more expansive meso view associates social capital with families and local community
associations and the underlying norms (trust, reciprocity) that facilitate coordination and cooperation for
mutual benefit. A macro view of social capital focuses on the social and political environment that shapes
social structures and enables norms to develop. This environment includes formalized institutional
relationships and structures, such as government, the political regime, the rule of law, the court system,
and civil and political liberties. Institutions have an important effect on the rate and pattern of economic
development. An integrating view of social capital recognizes that micro, meso, and macro institutions
coexist and have the potential to complement one another. Macro institutions can provide an enabling
environment in which micro institutions develop and flourish. In turn, local associations help sustain
regional and national institutions by giving them a measure of stability and legitimacy – and by holding
them accountable for their actions. Social capital is clearly a complicated characteristic and often
researchers find it difficult to identify appropriate variables that measure social capital quantitatively.


8.4 Household and individual level characteristics
       Some of the important characteristics in this category would include the age structure of
household members, education, gender of the household head, and the extent of participation in
the labor force. In recent times, other components that fall under this category have included
domestic violence prevention, and gender-based, anti-discrimination policies. The following
discussion organizes these characteristics into groups and discusses them in greater detail. These
groups are demographic, economic and social characteristics.


8.4.1 Demographic characteristics
       Demographic characteristics of the household can be broadly classified into three
categories, as follows:

                                                        80
8.4.1.1    Household size and structure
        This indicator is an important one as it shows a possible correlation between the level of
poverty and household composition. Household composition, in terms of the size of the
household and characteristics of its members (such as age), is often quite different for poor and
non-poor households. The Cambodian CSES of 1993/94 shows that the poor tend to live in
larger households, with an average family size of 6.6 persons in the poorest quintile compared to
4.9 in the richest quintile; similar patterns are found in most countries. The poor also tend to live
in younger households – with the bottom quintile having twice as many children under 15 per
family as the top quintile – and slightly fewer elderly people over age 60. Better-off households
also tend to have heads that are somewhat older.

8.4.1.2    Dependency ratio
        The dependency ratio is calculated as ratio of the number of family members not in the
labor force (whether young or old) to those in labor force in the household. This ratio allows one
to measure the burden weighing on members of the labor force within the household. One might
expect that a high dependency ratio will be correlated positively with the level of household
poverty.

8.4.1.3    Gender of the household head
          It is widely believed that the gender of the household head significantly influences household
poverty, and more specifically that households headed by women are poorer than those headed by men.
This is of particular importance to Cambodia. Due to male casualties in past wars, women are often the
heads of households. Women play an important role in the labor force, both in the financial management
of the household and in the labor market, but appear to face large degree of discrimination. They are
severely affected by both monetary and non-monetary poverty, for example, they have low levels of
literacy, are paid lower wages, and have less access to land or equal employment. According to a report
based on a joint conference between the Cambodian Institute for Cooperation and Peace and the World
Bank Institute, 43 percent of women are illiterate and 90 percent of these women are poor. According to
the Cambodian Ministry of Women’s and Veterans’ Affairs, the following contribute to poverty—lack of
opportunities for employment and education, lack of access to finance, mass illiteracy, food insecurity,
malnutrition, human trafficking, powerlessness, no resources, overwork in wage employment and in
households, discrimination in the labor market and in work places, and domestic violence. So many
observers are surprised to learn that poverty rates are not higher among female-headed than male-headed
households in Cambodia. Likewise, female-headed households in neighboring Vietnam are no more
likely to be in poverty than their male-headed counterparts.

8.4.2 Economic characteristics
        Economic characteristics include employment, income, consumption spending and household
property:




                                                      81
8.4.2.1     Household employment
         There are several indicators for determining household employment. Within this array of
indicators, economists focus on the rate of participation in the labor force, the real rate of unemployment,
the rate of underemployment and job changes.


8.4.2.2     Household incomes
         Income represents a very important area to consider when characterizing the poor. Of interest is
the level of income as well as its distribution among the household members and among the various
socio-economic groups. However, in practice income indicators present us with certain problems. As
noted in chapter 2, income is difficult to define, as it includes several components, of which only some
are monetary (for example, farm households consume most of their production on-site). Second,
individuals tend to make false declarations about their income level, which is generally under-estimated.
It is possible, in part, to correct these declarations but only at the cost of carrying out a large-scale data-
gathering operation on economic activities, the costs of production factors and inputs and the prices of
products. Given these limitations and the fact that savings are low, there is often a tendency to use the
household’s total spending as an approximation to its disposable income.


8.4.2.3     Structure of household consumption expenditures
        The structure of household consumption expenditures can be used to characterize
households by describing the make-up of food and non-food spending. What is of interest is to
measure the relative weight of the goods and services consumed by the household according to
its poverty level. This measurement gives some indication as to the probable impact of price
variation on household purchasing power. We can expect basic products, especially food, to
represent a more significant part of total spending by the poor.

8.4.2.4     Household property
        The property of a household includes its tangible goods (land, cultivated areas, livestock,
agricultural equipment, machinery, buildings, household appliances and other durable goods)
and its financial assets (liquid assets, savings and other financial assets). These indicators are of
interest as they represent the household’s inventory of wealth and therefore affect its income
flow. Furthermore, certain households, especially in rural areas, can be poor in terms of income,
but wealthy when their property is taken into consideration. Despite its importance, property is
difficult to evaluate in practice in any reliable way. First, one encounters the same problem of
under-declaration. Second, it is very difficult to measure certain elements of property such as
livestock. Finally, the depreciation of assets may be difficult to determine for at least two
reasons: 1) the life span of any given asset is variable; 2) the acquisition of these assets occurs at
different moments in each household. Therefore, property is more difficult to use than certain
other elements in the characterization of poverty.

8.4.3 Social characteristics
        Aside from the demographic and economic indicators, we also have recourse to social
indicators to characterize poverty and household living standards. The social indicators
generally selected are health, education and shelter.


                                                          82
8.4.3.1     Health within the Household
         Four types of indicators are normally used to characterize health in analyzing a household’s living
standards. These indicators include nutritional status (for example, anthropometric indicators such as
weight for age, height for age, and weight for height), disease status (for example, infant and juvenile
mortality and morbidity rates as related to certain diseases such as malaria, respiratory infections, diarrhea
and sometimes poliomyelitis), the availability of health care services (primary health-care centers,
maternity facilities, hospitals and pharmacies, basic health care workers, nurses, midwives, doctors and
traditional healers, and medical service such as vaccinations, access to medicines and medical
information) and the use of these services by poor and non-poor households.

         The data from the Cambodian Socio-Economic Survey of 1993/94 show that water and sanitation
are especially important influences on health and nutritional status. The CSES shows that the poor are
extremely disadvantaged in access to safe sources of water supply and sanitation. Only 4 percent of the
poorest quintile have access to piped water, while more than 17% of the richest quintile have the same.
Similar differences are apparent in access to sanitation. Few of the poor (9 percent) have access to a toilet
in the home, while around half of the richest 20 percent do. Another indicator of housing standards is
access to electricity. Here again the access of the poor lags far behind. Access to electricity from a
generator or line connection rises sharply with income, from a mere 1 percent among people in the bottom
quintile to 37 percent of Cambodians in the richest quintile. Other indicators of household wealth include
ownership of transportation. Access to bicycles is quite evenly distributed, with at least one half of
households owning a bicycle in every quintile, even the poorest. However access to cars, jeeps or
motorbikes is very rare among the poor and rises sharply with income. Overall, the shift from bicycles to
motorized transport is a strong indicator of wealth of families with access to a wider variety of services
and amenities.


8.4.3.2     Education
        Three types of indicators are normally used to characterize education in an analysis of
household living standards. These include the household members’ level of education (literacy
rate – with poor households having lower literacy), the availability of educational services
(primary and secondary schools) and the use of these services by the members of poor and non-
poor households (children’s registration in school, drop out rate of children by age and gender
and reasons for dropping out, percentage of children who are older than the normal age for their
level of education and average spending on education per child registered).

         Literacy and schooling are important indicators of the quality of life in their own right, as well as
being key determinants of poor people’s ability to take advantage of income-earning opportunities.
Cambodia (based on 1993/94 CSES data) has achieved a (self-reported) basic literacy rate of 67 percent
among adults (older than age 15), implying a high degree of literacy among the poor. However, the
literacy gap remains quite large, with literacy ranging from just over half of adults (58 percent) among the
poorest 20 percent of the population to 77 percent among the richest. Much larger differentials appear in
the distribution of schooling attainment. Years of schooling among adults aged over 15 averages only 3.1
years in the bottom 20 percent of the population, and increases to 5.3 years of schooling among the richest
20 percent. There is a large gender gap, with mean grade attainment being 5.1 years among men
compared with 3.2 years among women.




                                                         83
8.4.3.3     Shelter
        Shelter refers to the overall framework of personal life of the household. It is evaluated, by poor
and non-poor household groups, according to three components (some of which overlap with the
indicators mentioned above): housing, services, and the environment. The housing indicators include the
type of building (size and type of materials), the means through which one has access to housing (renting
or ownership), and household equipment. The service indicators focus on the availability and the use of
drinking water, communications services, electricity, and other energy sources.                Finally, the
environmental indicators concern the level of sanitation (touched on before), the degree of isolation
(availability of roads and paths which are usable at all times, length of time and availability of
transportation to get to work) and the degree of personal safety.

       It is generally established that poor households live in more precarious, less sanitary
environments, which contribute to the poorer health and lower productivity of household members.



8.5 Understanding the quantitative determinants of poverty: An example from
   Cambodia
        Some of the characteristics of the poor in Cambodia are apparent from the poverty estimates for
various sub-populations reported above (e.g., they are more likely to live in large households, in the
countryside, with the household head having minimal education). But the degree to which relevant
characteristics vary, on average, between the poor and the non-poor is not always apparent from the sub-
population poverty rates, and there is also a wider set of characteristics that may potentially be used as
indicators of poverty. In what follows we focus on one characteristic of the poor that has not been
examined by most poverty profiles, which is the structure of their consumption.

         One of the characteristics of the poor that is most important to understand is the structure of their
consumption and how it differs from the non-poor. This characteristic can provide a link between general
economic policies and poverty reduction strategies. For example, by identifying the items consumed
mainly by poor households, it may be possible to design indirect tax reforms that avoid undue increases in
the cost of living for the poor. Such preventative design is important where countries lack comprehensive
income tax and transfer systems that can be used to compensate for the burden of indirect taxes and
government charges. Another long-term benefit of identifying the items consumed mainly by the poor is
that it can help to give research and investment strategies a pro-poor bias. For example, investments in
production or processing technology for foods whose consumption is most heavily concentrated amongst
the poor will tend to reduce disparities in living standards.

One simple way of finding out which items are relatively more important to the consumption of the poor
is to compare the average budget shares of poor and non-poor households; this is done for 1999 for
Cambodia in Table 8.1. One may also develop a measure that is both scale neutral and allows for equity
weights (for instance, zero weights to consumption by households above the poverty line). . The
distributional characteristic of a good is defined by Newbery (1995) as:

                                              h
                                        ¦ β hqi
(8.1)                             di≡
                                        h
                                                  ,
                                         β Qi




                                                         84
which is comprised of four components: a) the social weight βh is the social marginal utility of
                                           h is consumption of the i-th good by household h, c) β is the
transferring one riel to household h, b) q i
average of the social weights over all of the households, and d) Qi is the aggregate consumption of good.

         The more heavily the consumption of good i is concentrated on the socially deserving (i.e., those
with high social marginal values of consumption, βh ) the higher will be the distributional characteristic.
Commonly used social weights are based on a utilitarian framework using a constant elasticity of
substitution social welfare function:
                                        (c h )1−v
                                    W =                                              v ≥ 0, v ≠ 1
(8.2)                                    1− v
                                    W = ln(c h )                                      v = 1,

where W is the value that is placed on the income distribution, ch is the consumption level for household
h, and v is the coefficient of inequality aversion. With this social welfare function, the social weight
applied to consumption by household h is given by the social marginal utility of consumption, βh=(ch)-v.
Different values of the coefficient v reflect different judgments about the desirability of making transfers
to reduce income inequality. Because of this element of value judgement, a range of values for v are
commonly used to see whether conclusions are robust to particular ethical judgements.

         One way to view the value for v is to consider judgments about the effect of taking 100 riels from
a richer household, giving some of this to a poorer household and destroying the rest (e.g., due to
efficiency losses). If one household has twice the income of the other, then when v=0 the judge would
approve of this transfer only if the poorer household received all 100 riels. But it can be shown that when
v takes the values of 0.5, 1, and 2, then the amount that the poorer household receives needs to be only
71, 50, and 25 riels in order for the resulting distribution to give the same level of social welfare as before
the transfer. Hence, in the current context, when the inequality aversion parameter is, say, v=2, taking
one extra riel in indirect tax from a poor household is judged to cause four times as much social cost as
does taking one extra riel in tax from a household with twice the consumption level.

         The difference in average budget shares between poor and non-poor households, and the
distributional characteristic, were calculated for each of the 36 items with consumption data available from
round 2 of CSES 1999 (see Gibson 1999). This level of commodity detail is clearly more aggregated than the
fine detail with which taxes (including those on trade such as tariffs) are usually defined, but it is still a useful
starting point in the search for items for which targeting of effective tax rates in order to alleviate poverty is
appropriate. The social weights for the distributional characteristic were based on the CES utility function
(defined over the real value of per capita consumption), with two values of the inequality aversion parameter
used (v=0.5 and v=2). These values cover the usual range used in similar studies in other countries.

The ranking of items according to the difference in average budget shares between poor and non-poor
households is reported in table 8.1. The item with the largest difference is rice, which makes up one-
quarter of the total budget for poor households (including imputed values for consumption out of gifts and
self-production), but only 16 percent of the budget for non-poor households. Other items which take a
larger share in the budgets of the poor than the rich include fish, fresh vegetables and wood fuel. At the
other extreme, items that are more important in the budgets of the non-poor are house rent and repairs
(including imputed rent for owner-occupiers), medical care, and transport and communication.

         The distributional characteristic, at both low and high levels of inequality aversion, shows that
rice is the item whose consumption is most heavily skewed towards poor households (columns 4-7 in
table 8.1). Other items where consumption is concentrated on the poor include tubers, sugar and salt,

                                                             85
 spices and seasonings, fresh vegetables, wood fuel, and nuts and seeds (only at low inequality aversion).
 Several of these items (e.g., tubers) have only a small overall share of household consumption, and so in
 the aggregate; variation in the tax rates for these items may not have large revenue implications.

         It is notable that both the distributional characteristic and the difference in budget shares between
 poor and non-poor show that items that are commonly considered as ‘merit goods’ (i.e., items whose
 consumption should be promoted on social grounds) have consumption that is skewed away from the
 poor. In terms of having consumption concentrated on the poor, medical care ranks only 31st and
 education spending only 33rd out of 36 goods, according to the distributional characteristic calculated
 when inequality aversion is high. Similarly, medical care is the item where the average budget share for
 the poor is second lowest, relative to the budget share for the non-poor, while for education it is seventh
 lowest. These results tend to suggest that any subsidies in health and education will tend to be captured
 predominantly by the non-poor. Thus it would be very useful for any public expenditure review carried
 out in the context of poverty reduction strategies to include a detailed incidence analysis to see exactly
 what type of households (i.e., poor or non-poor) are benefiting from any subsidies.

 Table 8.1: Disaggregated Consumption Characteristics of the Poor (selected items)
                                              Average value Budget share       Distributional characteristic
                                              of household    of poor      Low inequality High inequality
                                              consumptiona versus non-         aversion           aversion
Commodity                                                      poor             (v=0.5)             (v=2.0)
                                                Riel/day     % points        di      Rankb       di      Rankb
Rice (all varieties)                              2492          9.17       1.010       1       1.015        1
Fish (fresh, fermented, salted, canned etc)       1411          1.14       0.965       9       0.830        9
Fresh vegetables (trakun, cabbage etc)             680          1.06       0.975       5       0.870        5
Wood fuel (firewood, charcoal)                     459          0.61       0.971       7       0.847        6
Poultry (chicken, duck and other)                  507          0.47       0.954      14       0.819       11
Tobacco products                                   348          0.37       0.956      13       0.841        8
Sugar and salt                                     222          0.30       0.982       3       0.895        2
Tubers (sweet potato, cassava, traov, etc)         224          0.25       0.990       2       0.876        3
Spices and seasonings                              277          0.25       0.975       6       0.874        4
Fruits (banana, orange, mango etc)                 438          0.24       0.945      15       0.795       13
Eggs (duck, chicken, fermented, etc)               222          0.18       0.968       8       0.841        7
Nuts and seeds (coconut, peanut, etc)              193          0.10       0.977       4       0.826       10
Oils and fats                                      200          0.09       0.958      11       0.817       12
Alcoholic beverages                                240         -0.04       0.907      22       0.709       20
Other cereals (bread, noodles, biscuit etc)        413         -0.07       0.929      16       0.754       17
Furniture & household equipment                    115         -0.12       0.896      25       0.684       23
Pulses and legumes (gram, cowpea etc)              162         -0.12       0.963      10       0.789       14
Recreation and entertainment                        46        -0.17        0.706      35       0.349       36
Personal care (soap, toothpaste etc)               237        -0.27        0.923      20       0.754       16
Fuel and power (kerosene etc, excl. wood)          189        -0.29        0.826      30       0.573       30
Tea, coffee, cocoa                                 116        -0.32        0.897      24       0.644       26
Clothing and footwear                              451        -0.33        0.929      17       0.751       18
Education (school fees, textbooks etc)             323        -0.65        0.770      33       0.461       33
Personal effects (jewelry, handbags etc)           131        -0.66        0.807      31       0.472       32
Miscellaneous non-food items                       640        -0.69        0.891      26       0.687       22
Food taken away from home                          449        -0.89        0.904      23       0.671       24
Transport & communication                          455        -1.57        0.743      34       0.421       34


                                                          86
 Medical care (doctors fees, drugs etc)                    818            -2.82       0.792       32       0.498       31
 House rent (incl. imputed) and repairs                   1784            -2.85       0.698       36       0.417       35
   Notes: Results are calculated from the 3000 households in Round 2 of CSES 1999
   a
     In 1999 Phnom Penh prices, with the food poverty line used as the spatial deflator.
   b
     The item ranked “1” has consumption most heavily biased towards poor households, the item ranked “36” has consumption least
   heavily concentrated on poor households.
   Source: Gibson (1999).


   8.6Understanding the qualitative determinants of poverty: An example from
      Cambodia
           Qualitative indicators can only have values of “yes” or “no” at the level of an individual
   household. Because there is no need to measure quantities, qualitative indicators may be especially
   valuable for rapid appraisal methods that attempt to assess poverty status on the basis of a few simple
   questions. The percentages of three groups – below the food poverty line, those between the food poverty
   line and poverty line, and the non-poor – having the characteristics examined are reported in table 8.2 for
   Cambodia in 1999.

            Only one of the two characteristics of household heads examined – whether the head can speak a
   foreign language fluently – is able to discriminate amongst the three poverty states. Despite the
   statistically significant differences in percentages across the three groups in foreign language fluency, this
   indicator is probably not a useful one for identifying the poor because it occurs with such low frequency
   in the population.

           Most of the qualitative employment and income indicators also do not look promising as key
   questions to ask in rapid appraisals of poverty status. Although there are statistically significant
   differences amongst the three poverty states in the percentage of households who are not primarily
   dependant on agricultural incomes, this indicator gives no way of distinguishing the food poor from the
   non-poor, because of the non-linear relationship. Knowing that the household’s consumption in the past
   12 months was the same as normal or higher than normal is also no help in determining poverty status.
   However, over one-fifth of households who report that their past year’s consumption is lower than normal
   are below the food poverty line and this percentage is significantly higher than that for the other two
   poverty states (the percentage is indistinguishable between other poor and the non-poor).


            The selected housing characteristics all show statistically significant differences between the poor
   and non-poor but, with the exception of the use of fuels other than wood as the primary cooking fuel, are
   not able to distinguish between the different severities of poverty. Despite this discriminating ability of
   questions about non-wood cooking fuels, their practical importance is likely to be limited by the rarity of
   the indicator: almost nine out of every ten non-poor households use wood for cooking so many errors
   would be made if this was the basis made for allocating households into various poverty categories.
   Perhaps the most useful of the housing characteristics considered are the ones related to the composition
   of roofs and walls because the indicated conditions are externally verifiable and occur commonly but with
   a large difference in frequency between poor and non-poor.

                                          Table 8.2: Qualitative Poverty Indicators
Description of indicator                                               Percent with the indicated characteristic
                                                                               Poor
                                                                                                          Non-
                                                               below food      between food poverty                    Total
                                                                                                          Poor
                                                               poverty line     line and poverty line


                                                                    87
Head of household characteristics
                                                        3.6     5.7     4.4     3.7
    belongs to ethnic minority
                                                       (2.2)   (2.3)   (1.3)   (1.2)
                                                        0.3     1.4     5.3     3.8
    speaks a foreign language fluently
                                                       (0.2)   (0.6)   (0.7)   (0.5)
Employment and Income
                                                       37.3    22.6    39.0    33.1
    main income other than agriculture
                                                       (6.4)   (3.2)   (2.2)   (2.0)
Consumption expenditure
                                                       21.2    12.9    10.7    12.2
   Lower than normal
                                                       (4.3)   (3.0)   (1.3)   (1.4)
                                                       56.8    62.7    64.7    63.5
   Same as normal
                                                       (6.3)   (3.5)   (2.1)   (2.1)
                                                       22.0    24.4    24.6    24.3
   Higher than normal
                                                       (4.3)   (3.0)   (1.8)   (1.7)
Housing Characteristics
                                                       11.3     4.9    22.4    17.3
    main source of lighting is electricity
                                                       (3.5)   (0.9)   (1.8)   (1.5)
    main drinking water source is piped, public tap,    6.5     3.7    15.4    11.8
tanker                                                 (2.4)   (1.0)   (1.5)   (1.3)
                                                       10.2    12.6    23.7    19.8
    Toilet is located in dwelling
                                                       (3.2)   (2.8)   (1.7)   (1.6)
                                                        0.8     3.6    11.4     8.6
    primary cooking fuel is not wood
                                                       (0.6)   (1.0)   (0.9)   (0.8)
                                                       30.9    28.4    49.7    43.0
    concrete or plywood wall of dwelling
                                                       (6.6)   (3.0)   (2.1)   (2.0)
                                                       49.1    49.8    65.2    60.1
     Not use thatching or mixed thatch for roof
                                                       (5.3)   (3.4)   (2.1)   (1.9)
                                                        1.5     1.7    14.2    10.1
........not earth or wood floor
                                                       (0.8)   (0.6)   (1.1)   (0.9)
Assets and Liabilities
  owns the following livestock (rural only):
                                                       47.0    43.8    46.6    46.0
     Pig
                                                       (5.5)   (4.1)   (2.8)   (2.4)
                                                       15.1    14.0    12.5    13.1
    Buffalo
                                                       (5.0)   (2.6)   (2.0)   (1.8)
                                                       37.8    57.5    46.9    48.6
    Cow
                                                       (5.3)   (3.9)   (2.9)   (2.5)
                                                       57.6    65.2    63.8    63.5
    Poultry
                                                       (6.6)   (4.1)   (2.2)   (2.2)
                                                        2.0     3.4     3.4     3.2
  has a fish pond (rural only)
                                                       (1.2)   (1.0)   (0.8)   (0.6)
                                                       22.8    18.2    16.5    17.5
  has at least one outstanding loan
                                                       (4.7)   (2.3)   (1.7)   (1.6)
                                                       33.3    40.4    51.2    46.9
   owns a radio or cassette recorder
                                                       (3.8)   (3.4)   (2.0)   (1.9)
                                                       14.1    14.7    31.7    26.0
    owns a TV
                                                       (3.0)   (1.9)   (1.5)   (1.3)
                                                       55.4    62.9    57.8    58.7
    owns a bicycle
                                                       (5.0)   (3.0)   (1.9)   (1.7)
                                                        1.7     7.8    10.4     8.9
    owns a boat
                                                       (0.7)   (1.8)   (1.8)   (1.4)
                                                       14.8    13.5    28.6    23.8
    owns a motorbike or scooter
                                                       (3.0)   (1.9)   (1.4)   (1.1)



                                                        88
                                                                   0.0                     0.1                2.4       1.6
    owns a car or truck
                                                                  (0.0)                   (0.0)              (0.3)     (0.2)
                                                                  33.0                    34.5               35.5      35.0
    owns a cart (rural only)
                                                                  (5.4)                   (3.6)              (2.8)     (2.3)
                                                                   2.1                     2.9                4.0       3.5
    owns a tractor (rural only)
                                                                  (1.7)                   (1.3)              (1.1)     (1.0)
Village Characteristics
                                                                  91.5                    87.4               91.3      90.5
    has a road
                                                                  (3.8)                   (4.0)              (2.1)     (2.1)
                                                                  62.6                    52.7               46.1      49.3
    has a primary school
                                                                  (7.5)                   (5.5)              (3.8)     (3.5)
                                                                  29.4                    44.8               41.2      40.8
     has a development project
                                                                  (6.5)                   (5.5)              (3.8)     (3.4)
  Note: Results are from the 3000 households surveyed in round 2 of CSES 1999, with household sampling weights used in the
  calculation of the percentages. Standard errors in ( ) are corrected for the effect of clustering, stratification and weights.
  a
    Includes French, English, Chinese and Thai.
  Source: Gibson (1999).

           Most of the indicators of household assets and durable goods ownership show little power in
  discriminating between the various poverty states. The ownership rates for pigs, buffalo and poultry (rural
  households only) show no significant differences among any of the three poverty states, while the
  proportion of households owning cows above the food poverty line but below the poverty line is
  significantly higher the cow-owning proportion below the food poverty line.

           The ownership rates of bicycles, carts and tractors (the last two for rural households only) show
  no statistically significant differences amongst any of the three poverty states. The ownership rates of car,
  motorbikes and scooters, televisions and radio cassette players show statistically significant differences
  between the poor and non-poor, but no differences between the food poor and the other poor. It is only the
  ownership rate for boats that shows a statistically significant difference between the food poor and the
  other poor (but no significant difference between the non-poor and the poor who are above the food
  poverty line) and this characteristic may be limited by its environmental specificity.

           The qualitative village characteristics considered do not seem to be good predictors of poverty
  status, with no significant differences amongst the three groups in terms of road access and an unexpected
  inverse relationship between poverty status and access to primary schools (i.e., primary schools are more
  widely available in the villages of the food poor than of the other poor and the non-poor).

           The important implication of this discussion is that there is no quick and easy way, in Cambodia
  at least, to identify the poor. Indeed this is a relatively common finding; there are no satisfactory short
  cuts to the measurement of poverty.



  8.7 Analyzing the determinants of poverty: Regression techniques
          An analysis of the correlates of poverty can be carried if a multi-topic household survey is
  available, using income and consumption regressions. In these regressions, the logarithm of consumption
  or income (possibly divided by the poverty line) is typically used as the left-hand variable. Right-hand
  “explanatory” variables span a large array of possible poverty correlates along thelines of those discussed
  above. .




                                                                    89
        The regression estimates show how closely each independent variable is related to the dependent
variable (e.g. consumption per capita), holding all other influences constant. There is scope for a wide
variety of regressions; for instance the dependent variable could measure child nutrition, or morbidity, or
schooling, or other measures of capabilities; the regressions could be used to examine the determinants of
employment or labor income; and they can used to estimate agricultural production functions (which
relate production with information on type of crops grown per area, harvest, inputs into agricultural
production, and input and output prices). For an accessible discussion and lots of examples, in the context
of Vietnam, see Haughton et al., Health and Wealth in Vietnam (1999).

        A regression makes fuller use of information than do the tabulations of a poverty profile. More
formally, let wi be the normalized indicator divided by the poverty line, so that wi = yi/z, where z is the
poverty line and yi is (per capita) income or consumption. A unitary value for wi signifies that the
household has its level of income or consumption exactly at the level of the poverty line. Denote by Xi the
vector of independent variables. Then a popular form of regression is
(8.3)                                     Log wi = γXi + εi
Note that wi is in log form, which is a common way of allowing for the log normality of the variable.

        Some researchers prefer to use, on the left hand side, a binary variable that is set equal to
1 if the household is poor, and to 0 otherwise. Some of the information is lost by doing this, and
the resulting logit or probit regression is relatively sensitive to specification errors. However it
may be more helpful for targeting analysis, to assess the predictive power of various explanatory
variables used for means-testing. A fuller treatment of regression analysis is given in the Advanced
Poverty Analysis course.



         Table 8.3 shows a simple example of a regression of per capita household expenditure in Côte
d’Ivoire. It indicates that education plays a different role in urban and rural areas (where it does not seem
to significantly influence consumption), as do different types of assets. In rural areas, infrastructure has
substantial predictive power—households located in villages that are nearer to both paved roads and
public markets are better off, as are households living in areas with higher wage levels. The results
present further questions about the quality of education in rural areas and to the importance of rural
infrastructure in helping families grow out of poverty, that could be addressed in putting together a
poverty reduction strategy.

Table 8.4. Determinants of Household Spending Levels in Côte d’Ivoire in 19xx.

        Education level of most educated male            Urban              Rural
                                                          0.38               0.04
    Elementary
                                                          (5.3)              (0.6)
                                                          0.62               0.08
    Junior secondary
                                                          (8.6)              (0.9)
                                                          0.80               0.05
    Senior secondary
                                                          (9.6)              (0.4)
                                                          0.93
    University                                                                 -
                                                          (9.4)
                                                          0.11               0.07
    Elementary
                                                          (1.7)              (1.0)
                                                          0.24               0.27
    Junior secondary
                                                          (3.1)              (2.2)


                                                         90
                                                              0.34
    Senior secondary                                                            -
                                                              (4.1)
                                                              0.52
    University                                                                  -
                                                              (4.1)
    Value of selected household assets
                                                              0.06
    Home                                                                        -
                                                              (5.3)
                                                              0.04            0.16
    Business assets
                                                              (3.3)           (4.9)
                                                              0.08
    Savings                                                                     -
                                                              (4.7)
    Hectares of agriculture land
                                                                              0.17
    Cocoa trees                                                   -
                                                                              (4.3)
                                                                              0.04
    Coffee trees                                                  -
                                                                              (1.3)

                                                                             -0.04
    Distance to nearest paved road                                -
                                                                             (-2.9)
                                                                             -0.09
    Distance to nearest market                                    -
                                                                             (-3.3)

                                                                              0.37
    Unskilled wage                                                -
                                                                              (6.4)
    Note: t-statistics in brackets.
Note: Figures in parentheses are t-statistics.
Source: Adapted from Grosh and Munoz 1996, p.169, based on Glewwe 1990.



         Several variations of these multiple income regressions can be used to examine the correlates of
the income of the poor. Poverty analysis focuses on correlates of income and expenditure at the lower end
of the distribution rather than the correlates at the top end. One can then perform different regressions for
each quintile, or quartile, of the population. Whether these regressions can be conducted will in part
depend on the sample size of the survey. Alternatively, the regression can examine structural differences
in parameter estimates for different income or expenditure groups.

        When multiple cross-sectional surveys are available, the same regression can be repeated for
different years to see how the association of certain correlates with income or consumption varies over
time. Variations over time will be reflected in changes in coefficients or parameters. The results of
repeated cross-section regressions can also be used to decompose changes in poverty between changes in
household characteristics, and changes in the returns to (or impact of) these characteristics (e.g., Baulch et
al. 2001; van de Walle 2000; Wodon 2000).




                                                             91
                                          CHAPTER 9

                                    Poverty Reduction Policies

        So far we have looked at the concept of poverty and well-being, the various indicators used to
measure poverty, the idea of poverty profiles, and the factors that determine poverty. In this section, we
consider poverty reduction strategies, as well as touch upon certain policy implications.


9.1 A framework for action
        The approach to reducing poverty has evolved over the past 50 years in response to deepening
understanding of the complexity of development. Large investment in physical capital and infrastructure
were once viewed as the primary means of development. Later the development community realized that
improvements in health and education were important not only in their own right but also to promote
growth in the incomes of poor people. Following the development experience of East Asia miracle,
emphasis was placed on improving economic management and allowing greater play for market forces.
Labor-intensive growth, economic openness, investment in infrastructure and providing basic services to
the poor in health and education become the main strategies. In the 1990s, governance and institutions
moved toward center stage.

      The World Bank (2000) now separates its anti-poverty activities into three groups:
promoting opportunity, facilitating empowerment, and enhancing security.

9.1.1   Opportunity
        The lack of material opportunities such as jobs, credit, and public services, schools and
health services is a direct cause of poverty.

        There is a strong link between economic growth and the income and non-income
dimensions of poverty. The stark cross-country difference in poverty outcomes generally reflect
cross-country differences in economic growth over the long run. Poverty trends have tracked
growth trends very closely in 1980s and 1990s. According to Chen and Ravallion (2000), on
average, growth in the consumption of poorest fifth of the population tracked economic growth
one-for-one over this period. In the vast majority of countries that they study, growth led to
rising consumption in the poorest fifth of the population, while economic decline led to falling
consumption. So pro-growth policies in most cases actually are also pro-poor.

        Well-functioning markets are important in generating sustainable growth and expanding
opportunity for poor people because poor people rely on formal and informal markets to sell
their labor and products, to finance their investments, and to insure against risks. Market-friendly
reforms can not only deliver growth, but also deliver benefits to poor people. For example, recent
studies have examined the impact of market-friendly policies—such as openness to international
trade, low inflation, a moderate-size government, and strong rule of law—on the incomes of poor
people in a large cross-country sample. The findings: these policies on average benefit poor
people more than others. Case studies of Chile, China, Ghana, Uganda and Vietnam show that


                                                       92
agricultural reforms have helped raise producer prices for small farmers by eliminating
marketing boards, changing real exchange rates through broader economic reforms, lowering
tariffs and eliminating quotas.

         The human, physical, natural, financial and social assets that poor people possess—or
have access to—affect their prospects for escaping poverty because these assets can enable poor
people to take advantage of opportunities. Expanding the assets of poor people can strengthen
their position and their control over their lives. A recent study of irrigation in Vietnam (van de
Walle 2000a) has uncovered important complementarities between education and gains from
irrigation. Households with higher education levels received higher returns to irrigation.

        The core policies and institutions
        Creating more opportunities involves complementary actions to stimulate overall growth,
make markets work for poor people, and build their assets including addressing inequalities in
the distribution of endowments such as education:

¾ Encouraging effective private investment is essential because investment and technological
  innovation are the main drivers of growth in jobs and labor incomes. Fostering private investment
  requires reducing risk for private investors—through stable fiscal and monetary policy, stable
  investment regimes, sound financial systems, and a transparent business environment. Certainly, the
  rule of law and anti-corruption measures are also important. Special measures are frequently required
  to ensure that micro enterprises and small businesses can participate effectively in markets that are
  more vulnerable, yet employ a large number of poor people. For example, ensuring access to credit,
  lowering transaction costs of reaching export markets, and reducing restrictions on the informal sector
  will all help creating a sound business environment for poor households and small firms. Public
  investment in expanding infrastructure and communications, and upgrading the skills of the labor
  force have to complement private investment to enhance competitiveness and create new market
  opportunities.
¾ Opening to international markets offers a huge opportunity for job and income growth as long as
  countries have the infrastructure and institutions to stimulate a strong supply response. Therefore, the
  opening needs to be well designed with special attention to bottlenecks.
¾ Building human, physical, natural and financial assets that poor people own or can use requires
  actions on three fronts. First, increase public spending on basic social and economic services. Second,
  reform public delivery or privatize those services in order to ensure good quality service delivery.
  Third, have the poor communities and households participate in planning and monitoring to keep
  providers accountable.
¾ Addressing asset inequalities across gender, ethnic, racial and social divides. Special action is
  required to tackle socially-based inequality such as concentrated farm land ownership in rural
  communities, under-schooling of girls relative to boys, and the limited independence of women due
  to lack of access to productive means.
¾ Getting infrastructure and knowledge to poor areas. Special action is also needed in order to improve
  the social and economic infrastructure in poor and remote areas, which to a great extent also
  contribute the poverty problem. Similarly, basic urban services should be provided to city slums so
  that urban poor people may have chance to participate more actively in over growth.

9.1.2   Empowerment
       Lack of representation in the process of policy-making due to social and institutional barriers has
impeded poor people’s access to market opportunities and to public sector services.

                                                       93
        State institutions must be responsive and accountable to poor people. In nearly every country the
public sector often pursues activities that are biased against poor people and poor people have trouble
getting prompt, efficient service from the public administration. Meanwhile, due to weak popular
monitoring institutions, public spending may not reach its targeted poor people, but poor people may bear
the burden of corruption disproportionately. Poor people’s participation in policy making and
performance monitoring at both state and community levels is crucial.

         Some social norms and practices help generate and perpetuate poverty. Discrimination on the
basis of gender, ethnicity, race, religion, or social status can lead to social exclusion and creates barriers
to upward mobility, constraining people’s ability to participate in economic opportunities and to benefit
from and contribute to economic growth. For example, one cross-country study (Klasen, 1999) indicates
that countries that invest in girls’ education have higher rate of economic growth. The second half of the
20th century also witnessed devastating ethnic conflicts due to ethnic cleavages and lack of institutions of
conflict mediation. On the other hand, good social institutions—kinship, community organizations, and
informal networks—can play an important role in poverty reduction. For example, many development
programs succeed because they mobilize local groups of project beneficiaries in program implementation.


        The key policies
         To empower poor people, policies need to facilitate active collaboration among poor and other
groups in society include strengthening the participation of poor people in political processes and local
decision-making and making changes in governance that make public administration, legal institutions,
and public service delivery more efficient and accountable to all citizens, and removing the social barriers
that result from distinctions of gender, ethnicity, race and social status:

¾ Laying political and legal basis for inclusive development including institutionalizing transparent,
  democratic and participatory mechanisms for making decision and monitoring implementation and
  promoting legal assistance to poor people who usually have little resource and information to access
  legal system.
¾ Strengthening monitoring mechanisms of public administrations’ performance by providing access to
  budgetary information and participatory mechanisms.
¾ Promoting decentralization and community development to enhance the control that poor people and
  their communities have over the services to which they are entitled. Decentralization needs to be
  combined with effective participation and monitoring mechanisms.
¾ Promoting gender equality by promoting women’s representation in decision-making and providing
  special assistance for women’s productive activities.
¾ Tackling social structures and institutions that are obstacles to the upward mobility of poor people by
  fostering debate over exclusionary practices and supporting the socially excluded participating into
  political processes.
¾ Supporting poor people’s social capital by assisting networks of poor people to engage with market
  and non-market institutions so as to strengthen their influence over policy.

9.1.3    Security
         Poor people are exposed to a wide array of risks that make them vulnerable to income shocks and
losses of well-being. Reducing poor people’s vulnerability to ill health, economic shocks, natural
disasters, and violence will enhance well-being on its own and encourage investment in human capital
and in higher-risk, higher-return activities as well.




                                                         94
        Households and communities respond to their risk exposure through diversification of assets and
sources of income and various types of self-insurance and networks of mutual insurance mechanisms.
These means help to reduce the risk or soften the impact, but the effect is limited. To counter the
incentive and information problems that exclude poor people from many market-based insurance
mechanisms, the state has a special role in providing or regulating insurance and setting up safety nets.
Health, environmental, labor market, and macroeconomic policies can all reduce and mitigate risk.

         Large adverse shock—economic crises and natural disasters—cause poor people to suffer not
only in the short run. They undercut the ability of the poor to move out of poverty in the long run as well,
by depleting their human and physical assets, which may be irreversible. So it is crucial to prevent
economic crises and natural disasters, as well to protect poor people when they occur.


        The main policy tools
        National programs to manage economy-wide shocks and effective mechanisms to reduce the risks
faced by poor people, as well as helping them cope with adverse shocks when they occur, are necessary:.

¾ Formulating programs to helping poor people managing risk. Microinsurance programs, public work
  programs and food transfer programs may be mixed with other mechanisms to deliver more effective
  risk management.
¾ Developing national programs to prevent and respond to macro shocks—financial or natural.
¾ Design national systems of social risk management that are also pro-growth
¾ Supporting minority rights and providing the institutional basis for peaceful conflict resolution can
  help prevent civil conflict and mobilize more resource into productive activities.
¾ Tackling health problems including widespread illnesses such as malaria and tuberculosis, as well as
  moderately common but serious conditions such as HIV/AIDS.

        There is no simple, universal blueprint for implementing this strategy. Each developing country
needs to prepare its own mix of policies to reduce poverty, reflecting national priorities and local realities.
Given the important complementarities among these three dimensions, an effective poverty reduction
strategy will require action on all three fronts, by all stakeholders in society—government, civil society,
the private sector and poor people themselves.


9.2 Practice and good examples
         Any good poverty reduction plan has to be based on a comprehensive poverty analysis that
identifies the nature and evolution of poverty, the profile of poor people, and all contributing factors of
poverty. Building on an accurate understanding of poverty, the strategy for poverty reduction has to
prioritize the poverty reduction goals and take into account complementarities and compatibilities of
various policy tools. Then specific implementation modules including resource allocation and monitoring
mechanisms have to be designed.. The participation of poor people at the last two stages is essential since
overall they are the main actors in the fight against poverty.

9.2.1    Poverty Analysis: nature and evolution, profile, and causes
         Poverty has many dimensions. Material deprivation in term of low consumption or income is
certainly the most important welfare indicator, other dimensions such as low achievements in education
and health, vulnerability to risk, and powerlessness should be considered as well.

        Within each country, poverty can vary and move in different directions for different sub-
population defined by region, area, income level, gender, ethnicity, and caste. Households may move in

                                                          95
and out of poverty very frequently due to their exposure to risk and their capability in managing and
coping with risk. Identifying who is poor or vulnerable is required for efficient policy targeting and
provides vital information for the analysis of the causes of poverty .

        Besides a poverty profile and a quantitative analysis of poverty determinants, another route for
investigating the causes of poverty is to examine the factors highlighted by poor people – a participatory
poverty assessment. For a good example, applied to Vietnam, see World Bank (2000).

9.2.3 Monitoring and evaluation of poverty reduction strategy
        A poverty reduction strategy has to make specific goals for actions within a certain time period
and with a budget allocation plan. Usually it involves building capacities in data collection and data
analysis in order to keep track of progress and problems. A more important aspect of this capacity is poor
people’s access to this information and mechanisms for them to voice their concerns. The participatory
process needs to be institutionalized and community organizations need to be included for better
representation.

9.2.4 Examples of poverty reduction strategies

9.2.4.1         Brazil
        Brazil saw significant improvements in its social indicators in the 1990s. Net enrollment in
primary education increased from 88.2 percent in 1992 to 97.1 percent in 1997. Infant mortality fell from
62 per 1,000 live births in the mid-1980s to 38 in the mid-1990s.. New programs guarantee minimum per
capita spending for basic health care and minimum per student spending in primary schools. Innovative
actions to get children into school includes the Bolsa Escola, which gives poor families grants if their
children go to school.

        Despite the advances, the inequalities in health and education remain great, with the poorest fifth
of the population having three years of education, and the top fifth more than nine years. The income-
poor still leave school with skills inadequate for a middle-income country integrated into the global
economy. And reducing income poverty has proved difficult. Indeed, in the unstable macroeconomic
environment of the 1980s and early 1990s, poverty rose. Two recent events confirm that the groups most
vulnerable to economic insecurity are those with the highest incidence of poverty. Drought in the
Northeast hit poor rural workers severely, and the ripple effects of the East Asian crisis, though more
benign than expected, reduced the income of workers with the least education.

        Some illustrative priorities for action: job growth through productive investment and prudent
macroeconomic management is clearly central to increasing income opportunities. But unless structural
inequalities are tackled effectively, the gains for poor people will be modest. To reduce structural
inequalities, a large land reform program is under way, and there have been promising experiments in
negotiated land reform in the Northeast. In the ongoing education effort the next steps will probably
require even broader, deeper, and more participatory reforms—many of these are now under discussion.

9.2.4.2         China
        China stands out for the extraordinarily rapid decline in income poverty in the 1980s and its high
levels of education and health. But it has also had significant increases in inequality—between town and
country, and between the coastal areas and inland China, with the poor, semiarid areas of inland China
participating little in growth.




                                                        96
        The formal structures of security are in transition, and there are deep concerns about the less
dynamic parts of urban China, which are experiencing the beginnings of a major shakeout in state
enterprise and government employment. The formal provision of security was always weaker in rural
areas, but micro evidence suggests that village mechanisms continue to provide high levels of food
security through land allocation processes—confirmed as politically popular in villages by democratic
votes. Ensuring the voice of the new poor in urban areas and those left behind in inland China will be
important in guiding action.

Three areas for action are illustrative. First, maintaining rapid growth through high non-state investment
is crucial if there is to be a smooth process of job destruction in inefficient state activities and smooth
reform of the social protection arrangements for state employees. If there is a sustained slowdown,
insecurity in areas dependent on now inefficient state production could be acute. Second, the smooth
integration of China into the global trading system will be key in locking in reforms and ensuring
economic stability and steady job growth. But if new opportunities are not to widen disparities, this will
have to be accompanied by greater emphasis on building the assets of people living in the poorer areas.
Third, continuing area-based integrated rural development activities in poor areas of inland China and,
more generally, balancing investment across geographic areas need to be important parts of any overall
strategy.

9.2.4.3          Uganda
        Having emerged from a period of destructive conflict a decade and a half ago, Uganda still
suffers deep poverty in many dimensions. But it also shows what an immensely poor Sub-Saharan
African country can achieve.

         The first country to receive enhanced debt relief on the basis of its poverty reduction strategy,
Uganda stands out for its steady growth in the 1990s. It also stands out for significant reductions in
income poverty, impressive efforts toward universal primary education, and a major effort to ensure
transparent, poverty-focused budgets, both centrally and locally. One of its main vulnerabilities is health.
HIV/AIDS hit Uganda early: a tenth of adults are now infected, and AIDS orphans are straining
traditional systems of fostering children.

        Three areas are priorities for future action. Consolidating and deepening the accountability and
participation in resource allocation and strengthening central and local state institutions, to provide a basis
for sound local investment programs in social and physical capital. Tackling the perceived risks in the
business environment so that job-creating growth can take off. And furthering current efforts to stop the
spread of HIV/AIDS and such diseases as tuberculosis. These efforts would be easier if Uganda were to
pull back from its costly and ill-conceived military adventurism in nearby countries.

9.2.4.4          India
         India suffers severe deprivations in education and health—especially in the North, where caste,
class, and gender inequities are particularly strong. In studies in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, poor women
and men emphasized their extreme vulnerability and the ineffectiveness of state institutions, from schools
to police.

        In the past, poverty reduction in India lagged behind that of East Asia because of slower growth
and significantly less progress in promoting mass education and basic health. More recently, however,
growth has accelerated and there is a growing consensus that poverty has fallen substantially.

        There are also marked differences within India—with the South, particularly the state of Kerala,
having sharply better education and health. Kerala has life expectancies greater than those in Washington,


                                                          97
D.C., despite vastly lower income levels. The effectiveness of public action in Kerala has been attributed
to its strong tradition of political and social mobilization.

        What are the priorities for action in India? Accelerated poverty reduction requires continued solid
economic growth, which in turn demands further liberalization, especially in agriculture, and better
provision of infrastructure, sorely lacking in most of India. In areas with deep deprivation in health and
education, the development of social infrastructure is critical. Expanding education and health services
requires that state governments reverse the deterioration in their fiscal positions, as subsidies to the loss-
making power sector crowd out spending in the social sectors. The higher spending needs to be matched
by better service provision. This requires deep improvements in governance, often weakest in India’s
poorest regions, and in combating teacher absenteeism. Also needed is more equitable service provision,
which requires empowering women and members of lower castes.

9.2.4.5         Tanzania
         Since independence, the government has been focused on three development problems:
ignorance, disease and poverty. National efforts to tackle these problems were initially channeled through
centrally directed, medium-tem and long-term development plans; despite high levels of foreign aid, these
efforts were a complete failure, and poverty was higher in 1990 than at the time of independence. Despite
sustained effort over the past decade, and an acceleration in economic growth, half of the population
today is considered basically poor, and approximately one third lives in extreme poverty.

        The current poverty reduction strategy takes a decentralized approach, based on broad
consultation with all stakeholders. The Zonal Workshops, which included a large number of
representatives of the poor at the village level, identified priority concerns and requirements for poverty
reduction. Through an assessment of the poverty profiles and trends using 6 household surveys of various
purposes during the past two decades, the key findings include: a very high incidence of poverty (48% in
1991/92); poverty is more widespread in rural areas than in urban centers; the poor are concentrated in
subsistence agriculture; urban poverty is also acute in urban areas other than Dar es Salaam, and poor
people are mostly in the informal sector; youth, the old and large households are more likely to be poor;
the incidence of poverty declined between 1983-1991 and 1991-1993, but rose during 1993-1998; infant
mortality rate remains to be high and AIDS is the leading killer of youths in Dar es Salaam and several
other sampled districts; malnutrition continues to be severe; access to clean drinking water is still limited
and the majority of poor people have no access to piped water and, as a result, have much higher exposure
to cholera and waterborne diseases; the judiciary system has corruption problems.

        Two participatory poverty assessment studies have suggested the following causes of poverty and
obstacles to development: insecure land tenure, lack of access to agricultural inputs, credit, technology,
transportation, markets, and quality health services, vulnerability to shocks, gender inequality. These
factors were reiterated in the Zonal Workshops. The information then was summarized for each
dimension of poverty and further discussed with other stakeholders.

         The poverty reduction strategy aims at (1) reducing income poverty; (2) improving human
capabilities, survival and social well-being; and (3) containing the extreme vulnerability among the poor.
The key instrument is high and equitable growth. Specifically, over the next three years, the annual GDP
growth rate is targeted to accelerate from 5.2% to 6% - a somewhat unrealistic goal. Agriculture should
increase at 5% on average, compared to 3.6% during 1990-1998. The growth of the industrial and service
sectors is expected to be higher than that of agriculture. At these growth rates, the incidence of poverty is
expected to drop to 42% by 2003 and 24% by 2010. In pursuit of the above poverty reduction objectives,
reforms aimed at bolstering market efficiency and factor productivity will be implemented. Besides



                                                         98
maintaining low inflation and a small fiscal imbalance, special budgetary attention is to be given to rural,
export, and private sectors development programs.

        Specific goals are also identified for other dimensions of poverty such as education and health,
and especially HIV/AIDS related issues. Twenty seven indicators for the monitoring and evaluation of the
poverty reduction strategy have been selected and at least two observations will be made during the next
three years. These key welfare indicators will be at the heart of further discussion and assessment of the
poverty reduction strategy.




                                                        99
       Appendix I: Data Introduction

       In this course, we will be working extensively with STATA using a subset of information
from the Household Survey 1998/99, conducted jointly by Bangladesh Institute of Development
Studies (BIDS) and the World Bank. The information was collected at individual, household, and
community levels. A description of the data sets and file structure used for these exercises is
given below.

       File Structure
        We will use and generate a lot of files. There are mainly three types of STATA files.
Some contain data sets (identified by the suffix .dta), others contain STATA programs
(identified by the suffix .do), and yet others contain a record and output of the work we do in
STATA (identified by the suffix .log). To keep these files organized, it is useful to create a
well-structured set of directories. The following directory structure has been created on each
computer:

       c:\intropov
       c:\intropov\data
       c:\intropov\dofiles
       c:\intropov\logfiles

       Currently under c:\intropov\data, there are four data files:
   1. hh.dta includes 20 household level variables such as household location, household
      business type, asset ownership, access to service, etc.
   2. ind.dta includes 10 individual level variables such age, gender, education or
      schooling, marital status, main activity, working status, occupation, sector, relation to
      household head, etc.
   3. consume.dta includes 30 categories of expenditure such as various food and non-food
      items, rent or rental value of housing, etc.
   4. vprice.dta includes village level price information on the main food items.



       Data Description

       hh.dta
       hhcode:          household identification number

       thana:           thana code (a thana is an administrative center comprising a number of
                        villages). It ranges from 1 to 32 as there are 32 thanas.


                                                  100
vill:      village code (when combined with thana it uniquely identifies a village). It
           ranges from 1 to 4 as a maximum four villages are selected from a thana.

region:    region code
           1      Dhaka (the capital)
           2      Chittagong
           3      Khulna
           4      Rajshahi

weight     sampling weight for household

distance   distance to nearest paved road (km)

d_bank     distance to nearest commercial/agricultural bank (km)

toilet     type of latrine used in the household
           1       sanitary
           0       non-sanitary

hhelec     if household has electricity
           1       yes
           0       no

hassetg    household total assets (in taka)

famsize    household size

sexhead    gender of household head
                  1      male
                  0      female

agehead    age of household head (years)

educhead   years of schooling of household head

hhlandd    land (in decimals which is one-hundredth of an acre) owned by
           household


ind.dta
pid        household member identification number (unique for a
           household member, so becomes unique in the sample after being
           combined with household id)
indsave    individual savings (in taka)
snaghr     non-farm self employment working hours per month


                                          101
sagrhr        farm self employment working hours per month
wnaghr        non-farm wage job working hours per month
waghr         farm wage job working hours per month
iemphr        total working hours per month
rel_hh        code for relation to household head
                     1        Head himself/herself
                     2        Wife/husband
                     3        Son/daughter
                     4        Grandson/granddaughter
                     5        Father/mother
                     6        Sister/brother
                     7        Niece/nephew
                     8        Son-in-law/daughter-in-law
                     9        Spouse of brother or sister
                     10       Brother or sister of spouse
                     11       Father-in-law/mother-in-law
                     12       Other relatives of head or spouse
                     13       Servant/maid servant
                     14       Other ___________ (specify)

educ          years of schooling completed
sex           gender
age           age (in years)
consume.dta
Ten items have been selected from the survey: rice, wheat, pulses, milk, oil, meat, fish,
vegetables, fruits, sugar. Let X denote any items, so:

qX            quantity (kg) of item X consumed last week
eX            value of item X consumed last week (in taka)
expfd         household total food consumption per month (in taka)
expnfd        household total expenditure on regular non-food items per month
              (in taka)
hhexp         household total expenditure per month (in taka)
vprice.dta
Eleven price items (vegetables in the above now has two entries: potatoes and other
vegetables) were selected from the survey. Again, denote an item by X:

pX                    village price per kg




                                             102
       Appendix II: STATA Preliminary
         STATA is a statistical software package that offers a large number of statistical and
econometric estimation procedures. With STATA we can easily manage data and apply standard
statistical and econometric methods such as regression analysis and limited dependent variable
analysis to cross-sectional or longitudinal data.



       1. Getting Started
       1.1. Starting STATA
       Start a STATA session by double-clicking on the STATA icon in your desktop. The STATA
computing environment comprises four main windows. The size and shape of these windows may be
moved about on the screen. Their general look and description are shown below:

     Review                   Stata Results
               Lists
         previous
       commands
      entered in the
          STATA
        Command
      window during
     current session
     Variables

                               Displays each command and results or feedback generated by the
                                                   command

     Lists all
     variables
     of the
     currently
     open
     dataset


                       Stata Command

                       STATA commands are entered here. It shows a blinking command prompt


        It is useful to have the Stata Results window be the largest so you can see a lot of
information about your commands and output on the screen. In addition to these windows
STATA environment has a menu and a toolbar at the top (to perform STATA operations) and a
directory status bar at the bottom (that shows the current directory). You can use menu and

                                                   103
toolbar to issue different STATA commands (like opening and saving data files), although most
of the time it is more convenient to use the Stata Command window to perform those tasks.
If you are creating a log file (see below for more details), the contents can also be displayed on
the screen; this is sometimes useful if one needs to back up to see earlier results from the current
session.



       1.2. Opening a Dataset
      You open a STATA dataset by entering following command in the Stata Command
window:


       use hh
(or possibly use c:\intropov\data\hh, depending on where STATA has opened up; see
below for more details). STATA responds by displaying the following in the Stata Results
window:


               . use hh
               .


       The first line repeats the command you enter and the second line with no error message
implies that the command has been executed successfully. From now on, we will show only the
Stata Results window to demonstrate STATA commands. The following points should be
noted:


   •   STATA assumes the file to be in STATA format with an extension .dta. So, typing hh
       is the same as typing hh.dta.
   •   We can only have one data set open at a time in STATA. So if we open another data set
       ind.dta, we will be replacing hh.dta with ind.dta.
   •   The above command assumes that the file hh.dta is in the current directory (shown by
       the directory status bar at the bottom). If that is not the case then you can do one of the
       following two things (assuming current directory is c:\stata\data and the file
       hh.dta is in c:\intropov):


                   S   Type the full path of the data file:


               . use c:\intropov\hh
               .


                                                     104
       S   Make c:\intropov as the current directory and then open the file as before:


           . cd c:\intropov
           . use hh
           .


•   If the memory allocated to STATA (which is 1,000K or 1M by default) is too little for the
    data file to be opened we will see an error message like the following:

           . use hh
           no room to add more observations
           r(901);
           .

             The third line displays the code associated with the error message. All error
    messages in STATA have associated codes like this; further explanations are available in
    the STATA Reference Manuals. In this case we have to allocate more memory to
    STATA. The following commands allocate 10M to STATA and then tries again to open
    the file:


           . set memory 10m
           (10240k)
           . use hh
           .


            Since the file opens successfully, allocated memory is sufficient. If you continue
    to get an error message, you can try 25m or 30m. But be careful not to specify too much
    memory for STATA. If you specify too much, the computer will use virtual memory that
    will actually slow down your computer. Another important thing to remember is that the
    memory allocation command (set memory 10m for example) works only if no data
    set is open. Otherwise you will get following error message:


           . use hh
           . set memory 10m
           no; data in memory would be lost
           r(4);



           You can clear the memory using one of the two commands: clear or


                                               105
              drop _all. The following demonstration shows the first command:


              . use hh
              . set memory 10m
              no; data in memory would be lost
              r(4);
              . clear
              . set memory 10m
              .


1.3 . Saving a Data set
       If you make changes in an open STATA data file and want to save those changes, you
can do that by using the STATA save command. For example, the following command saves
the hh.dta file:


              . save hh, replace
              file hh.dta saved


       You can optionally omit the filename here (just save, replace is good enough). If
you do not use the replace option STATA does not save the data but issues the following
error message:


              . save hh
              file hh.dta already exists
              r(602);


       The replace option unambiguously tells STATA to overwrite the pre-existing original
version with the new version. If you do NOT want to lose the original version, you have to
specify a different filename in the save command:



              . save hh1
              file hh1.dta saved


        Notice that there is no replace option here. However, if a file named hh1.dta already
exists then you have to either use the replace option or use a new filename.




                                                106
       1.4. Exiting STATA
      An easy way to exit STATA is to issue the command: exit. However, if you have an
unsaved data set open, STATA will issue the following error message:

              . exit
              no; data in memory would be lost
              r(4);

        To remedy this problem you can save the data file and then issue the exit command. If
you really want to exit STATA without saving the data file, you can first clear the memory
(using clear or drop _all command as shown before) and issue the exit command. You
can also simplify the process by combining two commands:

              . exit, clear


       1.5. STATA Help
       You can access STATA help facilities following ways:
   •   The reference manuals (the index therein).
   •   If you know which command or keyword you want the help information about, you can
       the issue the command help followed by the command name or keyword. This
       command only works if you type the full command name or keyword unabbreviated. For
       example, following will not help:

              . help mem
              help for mem not found
              try help contents or search mem

                     But following will work:

              . help memory

              (output omitted)

   •   If you can not recall the full command name or keyword, or you are not sure about which
       command you want you can use the command lookup or search followed by the
       command name or keyword. So following will work:

              . search mem

              (output omitted)

       This command will list all commands associated with this keyword and display a
       brief description of each of those commands. Then you can pick what you think is


                                                107
       relevant and use “help” to obtain the specific reference.
•      The STATA website (http://www.stata.com) has excellent help facilities, for example,
       Online Tutorial, Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ), etc.


       1.6. Notes on STATA Commands
       Here are some general comments about STATA commands:

•   STATA commands are typed in lower case.
•   All names, including commands or variable names, can be abbreviated as long as there is no
    ambiguity. So describe, des or simply d do the same job as there is no confusion.
•   In addition to typing, some keystrokes can be used to represent a few STATA commands or
    sequences. The most important of them are the Page-Up and Page-Down keys. To display
    the previous command in Stata Command window, you can press Page-Up key. You
    can keep doing that until the first command of the session appears. Similarly, the Page-
    Down key displays the command that follows the currently displayed command in the
    Stata Command window.




       2. Working with data files: looking at the content
        From now on, we will mostly list the command(s) and not the results, to save space. To
go through this exercise open the hh.dta file, as we will use examples extensively from this
data file.


       2.1. Listing the variables
       To see all variables in the data set, use the describe command (fully or abbreviated):


              . describe


       This command provides you with information about the data set (name, size, number of
observations) and lists all variables (name, storage format, display format, label).

        To see just one variable or list of variables use the describe command followed by the
variable name(s):

       . d hhcode vill

                     storage display      value
       variable name   type   format      label      variable label
       ----------------------------------------------------------------


                                                 108
       hhcode              double %7.0f                     COMPLETE HOUSEHOLD CODE
       vill                float %2.0f                          VILLAGE CODE


        As you can see, the describe command shows also the variable type, its length and a
short description of the variable (if available). The following points should be noted:

•   You can abbreviate a list of variables by typing only the first and last variable names,
    appended by a hyphen (-), provided the two variables appearing in the list are in the same
    order as they are in the data set. For example, to see all variables from hhcode up to
    famsize, you could type:

                . describe hhcode-famsize



•   Also you can use the wildcard symbol (*) to save yourself some typing. For example, to see
    all variable that start with "hh", you could type:


                . describe hh*



       You can abbreviate a variable or variable list this way in any STATA command (where it
makes sense), not just in describe.



       2.2. Listing data
        To see actual data stored in the variables we use the list command (abbreviated as l).
If you type the command list all by itself STATA will display values for all variables and all
observations, which is not desirable for any practical purpose. We usually want to see the data
for certain variables and for certain observations. We achieve this by typing a list command
with a variable list and with conditions, as shown in the following examples:

       The following command lists all variables of the first three observations:

                . list in 1/3


        Here STATA displays all observations starting from observation 1 and ending with
observation 3. STATA can also display data as a spreadsheet. There are two icons in the toolbar
called Data Editor and Data Browser (fourth and third from right). By clicking one, a
new window will pop up and the data will be displayed as a table, with observations as rows and
variables as columns. Data Browser will only display the data, whereas you can edit data


                                                  109
with Data Editor. The commands edit and browse will also open the spreadsheet
window.

       The following command lists household size and head's education for households headed
by a female who is younger than 45:

              . list hhid hhsize headedu if headsex==2 & headage<45




        The above statement uses two relational operators (== and <) and one logical operator
(&). Relational operators impose a condition on one variable, while logical operators combine
two or more relational operators. The following list shows the relational and logical operators
that are used in STATA:


                     Relational operators         Logical operators
                     > (greater than)                     ~ (not)
                     < (less than)                        | (or)
                     == (equal)                           & (and)
                     >= (greater than or equal)
                     >= (less than or equal)
                     != or ~= (not equal)



        You can use relational and logical operators in any STATA command (where it makes
sense), not just in the list command.




       2.3. Summarizing data
     The command summarize (abbreviated sum) calculates and displays a variety of
summary statistics, for example means and standard deviations. If no variable is specified,
summary statistics are calculated for all variables in the data set. The following command
summarizes the household size and education of the household head:

              . sum famsize educhead


       Any observation that has a missing value for the variable(s) being summarized is
excluded from this calculation by STATA (missing values are discussed later). With no option,
summarize provides the mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum for each variable.



                                                       110
If we want to know the median and percentiles of a variable, we need to add the detail option
(abbreviated d):

               . sum famsize educhead, d



        STATA allows the use of weights. The weight option is useful if the sampling
probability of one observation is different from another. In most household survey, the sampling
frame is stratified, where the first primary sampling units (often villages) are sampled, and
conditional on the selection of primary sampling unit, secondary sampling units (often
households) are drawn. Household surveys generally provide weights to correct for the sampling
design differences and sometimes data collection problems. The implementation in STATA is
straightforward:

               . sum famsize educhead [pw=weight]



       Here the variable weight has the information on the weight to be given to each
observation and pw is a STATA option to incorporate the weight into the calculation. We will
discuss the use of weights further in chapter exercises that follow this exercise.

         For variables that are strings, summarize will not be able to give any descriptive
statistics except that the number of observations is zero. Also, for variables that are categorical, it
can be difficult to interpret the output of the summarize command. In both cases, a full
tabulation may be more meaningful, which we will discuss next.


         Many times we want to see summary statistics by group of certain variables, not just for
the whole data set. Say in the above example, we want to see mean of family size and education
of household head by the gender of household head. Of course, we can use a condition in the
sum command (for example, sum famsize educhead if sexhead==1
[pw=weight]), but this is not convenient if the variability of the group variable increases (for
example, the variable region). In those cases, we use by option of STATA which makes life
much simpler. For example, we want to see summary statistics of family size and education of
household head for each region. Before we use STATA by option we must make sure that data is
sorted by the group variable. You can check this by issuing describe command after opening
each file. describe command, after listing all the variables, informs if the data set is sorted by
any variable(s). If there is no sorting information listed or the data set is sorted by variable(s) that
is (are) different from what you want it to be, you can issue a sort command and then save the
data set in this form. Following commands sort the data set by region and show summary
statistics of family size and education of household head by region:


               . sort region

                                                     111
               . by region: sum famsize educhead [pw=weight]




       2.4. Frequency distributions (tabulations)
        We often need frequency distributions and cross tabulations. We use the tabulate
(abbreviated tab) command to do this. The following command gives the regional distribution
of the households:


               . tab region



       The following command gives the gender distribution of household heads in region 1:


               . tab sexhead if region==1


In passing, note the use of the == sign here. It indicates that if the regional variable is identically
equal to 1, then do the tabulation.

        We can use the tabulate command to make a two-way distribution. For example, we
would like to check whether there is any gender bias in the education of household heads. We
use the following command:

               . tab educhead sexhead


       To see percentages by row or columns we can add options to the tabulate command:

               . tab region sexhead, col row




       2.5. Distributions of descriptive statistics (table command)
       Another convenient command is table which combines features of summ and tab
commands and by option. In addition, it displays the results in a more presentable form.
Following table command show mean of family size and education of household head by region:

       . table region, c(mean famsize mean educhead)

       ------------------------------------------


                                                     112
          region | mean(famsize) mean(educhead)
       ----------+-------------------------------
           Dhaka |           5.23               2
       Chittagon |           5.82               3
          Khulna |           5.03               3
        Ragfhahi |           5.03               2
       ------------------------------------------




        Results are as we expected. But why is mean of educhead displayed as integer, not
fraction? This is because educhead variable is stored as an integer number and STATA simply
truncated numbers after the decimal. Look at the description of this variable.
       . d educhead

                        storage display          value
      variable name       type   format          label         variable label
      educhead             float %2.0f                            Education (years)
of HH Head




       You see that educhead is a float variable its format (%2.0f) shows that its digits
occupy 2 places and it has no digit after decimal. You can force STATA to reformat the display.
Say we want it display two place after decimal for three digit display. Following command
shows that and subsequent table command:

       . format educhead %3.2f

       . table region, c(mean famsize mean educhead)

       ------------------------------------------
          region | mean(famsize) mean(educhead)
       ----------+-------------------------------
           Dhaka |           5.23            2.09
       Chittagon |           5.82            3.14
          Khulna |           5.03            2.91
        Ragfhahi |           5.03            2.15
       ------------------------------------------




                                                 113
         That is much better. Please consult STATA manuals for formatting options available for
all types of variables. Remember that formatting changes only the display of the variable, not the
internal representation of the variable in the memory. table command can display up to five
statistics and not just mean. Also, what we showed here is a one-way table. But it is possible to
display two-way, three-way or even higher dimensional tables. Let us look at an example of a
two-way table. Suppose we want to see the education of household head and not just by region
but also by sex of household head. Here is how we do that:




       . table region sexhead, c(mean famsize mean educhead)

       ----------------------
                 | sex head
                 |   1=male
          region |    0     1
       ----------+-----------
           Dhaka | 3.36 5.37
                 | 0.18 2.24
                 |
       Chittagon | 4.17 6.08
                 | 1.50 3.39
                 |
          Khulna | 4.18 5.11
                 | 1.36 3.05
                 |
        Ragfhahi | 3.70 5.13
                 | 0.00 2.31
       ----------------------




       2.5. Missing Values in STATA
        In STATA, a missing value is represented by a dot (.). A missing value is considered
larger than any number. The summarize command ignores the observations with missing
values and the tabulate command does the same, unless forced include missing values.


       2.6. Counting observations
       We use count command to count the number of observations in the data set:

               . count
                 519
               .


                                                  114
      The count command can be used with conditions. The following command gives the
number of households whose head is older than 50:

              . count if agehead>50
                161
              .




       3. Working with data files: changing data set

       3.1. Generating new variables
        In STATA the command generate (abbreviated gen) creates new variables, while the
command replace changes the values of an existing variable. The following commands
create a new variable called oldhead, then set its value to 1 if the household head is older than
32 years and to 0 otherwise:


              . gen oldhead=1 if agehead>32
              (90 missing values generated)
              . replace oldhead=0 if agehead<=32
              (90 real changes made)

        What happens here is, for each observation, the generate command checks the
condition (whether household head is older than 32) and sets the value of the variable oldhead
to 1 for that observation if the condition is true, and to missing value otherwise. The replace
command works in a similar fashion (however, the condition is reversed here and oldhead gets
0 if the condition is met). After the generate command STATA informs us that 90
observations failed to meet the condition and after the replace command STATA informs us
that those 90 observations have got new values (0 in this case). The following points should be
made:

•   STATA variable names cannot be longer than 8 letters. So generate/replace commands must
    conform to this.
•   If a generate or replace command is issued without any conditions, that command
    applies to all observations in the data file.
•   While using the generate command, care should be taken to handle missing values
    properly.
•   The right hand side of the = sign in the generate or replace commands can be any
    expression involving variable names, not just a value.




                                                  115
•   The command replace does not have to always follow the generate command. The
    replace command can be used to change the values of any existing variable,
    independently of generate command.

       STATA provides many useful functions to be used in generate and replace
commands, for example mean(.) or max(.). For example, in the ind.dta file. the
following command calculates the maximum share of employment among four sectors for each
household:

              . gen maxhr=max(snaghr,saghr,wnaghr,waghr)

              .


      An extension of the generate command is egen. Like the gen command, the egen
command can create variables to store descriptive statistics like the mean, sum, maximum and
minimum or other statistics. For example, an alternative way to create maxhr variable is:

              . egen maxhr=rmax(snaghr saghr wnaghr waghr)


        Note the difference in syntax. The more powerful feature of egen command is its ability
to create statistics involving multiple observations. For example, the following command creates
average individual employment hours for the data set:

              . egen avgemphr=mean(iemphr)


     All observations in the data set get the same value for avgemphr. The following
command creates the same statistics, this time for males and females:

              . egen avghrmf=mean(iemphr), by(sex)


       Here observations for males get the value that is average of male employment hours,
while observations for females get the equivalent for female employment hours.


       3.2. Labeling
        3.2.1. Labeling variables
        You can attach labels to variables to give a description to them. For example, the
variable oldhead does not have any label now. You can attach a label to this variable by
typing:

              . label variable oldhead "HH Head is over 32"

                                                 116
        In the label command, variable can be shortened to var. Now to see the new label,
type:

               . des oldhead




       3.2.2. Labeling Data
       There are other types of labels we can create. To attach a label to the entire data set,
which appears at the top of our describe list:

               . label data “Bangladesh HH Survey 1998/99”


        To see this label, type:

               . des



        3.2.3. Labeling Values of variables
        Variables that are categorical, like those in sexhead (1=male, 0=female), can have
labels that help one to remember what the categories are. For example, if we tabulate the
variable sexhead we see only 0 and 1 values:

               . tab sexhead

       To attach labels to the values of a variable, we have to do two things. We have to define
a value label. Then we have to assign this label to our variable(s). Using the new categories for
sexhead:

               . label define sexlabel 0 "Female" 1 "Male"
               . label values sexhead sexlabel


        Now, to see the labels, type:

               . tab sexhead

       If you want to see the actual values of the variable sexhead, which is still 0s and 1s,
you can add an option to not display the labels we have assigned the values of the variable:


                                                  117
              . tab sexhead, nolabel


       3.3. Keeping and Dropping Variables and Observations
        We can select variables and observations of a data set by using the keep or drop
commands. Suppose we have a data set with 6 variables: var1, var2, … , var6. We would
like to keep a file with only three of them, say var1, var2, and var3. You can use either of
the following two commands:

                       keep var1 var2 var3 (or keep var1-var3)
                       drop var4 var5 var6 (or drop var4-var6)

       Note the use of a hyphen (-) in both commands. For practical purpose you should use the
command that involves fewer variables or less typing (and hence less risk of error!). We can also
use relational or logical operators. For example, the following command drops those
observations where the head of the household is 80 or older :

              . drop if agehead>=80

       The following command keeps those observations where household size is 6 or less:

              . keep if famsize<=6

       The above two commands drop or keep all variables based on the conditions. You cannot
include a variable list in a drop or keep command that also uses conditions. For example, the
following command will fail:

              . keep hhcode famsize if famsize<=6
              invalid sytax
              r(198);

       You have use two commands to do the job:


              . keep if famsize<=6
              . keep hhcode famsize


         You can also use the keyword in a drop or keep command. For example, to drop the
first 20 observations:

              . drop in 1/20




                                                  118
       3.4. Producing Graphs
        STATA is quite good at producing basic graphs, although considerable experimentation
may be needed to produce really beautiful graphs. The following command shows the
distribution of the age of the household head in a bar graph:

              . graph agehead

       Whether you use a categorical variable or a continuous variable, say income, does not
make a difference to STATA: the default is 5 bars (“bins”). The number of bars may be
increased, up to a maximum of 50, by adding the option bin(#).

              . graph agehead, bin(12)

       In order to save the graph we would add the option saving(filename). You can also
provide titles. For a scatter plot of two variables, type the following command:

     graph headedu headage,                 t1(education       by    age)    saving(eduage,
replace) ylab xlab s(.)


       3.5. Combining Data sets
        3.5.1. Merging data sets
        STATA can only have one data set in memory at a time. However, in many occasions
you need variables that are spread in two or more files and you would like to combine those files
for the purpose of analysis. For example, we want to see how individual's education varies by
household head's gender. Since household head's gender (variable sexhead) and individual's
education (variable educ) come from two different files (hh.dta and ind.dta) we have to
merge these two files to do the analysis. We want to combine these two files at household level,
so the variable that is used for merging is hhcode (let's call it merge variable). Before merging
is done, both files must be sorted by merge variable. Following command opens, sorts and saves
the ind.dta file:

. use ind
. sort hhcode
. save, replace


Once both data sets are sorted you can go ahead with merging. Following steps show how we do
this:

. use hh
. merge hhcode using ind




                                                  119
In the context hh.dta is called the master file (this is the one that remains in the memory
before merging) and ind.dta is called using file. To see how the merge operation went, we
issue following command:

       . tab _merge

            _merge |      Freq.     Percent        Cum.
       ------------+-----------------------------------
                 3 |       2767      100.00      100.00
       ------------+-----------------------------------
             Total |       2767      100.00

The variable _merge is created by STATA after each merge operation and it can have three
possible values:

1      shows those observations from master file that could not be merged
2      shows those observations from using file that could not be merged
3      shows those observations that were successfully merged

Total number of observations in the resulting data set is the sum of these three _merge
frequencies. Possible candidate for _merge=1 is an observation in hh.dta file that has a
hhcode values which cannot be found in ind.dta file. Similarly if the ind.dta file has a
hhcode that is not found in the hh.dta file that observation will appear with _merge=2. In
the above example, however, each household in hh.dta file has an exact match in the
ind.dta file and that is why we got _merge=3 and not 1's or 2's. If you keep only the
matched observations, you can do that by this command: keep if _merge==3. Once we
have merged the data sets we can go ahead with our analysis:

       . sort sexhead
       . by sexhead: sum educ

       -> sexhead = 0

           Variable |     Obs        Mean   Std. Dev.     Min      Max
       -------------+-------------------------------------------------
               educ |     179    2.329609   3.424591        0       14
       ________________________________________________________________
       -> sexhead = 1

       Variable |     Obs        Mean   Std. Dev.       Min        Max
       -------------+---------------------------------------------------
               educ |     2588   2.340417   3.324081        0          16

The result shows that there is not much difference in education by the gender of household head.

        Notice that in order to show the results by sexhead variable, we have to sort the data by
that variable, otherwise we will get an error message. The preference of master and using data is
not important and a matter of convenience.



                                                  120
        3.5.2. Appending data sets
Consider what would happen in the above merging scenario if we have _merge=1 and 2 only
but no 3s. This can happen if individual data (ind.dta) come from households that are completely
different from the households in hh.dta. In this case resulting number of observations after
merging is the sum of observations in the two files (observations with _merge=1 + observations
with _merge=2). STATA in this case would actually append the two data sets; however variables
that are only included in one file will have missing values for all observation from the other file..
Although this is not what we intend in the above example, appending is necessary when we need
to combine two data sets that have same (or almost same) variables but are mutually exclusive.
For example, assume we have four regional version of hh.dta file: hhdhak.dta (has
households only from Dhaka region), hhkhul.dta (has households only from Khulna region),
hhraj.dta (has households only from Rajshahi region) and hhchit.dta (has households
only from Chittagong region). These data files have same variables as does hh.dta but
represent four distinct sets of households. How do we combine them to get a overall data set of
the whole country? We append them. STATA has a command (append) to that. Following
commands show how we do that.


.   use hhdhak
.   append using hhkhul
.   append using hhraj
.   append using hhchit

       At this stage we have a data set in the memory that has household information from all
four regions. If we need this data set for subsequent use we should save this data set after
arranging in a defined order (say, sorting by hhcode).

       4. Working with .log and .do files
        STATA can work interactively. You type one command line each time and STATA will
process that command, display the result if any and wait for the next command. It is very
flexible. But what if you want to save these results, or perhaps have a printed version of the
results? You can do that in STATA by creating .log files. A .log file is created by issuing a
log using command and closed by a log close command; and all commands issued in
between plus corresponding outputs are saved in the .log file. Let us go back to the example in
Section 3.5.1. Assume that we want to save only the education summary by household gender,
not the merging outcomes. Here are commands that we issue:

       . log using educm.log

       . by sexhead:sum educ

       __________________________________________________________________
       -> sexhead = 0

           Variable |     Obs        Mean   Std. Dev.       Min      Max
       -------------+---------------------------------------------------


                                                    121
               educ |     179    2.329609   3.424591         0       14
       __________________________________________________________________
       -> sexhead = 1

       Variable |     Obs        Mean   Std. Dev.       Min        Max
       -------------+---------------------------------------------------
               educ |     2588   2.340417   3.324081      0         16
       .log close


What happens here is STATA creates a text file named educm.log in the current directory and
saves the summary output in that file. If you want the .log file to be saved in directory other than
current directory you can specify full path of the directory in the .log creation command.
      The .log creation command shown above fails if the .log file already exists. There are
two ways you can handle this in above scenario:
•   You can replace the existing .log file by issuing the command:                   log    using
    educm.log, replace.
•   You can append any new output to the existing file by issuing command: log using
    educm.log, append.


If you really want to keep the existing .log file unchanged, then you can rename either this file
or the file in the .log creation command. In a .log file if you want to suppress portion of it,
you can issue log off before that portion and log on command after that. You have to close
a log file before opening a new one, otherwise you will get an error message.


         If you find yourself using same set of commands repeatedly, you can save those
commands in a file and run them together whenever you need it. These command files are called
.do files and they are extremely useful. Again going back to the example of Section 3.5.1., you
can type all commands, starting from "use ind" to "by sexhead: sum educ", in a text
file called educm.do, save it in the current directory and then issue the command "do educm"
from STATA prompt to run it. In order to save the output of all these commands you can also
include .log creation commands in the file. So the educm.do file may look like this:

       log using educm.log
       use ind
       sort hhcode
       save, replace
       use hh
       merge hhcode using ind
       tab _merge
       sort sexhead
       by sexhead:sum educ
       log close




                                                   122
       The main advantage of using .do file instead of typing commands line by line is
repeatability. Usually if it takes quite some steps to obtain the desired output, you should edit a
.do file because you may need to do it tens of times.


       There are certain commands that are useful in a .do file. We will discuss them from the
following sample .do file:

   *This is a STATA comment which is not executed
   /*****This is a do file that shows some very useful
     commands used in do files. In addition, it creates a
   log file and uses some basic STATA commands                             ***/


   #delimit ;
   set more 1;
   drop _all;
   cap log close;
   log using c:\intropov\logfiles\try1.log, replace;

   use “c:\intropov\data\hh.dta”;
   describe;
   list in 1/3;
   list hhid hhsize headedu if headsex==2 & headage<45;
   summarize hhsize;
    summarize hhsize, detail;
   sum hhsize headedu [pw=weight], d;
    tabulate headsex;
   tabulate headedu headsex, col row chi;
   tabulate headedu, summarize(headage);
   label define sexlabel 1 “MALE” 2 “FEMALE”;
   label values headsex sexlabel;
   tabulate headsex;
   label variable headsex “Head Gender”;
   use “c:\intropov\data\hh.dta”;


                                                   123
   sort hhid;
   save temp, replace;
   use “c:\intropov\data\consume.dta”, clear;
   sort hhid ;
   merge hhid using temp;
   tabulate _merge;
   keep if _merge==3;


   log close;
   exit;

        The first line in the file is a comment. STATA treats any line that starts with an asterisk
(*) as a comment and ignores it. You can write multi-line comment by using forward slash and
asterisk (/*) as the start of the comment and end the comment by asterisk and forward slash (*/).
Comments are very useful for documentation purpose and you should include at least following
information in the comment of a do file: general purpose of the do file, and last modification
time and date. You can include comment anywhere in the do file, not just at the beginning.

       #delimit ;     By default STATA assumes that each command is ended by the carriage
                      return (ENTER key press). If, however, a command is too long to be fit in
                      one line you can spread it over more than one line. You do that by letting
                      STATA know what the command delimiter would be. The command in
                      the example says that a command is ended by a semicolon (;). Every
                      command following the delimit command has to end with a ; until the file
                      ends or another #delimit cr command appears which makes carriage return
                      again the command delimiter. Although for this particular .do file we don't
                      need to use the #delimit command it is done to explain the command.

   set more 1         STATA usually displays results one screenful at a time, and waits for the
                      user to press any key. But this would soon become a pain if after starting a
                      .do file to run you have to press a key every time this happens until the
                      program ends. This command displays the whole output skipping page
                      after page automatically.
   drop _all          This command clears the memory.


   cap log close    This command closes any open .log file. If no log file is open
               STATA just ignores this command.




                                                   124
        You can edit .do files either using the STATA do-file editor or using a text editor such as
Word and WordPad. If you are editing a .do file with the do-file editor, you can run your
program directly within the do-file editor window by clicking the “Do current file” icon.
Similarly, you can read .log files in any text editor. Now open the do-file editor and type the
above code into it, then save it as c:\intropov\dofiles\try.do. Click the “Do current
file” icon and switch to the “STATA Results” window. You should indicate command lines be
processed without pause (using the set more off command). When you see “end of do file”,
open c:\intropov\logfiles\try11.log in Word and check the results.

       Follow-up practice
        Now let’s do some practice using all three datasets. Remember, do not overwrite these
three data files.
   1. Generate a new variable, agegroup, that categorize individuals according to their age. For
      example, assign 1 to agegroup if the person is less older than 30. You can make your own
      rule that you think is appropriate. Label this variable and its categorical values, and
      tabulate it.
   2. Calculate the sex ratio of sampled population, and the labor participation rates for both
      genders.
   3. Count the number of children younger than 15 and the number of elders older than 65.
      Compare the mean per capita staple food consumption (in kg) for households with no
      children, one child, and two or more children.
   4. Calculate the mean per capita food consumption of those households whose heads are
      aged between 30 and 39. Compare it to the mean per capita food consumption for those
      whose heads are aged between 50 and 59.
   5. Report the mean and median per capita food consumption for each educational level of
      household head. (Hint: “by” or “table xxx, c(mean xxx)”.
   6. Calculate the food share in total household expenditure and compare the mean food share
      for households headed by men with that of households headed by women.
   7. Tabulate mean household size and mean educational level by region and area.




                                                   125
                                               Exercises

Exercise 1 (Chapter Two):
Let’s look at the data sets that we are going to use for our poverty analysis. It is quite important
to know the general population structure and household characteristics. We also need some steps
to construct the data set that we will use in the later exercises.

1.1 Household Characteristics
Open c:\intropov\data\hh.dta which consists of household level variables. Answer
the following questions:

  i.   How many variables are there?
           ii. How many observations (households) are there?
 iii.There are four regions. Household characteristics may vary by regions. Fill in the following
     table (hint: use table command).
                                           Dhaka Chittagong Khulna            Rajshahi
           Total number of households         ______      ______      ______     ______
           Total number of population         ______      ______      ______     ______
           Average distance to paved road ______          ______      ______     ______
           Average distance to nearest bank ______        ______      ______     ______
           % Household has electricity        ______      ______      ______     ______
           % Household has sanitary toilet ______         ______      ______     ______
          Average household assets            ______      ______      ______     ______
          Average household land holding ______           ______      ______     ______
          Average household size              ______      ______      ______     ______


   Are the sampled households very different across regions?
   _____________________________________________________________________


   _____________________________________________________________________


        iv. Gender of households heads may also affect household characteristics:
                                                     Male-headed     Female-headed
                                                       households      households


                                                   126
              Average household size                _________         ________
              Average head schooling                _________         ________
              Average head age                      _________         ________
              Average household assets              _________         ________
              Average household land holding        _________         ________


       Are the sampled households headed by males very different from those headed by females?
       _____________________________________________________________________


       _____________________________________________________________________



1.2 Individual Characteristics
Open c:\intropov\data\ind.dta. This file consists of household member
information. Merge this data with the household level data (hh.dta) and answer the following
questions for individuals who are 15 years old or older:

  i.      Regional variation                       Dhaka     Chittagong Khulna      Rajshahi
          Average schooling years              ______      ______     ______     ______
          Gender ratio (% of female)            ______      ______      ______   ______
          % Working population (with
          positive working hours)              ______       ______      ______   ______
          % Working population working                                                     in farm
                       ______     ______         ______      ______


       Are the sampled individuals very different across regions?
       _____________________________________________________________________


       _____________________________________________________________________


 ii.      gender difference                               Among males      Among females
          Average schooling years(age>=5)           _________         ________
          Average schooling years(age<15)           _________         ________


                                                     127
      Average age                             _________        ________
      % Working population (with
         positive working hours)              _________        ________
      % Working population working
          in farm                             _________        ________
      Average working hours                   _________        ________
      Average working hours in farm           _________        ________
      Average working hours in non-farm         _________       ________


   Are the sampled women very different from men?
   _____________________________________________________________________


   _____________________________________________________________________



1.3 Expenditure
Open c:\intropov\data\consume.dta. It has household level consumption
expenditure information. Merge it with hh.dta.

  i.   Create three variables: per capita food expenditure (let’s call it pcfood), per capita
    nonfood expenditure (call it pcnfood) and per capita total expenditure (call it pcexp).
    Now let’s look at the consumption patterns.
       Average per capita expenditure:           pcfood          pcexp
        by region:
              Whole                           ________         ________
              Dhaka region                    ________         ________
              Chittagong region                 ________        ________
              Khulna region                    ________        ________
              Rajshahi region                  ________        ________
        by head gender:
              male-headed households           ________        ________
              female-headed households         ________        ________
        by head education level:


                                                128
             head has some education            ________         ________
             head has no education              ________         ________
       by household size:
             Large household (>5)               ________         ________
             Small household (<=5)                ________         ________
       by land ownership:
             Large land ownership (>0.5/person)________           ________
             Small land ownership or landless     ________         ________


  Summarize your findings on per capita expenditure comparison


  _____________________________________________________________________


  _____________________________________________________________________


ii.Now add another measure of household size which take into account that children actually
   consume less than adults. Let’s assume children (age <15) will be weighted as .75 of an
   adult. For instance, a household of a couple with one child aged at 7 has 2.75 adult-
   equivalence scale instead of 3. Go back to the ind.dta and create this variable (let’s call it
   famsize2), then merge with the household data and the consumption data). Create per
   adult equivalent expenditure variables (let’s call them pafood and paexp) and repeat the
   above exercise.

     Average per capita expenditure:               pcfood         pcexp
       by region:
             Whole                              ________         ________
             Dhaka region                       ________         ________
             Chittagong region                   ________         ________
             Khulna region                      ________         ________
             Rajshahi region                    ________          ________
       by head gender:
             male-headed households             ________         ________
             female-headed households           ________         ________


                                                 129
       by head education level:
             head has some education            ________         ________
             head has no education              ________         ________
       by household size:
             Large household (>5)               ________         ________
             Small household (<=5)               ________         ________
       by land ownership:
             Large land ownership (>0.5/person)________           ________
             Small land ownership or landless    ________         ________


  Compare your new results with those of per capita expenditure. In analyzing poverty, is it
  better to use adult-equivalents?


  _____________________________________________________________________


  _____________________________________________________________________


iii.Besides looking at the mean or the median value of consumption, we can also easily look at
    the whole distribution of consumption using graph. The following is to plot the cumulative
    distribution function curve of per capita total expenditure.

. cumul pcexp, gen(pcexpcdf)
. label variable pcexpcdf “Cumulative Distribution of pcexp”
. label variable pcexp “Per Capita total expenditure”
. graph pcexpcdf pcexp, ylabel(0,.2,.4,.6,.8,1) xlabel
saving(cdf, replace)

  The cumul command creates a variable called pcexpcdf which is defined as the empirical
  cumulative distribution function (cdf) of pcexp. After labeling the two variables,
  pcexpcdf (on the vertical axis) is plotted against pcexp (on the horizontal axis). Note the
  options ylabel and xlabel are used to have each axis properly labeled. Without
  arguments, graph will choose “round” values to be labeled; with arguments, graph will
  only label those values that you choose. The graph is also saved in a file called cdf.gph.
  When you want to look the graph later, you just need to type “graph using cdf”.



                                                 130
   The cumulative distribution function curve of a welfare indicator can reveal quite a lot
   information about the poverty and inequality. For example, if we know the value of a poverty
   line, we can easily find the corresponding percentage value of people below the line.

 iv. Keep pcfood pcexp pafood paexp famsize2 hhcode, and merge with
    hh.dta and save as pce.dta in the c:\intropov\data directory.


1.4 Household Weights
In most household surveys, observations are selected through a random process, but different
observations may have different probabilities of selection. Therefore, we need use weights which
are equal to the inverse of the probability of being sampled. A weight of wj for the jth
observation means, roughly speaking, that the jth observation represents wj elements in the
population from which the sample was drawn. Omitting sampling weights in the analysis usually
gives biased estimates, which may be far from the true values.

Various post-sampling adjustments to the weights are sometimes necessary. A household
sampling weight is provided in the hh.dta. In estimating individual level parameters such as
per capita expenditure, we need to transform the household sample weights into individual
sample weights and use as an option in STATA commands:

. gen weighti = weight*famsize
. table region [pweight=weighti], c(mean pcexp)

STATA has four types of weights: fweight, pweight, aweight, and iweight. fweight
or frequency weights, indicate duplicate observation and only allow intergers; pweight or
sampling weights, denote the inverse of probability of selection due to sample design;
aweight, or analytic weights, are inversely proportional to the variance of an observation; and
iweight, or importance weights indicate the relative “importance” of the observation and are
rarely used. The most commonly used are pweight and aweight. Not every command
supports every kind of weight, but each do have a default “natural” weights. So if instead
[weight=weighti] is specified in the above command, then fweight—the default
treatment of weights for table is assumed.

Now let’s repeat some previous estimation with weights:

                                         Dhaka        Chittagong Khulna     Rajshahi
       Average household size               ______        ______   ______     ______
       Average per capita food expenditure: ______        ______   ______     ______
       Average per capita total expenditure: ______       ______   ______     ______

Are weighted averages very different from unweighted ones?


                                                 131
1.5 Challenge: Effects of clustering and stratification
        If the survey under consideration has a complex sampling design, then the standard errors
of estimates may well be biased if ignoring clustering and stratification. Both have effects on the
estimates of standard errors.

        Household surveys can have multistage sampling, i.e., sample groups of households first
(villages or city blocks) and then sample households within sampled primary sampling units.
This technique is called clustering. Because observations in the same cluster are not independent
as what we always assume, the standard errors may be underestimated.

         Different groups of clusters are often sampled separately. These groups are called strata. For
example, villages might be divided into strata according to their regions. Then 100 villages can be
sampled from each region. Because sampling is implemented independently across strata, strata are
statistically independent and can be analyzed as such. In many cases, this produces smaller estimates of
standard errors.

         STATA has a set of command specially dealing with survey estimation. For instance, one has to
start with svyset to set variables: sampling weight, primary sample unit, strata. Then svymean will
give estimates of population means and their correct standard errors. svyreg will perform linear
regression, taking into account of survey design. Repeat the above exercise (1.4) and compare the results.
_________________________________

        ____________________________________________________________________




                                                       132
Exercise 2 (Chapter Three):
        The degree of consistency of the poverty line depends on the extent to which the chosen
poverty line represents similar levels of well-being over time and across groups so that the
poverty measures can be compared over time and across groups. Three methods have been used
for deriving the poverty line in Bangladesh: direct caloric intake, food energy intake and cost of
basic needs. The cost of basic needs method is both representative and consistent for
comparisons over time and across groups.

        The following table gives a nutritional basket considered minimal for the healthy survival
of a typical family in rural Bangladesh.

                                        Per capita normative daily
                                                                                    Average
               Food                         requirements
                                                                            rural consumer
       items                                              Quantity
                                      Calorie                               price (taka/kg)
                                                   (gm)
       Rice                            1386                   397                15.19
       Wheat                            139                    40                    12.81
       Pulse                           153                     40                   30.84
       Milk (cow)                        39                    58                    15.90
       Oil (mustard)                    180                    20                    58.24
       Meat (beef)                       14                    12                    66.39
       Fish                             51                     48                    46.02
       Potato                           26                     27                    8.18
       Other
                                        26                     150                  38.30
       vegetables
       Sugar                            82                      20                  30.49
       Fruits                           6                       20                  28.86
       Total                           2112                    832


2.1 Direct Calorie Intake
The direct caloric intake method will consider any household not meeting the nutritional
requirement of 2112 calories per day per person as poor. For this method, we need to know the
quantity of every food item consumed by households and its calorie content. Then we calculate
the total calorie content of those consumed food and derive an equivalent daily caloric intake per
capita for each household. c:\intropov\data\consume.dta includes quantity of 10
food items consumed (“potato” and “other vegetables” listed in the above are combined into one
item “vegetables” in the survey, let’s assume that the total per capita daily calorie requirement of
this combined item is 52 and the quantity is 177 gm). Use the quantity information (hint: the unit
is kg per week and needs to convert into gm per day) and the calorie content information of the
above table to calculate each household's per capita caloric intake (calorie per day). Create a new
variable cpcap to store this caloric intake. Now identify the households for which cpcap is
less than 2112. These households are considered "poor" based on direct caloric intake method.



                                                   133
Create a variable directp which equals 1 if the household is poor and 0 otherwise. What
percentage of people are poor by this method?

                              Whole          Dhaka region          Other regions
   % of being poor            _________      _________             ________


2.2 Food-Energy Intake
The food-energy intake method finds the value of per capita total consumption at which a
household can be expected to fulfill its caloric requirement determines poverty based on that
expenditure. Note this expenditure automatically includes allowance for both food and non-food
thus avoiding the tricky problem of determining the basic needs for those goods. It does not need
price data either. A simple method is to rank households by their per capita caloric intakes and
calculate the mean expenditure for the group of households who consume approximately the
stipulated per capita caloric intake requirement.

         i.Merge cpcap with hh.dta and calculate the average pcexp for the households
           whose per capita calorie intake is within 10% minus/plus range of 2112.

         ii.Call the average value feipline and identify the households for which pcexp is
            less than feipline. These households are considered "poor" based on food-energy
            intake method. Create a variable feip which equals 1 if the household is poor and 0
            otherwise.

. sum pcexp [aw=weighti] if cpcap<2112*1.1 & cpcap>2112*.9
. gen feipline = r(mean)
. gen feip = 0
. replace feip = 1 if pcexp <= feipline

Note that STATA commands that report results also save the results so that other commands can
subsequently use those results. r-class commands such as summarize save results in r() in
version 6.0 or version 7.0. After any r-class commands, if you type “return list”, STATA
will list what was saved. Another group—e-class commands such as regress save results in
e() and “estimates list” will list saved results. For example, e(b) and e(V) store the
estimates of coefficients and the variance-covariance matrix, respectively. To access coefficients
and standard errors, there is an easier way. _b(varname) or _coef(varname) contains the
coefficient on varname and _se(varname) refers to the standard error on the coefficient.

What percentage of people are poor by this method?

                              Whole          Dhaka region          Other regions



                                                  134
   % of being poor           _________      _________              ________


        iii.Challenge: a more sophisticated method is to regress per capita total expenditure on
            per capita calorie intake and then predict the expected per capita expenditure at 2112
            kcal level. Do this (hints):

. regress pcexp cpcap [aw=weighti]
. gen feipline=_b[_cons] + _b[cpcap]*2112

Should there be separate regression for each region? _____________________________

____________________________________________________________________

2.3 Cost of Basic Needs
The cost of basic needs method is to find the value of consumption necessary to meet minimum
subsistence needs. Usually it involves a basket of food items based on nutritional requirements
and consumption patterns, and a reasonable allowance for non-food consumption.

             i.According to the above basket and the average rural consumer prices, how much
               money does a household of four need each day to meet calorie requirement?

            ii.One way to derive the non-food allowance is simply to assume a certain
               percentage of the value of minimum food consumption. How much total
               expenditure does the family need at least per year for being non-poor if assuming
               that nonfood expense is about 30 percent of food expense?

           iii.vprice.dta gives village level price information on all 11 food items.
               Therefore, we can actually calculate a food poverty line (call it foodline) and a
               total poverty line (call it cbnpline) for each village using the cost of basic
               needs method and merge this variable with pce.dta (hint: need to sort both
               data sets and merge by thana vill). Do this and create a variable cbnp
               which equals 1 for the poor and 0 for the non-poor.

What percentage of people are poor by this method?

                             Whole          Dhaka region           Other regions
   % of being poor           _________      _________              ________


Do percentages of people being poor agree using the three methods? ________________


____________________________________________________________________

                                                  135
Keep all imputed poverty lines and poverty indicators, merge with pce.dta, save it as
final.dta.




                                            136
Exercise 3 (Chapter Four):

3.1 A Simple Example
       In STATA, open the data file example.dta and browse the data using STATA “Data
Browser”. You should see a spreadsheet listing information exactly as presented in the following
table.

                            Country A       Country B       Country C
                               110             118             119
                               115             120             120
                               119             120             122
                               120             125             123
                               125             126             123
                               127             127             125
                               138             133             135
                               141             141             140
                               178             173             173
                               222             212             215


       It consists of the individual consumption information of three countries. All three
countries have 10 people.

   1. Summarize consumption for three countries. What do you find?
      _____________________________________________________________
   2. Assume a poverty line of 125, calculate the poverty rates for each country using the
      formulas provided in the Chapter Four notes:
                                          Country           A           B      C
             a.     Using the headcount index:           ________ ________ ________
             b.     Using the poverty gap index:         ________ ________ ________
             c.     Using the squared poverty gap index:________ ________ ________
   3. Which country has the highest incidence of poverty? Justify your answer.




3.2 Poverty Measures for Rural Bangladesh 1999
Now let’s work with the per capita food expenditure and the per capita total expenditure
(pcfood and pcexp in c:\intropov\data\final.dta) that we have created in
Exercise 1, and use cbnpline (the cost of basic needs poverty line that we derived in Exercise
2). To facilitate and generalize the calculation, three STATA .ado programs (under
c:\ado\personal) are provided so that you do not have to program those formulas yourself.
All you need to do is to prepare a welfare indicator and a poverty line, and invoke those
programs in STATA just as what you do with STATA commands. Therefore, these programs can

                                                 137
be readily applied in your own poverty research. Please see section appendix for the
documentation. Note that as a general rule in STATA, commands are case-sensitive.
FGT.ado can calculate the head count index (or FGT(0)), the poverty gap index (or FGT(1)),
and the squared poverty gap index (or FGT(2)). For example,

. FGT y, line(1000) fgt0 fgt1 fgt2
. FGT y, vline(varname) fgt0 fgt1 fgt2


will calculate the headcount ratio, the poverty gap ratio, and squared poverty gap index using a
poverty line 1000 on welfare indicator y. Instead of typing all three measures you can specify
all option. However if only one measure is needed, you can specify just corresponding option.
line(#)sets the poverty line. However if poverty line varies among observations you can use
vline(varname) where varname contains poverty line for each observation. If neither
option for poverty line is provided, the poverty line is assumed to be the value of half the median
of welfare indicator y.
Sen.ado and SST.ado calculate the Sen index and SST index respectively. The syntax follows
the same format:

. Sen y, line(1000)
. SST y, line(1000)


You can specify conditions, range and weights with these commands. For example, the
following command calculates headcount ratio for Dhaka region based on a poverty line of 3000.

. FGT pcexp [aw=weighti] if region==1, line(3000) fgt0


Now we are ready to turn to the measurement of poverty using the data from the BHES 1991/2.
   1. Compute the five main measures of poverty (headcount, poverty gap, squared poverty
   gap, Sen index and Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index) for per capital expenditure, using both the
   food poverty line and the total poverty line derived by the cost of basic needs method in the
   previous exercise.
                                 Food poverty line    Total poverty line
          i. Headcount index:             ________             ________
         ii. Poverty gap index:           ________             ________
       iii. Squared poverty gap index:    ________             ________
        iv. Sen index:                    ________             ________
         v. Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index      ________             ________
   2. Compute the headcount index and poverty gap index for specific subgroups using the
   food poverty line.


                                                   138
                                   Headcount index         Poverty gap index
         i. Dhaka region:                      ________              ________
        ii. Other three regions:               ________              ________
       iii. Households headed by men:           ________             ________
       iv. Households headed by women: ________                      ________
        v. Large households (>5):              ________              ________
       vi. Small households (<=5):              ________             ________
   3. Repeat the above exercise using the total poverty line.
                                         Headcount index           Poverty gap index
          i.   Dhaka region:             ________                     ________
         ii.   Other three regions:      ________                     ________
        iii.   Households headed by men: ________                     ________
        iv.    Households headed by women: ________                   ________
         v.    Large households (>5):    ________                     ________
        vi.    Small households (<=5):    ________                    ________

3.3 Appendix
       Description----Poverty measure programs: FGT.ado, Sen.ado, and SST.ado

       The general syntax is:

       program varname [weight] [if exp] [in range] [, options]

       where program is one of FGT, Sen and SST. FGT computes the three most common
poverty measures (headcount ratio, poverty gap ratio, squared poverty gap ratio) based on the
(income) distribution described by varname and their standard errors while Sen and SST
compute the Sen index and the Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index, respectively.

       aweight and fweight are allowed.

        The poverty line is either specified by a value using Line(#), or specified by a variable
using vline(varname). User can select any positive value in the first option. The second
option should be used when there are multiple poverty lines and one variable with a name
“varname” contains poverty line values for each observation. If neither option is provided, the
default poverty line is then directly computed as half the median of welfare indicator.

       Options only for FGT:

       All requests that all three measures are computed and reported. By default, no measure
is produced if nothing is specified. The following options specify the measures to be computed
and reported:
               fgt0: headcount ratio [FGT(0)]
               fgt1: poverty gap ratio [FGT(1)]
               fgt2: poverty gap ratio [FGT(2)]


                                                  139
       When sd option is specified, the standard errors of specified measure will be calculated
and reported next to the measure.

       The results will saved in the following global macros:

         S_1 = total number of observations in the data
         S_2 = number of observations used to compute the indices
         S_3 = weighted number of observations
         S_4 = value of the poverty line if a single value poverty line is used
         S_5 = weighted number of observations identified as poor
         S_6 = headcount ratio in FGT, or Sen index in Sen, or Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index
                       in SST
         S_7 = poverty gap ratio [FGT(1)]
         S_8 = squared poverty gap ratio [FGT(2)]

        Note: FGT.ado file is based on poverty.ado written by Philippe VAN KERM and
the standard error calculation follows Deaton (1997)




                                                  140
Exercise 4 (Chapter Five):
        The robustness of poverty measures is very important because if poverty measures are not as
accurate as we wish they could be then many conclusions that we draw from poverty comparisons
between groups and over time may not be right.

4.1 Sampling Error
        For example, the fact that poverty calculations are based on a sample of households rather than
the population implies that calculated measures carry a margin of error. When the standard errors of
poverty measures are large, small changes in poverty may well be statistically insignificant and should not
be interpreted for policy purpose.

        FGT can also compute the standard errors of its poverty measures if option sd is
specified:

. FGT y, Line(1000) fgt0 fgt1 sd

Now let’s re-compute the headcount index and poverty gap index for Dhaka region and other
three regions using the total poverty line, and compute the standard errors of the two measures as
well. Does the factor of standard errors change any conclusion of poverty comparison between
Dhaka region and other regions?

                                         Headcount index         Poverty gap index
    a) Dhaka region:                     ________                   ________
          (Standard Errors)               ________                  ________
    b) Other three regions:               ________                  ________
          (Standard Errors)              ________                   ________

4.2 Measurement Error
Another reason that we need to be very careful in poverty comparison is because data collected
are measured incorrectly. This could be due to recall error on the part of respondents while
answering survey questions, or because of enumerator error when the data were entered into
specific formats. Let us simulate measurement error in per capita expenditure, and then
investigate what the effect of this error is on basic poverty measures.

. sum pcexp [aw=weighti]
. gen mu = r(sd)*invnorm(uniform())/10
. gen pcexp_n1 = pcexp + mu

So this measure error is assumed to be a normal random variable with a standard error as big as a
tenth of the standard error of observed per capita expenditure. Let us assume that the
measurement error “mu” is additive to observed per capita expenditure. Note that this error by
design is independent of observed per capita expenditure and of any other household or
community characteristics.


                                                       141
Now re-compute the headcount ratio and poverty gap ratio using this new per capita expenditure.
Then copy the values of those two measures using observed per capita expenditure from Exercise
3.
                                           pcexp             pcexp_n1
   i.     Headcount index:            ________               ________
  ii.     Poverty gap index:                  ________               ________

Are those measures different? Now let’s brainstorm the following situation. If the measurement
error is correlated with household characteristic, for example, subsistence farmers usually
underreport their consumption of own production, then is the measurement error problem going
to be more severe? ____________________________

____________________________________________________________________

4.3 Sensitivity Analysis
Apart from taking standard errors into account, it is also important to test the sensitivity of
poverty measures for alternative definitions of consumption aggregates and alternative ways of
setting the poverty line. For example, some non-food items are excluded from the expenditure
aggregate on the basis that those items are irregular and do not reflect a household’s command
over resources on average. Also a 30% allowance for non-food expenditure is quite ad hoc.

   1) Create a new total expenditure which includes the previously excluded irregular non-food
   expenditure (expnfd2) and re-compute the three FGT poverty measures on per capita
   expenditure and compare the results with those of original definition.

                                                   pcexp          pcexp_n2

         i.   the headcount index:              ________          _______
        ii.   the poverty gap index:            ________          ________

   2) the non-food allowance can be estimated from data. Two methods have been considered.
   The first is to find the average non-food expenditure for households whose total expenditure
   is equal to the food poverty line. The non-food expenditure for this group of households must
   be necessities since the households are giving up part of minimum food consumption in order
   to buy non-food items. The second is to find the non-food expenditure for households whose
   food expenditure is equal to food poverty line. Since the second is more generous than the
   first, the two are usually referred as the “lower” and the “upper” allowances and the poverty
   lines constructed using them are called “lower” and “upper” poverty lines, respectively.

   .   sum   pcnfood    [aw=weighti]                   if    pcfood<foodline*1.1              &
      pcfood>foodline*.9
   . gen line_u = foodline + r(mean)
   .    sum   pcnfood    [aw=weighti]                  if      pcexp<foodline*1.1             &
      pcexp>foodline*.9


                                                 142
   . gen line_l = foodline + r(mean)

   Now let’s compare the results using these two poverty lines:

                     Poverty line           30%           lower          upper

         i.   the headcount index:      ________         ________        ________
        ii.   the poverty gap index:    ________         ________        ________

   Are those measures different? Can you explain why they are different? ___________



   3) Challenge: compare poverty measures when using per adult equivalence scale
   expenditure (paeexp), with those of using per capita expenditure. ________________

   ________________________________________________________________

4.4 Stochastic Dominance
An ultimate tool of testing the robustness of poverty comparison is stochastic dominance test.
The first-order stochastic dominance test compares the cumulative distribution functions of per
capita expenditure. Let’s compare the cumulative distributions between Dhaka region and other
three regions. First, generate the cumulative distribution function of Dhaka region:

. keep if region == 1
. sort pcexp
       . gen cump1 = sum(weighti)
       . replace cump1 = cump1/cump1[_N]
       . keep cump1 pcexp
       . save temp, replace


Then, similarly generate the cumulative distribution cump2 for the other three regions. Keep
cump2 and pcexp, and append with the “temp” by:

. append using temp
. label variable cump1 “Dhaka”
. label variable cump2 “other regions”
. graph cump1 cump2 pcexp xla() ylab(0,.2,.4,.6,.8,1)




                                                  143
Does one distribution dominate another? If the two lines cross at least once, then we may need to
test for the second-order stochastic dominance. The poverty “deficit” curve is just the integral of
the cumulative distribution up to every per capita expenditure value. After creating cump1,

. gen intcump1 = sum(cump1)
. keep intcump1 pcexp
     . save temp, replace

Create intcump2 for the other three regions. After combining variables and labeling them
properly,

. graph intcump1 intcump2 pcexp xla() ylab()

Does one distribution dominate another here?

4.5 Challenge: Bootstrapping standard error for SST index
        The bootstrapping technique can be applied in calculating of standard errors of poverty
measures, especially those whose standard errors are impossible to solve analytically. The idea is
quite simple. Repeat the calculation of the poverty measure a large number of times and each
time use a new random sample drawn from the original one with replacement. For this purpose,
you need to learn to use macros and loops in STATA. The following code is an example:

       local i = 1
       while `i’<=100 {
            use " c:\intropov\data\final.dta ", clear;
            keep pcexp weighti cbnpline
            bsample _N
          SST pcexp [aw=weighti], vline(cbnpline)

               drop _all
               set obs 1
               gen sst = $S_1
               if `i’ ==1 {
                    save temp, replace
                  }
               else {
                    append using temp
                    save temp, replace
                }

         local i = i + 1
       }



                                                   144
sum sst

The above code is to repeat calculation of SST index 100 times.




                                          145
       Exercise 5 (Chapter Six):

   5.1 Lorenz Curve
        The Lorenz curve can give a clear graphic interpretation of the Gini coefficient. Let’s
make the Lorenz curve of per capita expenditure distribution of rural Bangladesh. First, we need
to calculate the cumulative shares of per capita expenditure and population:

. sort pcexp
       . gen cumy = sum(pcexp*weight)
       . gen cump = sum(weight)
       . qui replace cumy = cumy/cumy[_N]
       . qui replace cump = cump/cump[_N]

       Second, we need to plot the cumulative share of expenditure against the cumulative share
of population. We may also want to add a 45° line so that we can present the perfect equality
case.

. sort pcexp
     .    graph   cumy   cump  cump,                    c(ll)       s(..)      xlabel
(0,.2,.4,6,.8,1)
       ylabel(0,.2,.4,.6,.8,1) border

Now repeat this exercise for Dhaka region and compare its Lorenz curve with the Lorenz curve
for the whole rural area. What conclusion can you draw? _____________________

____________________________________________________________________

   5.2 Inequality Measures for Rural Bangladesh
Three programs are provided to compute the Gini coefficient, generalized entropy family and
Atkinson family of inequality measures, respectively. As in Exercise 3, you can use these
programs just like other STATA commands. The syntax is:


. gini y [if…] [in…] [weight]
. GE y [if…] [in…] [weight], alpha(#)
. Atkinson [if…] [in…] [weight], averse(#)


      Alpha(#) and Averse(#) set the parameter values for the generalized entropy
measure and Atkinson measure, respectively. Details see the appendix.


                                                 146
Let’s continue using the per capita total expenditure to calculate inequality measures:
   i. Compute the Gini coefficient, the Theil index and the Atkinson index with inequality
   aversion parameter equal to 1 for the four regions.
                                           Gini           Theil        Atkinson
       All regions                       ________      ________       ________
       Dhaka region:                     ________      ________       ________
       Other three regions:              ________      ________       ________
   ii. Now repeat the above exercise using two decile dispersion ratios and the share of
   consumption of poorest 25%. STATA command xtile is good for dividing the sample by
   ranking. For example, to calculate the consumption expenditure ratio between richest 20%
   and poorest 20%, you need to identify those two groups.

. xtile group = y, nq(5)


   xtile will generate a new variable group which splits the sample into 5 groups
   according to the ranking of y (from smallest to largest, i.e., the poorest 20% will have
   group==1, while the richest 20% will have group==5). Similarly, to identify the poorest
   25%, you need to split the sample into 4 groups.


                                                   top 20 %          top 10%        Percentage of
                                                                                   consumption of
                                                 bottom 20%        bottom 10%       poorest 25%


        whole                           ________    ________     ________
        for Dhaka region:               ________    ________     ________
        for other three regions:        ________    ________     ________
   iii.     Challenge: many inequality indexes can be decomposed by subgroups. Try to
   decompose Theil index by region. _______________________________________
   ________________________________________________________________

       Appendix
Description: inequality measure programs: gini.ado, GE.ado, Atkinson.ado

       The general syntax is as the above one except where program is one of gini, GE and
Atkinson. gini computes the most commonly used inequality measure—gini coefficient,
while GE and Atkinson compute the Generalized Entropy family and the Atkinson family of
inequality measures, respectively.



                                                   147
       aweight and fweight are allowed.

       Option for GE:

        Alpha(#)sets the parameter value which determines the sensitivity of the inequality
measure to changes of the distribution. The measure is sensitive to changes at the lower end of
the distribution with a parameter value close to zero, equally sensitive to changes across the
distribution for the parameter equal to one (which is the Theil index), and sensitive to changes at
the higher end of the distribution for higher values.

       Option for Atkinson:

       Averse(#)sets the parameter value which measures aversion to inequality.

       The result will saved in the following global macro:

          S_1 = the inequality measure

       Note: gini.ado file is based on Deaton (1997)




                                                   148
         Exercise 6 (Chapter Seven):
In the previous exercises, we have computed poverty measures for various subgroups, such as
regions, head gender, household size, etc. Another way is to present poverty profile by
comparing characteristics of “poor” and “non-poor”.

   6.1      Characteristics of the poor
         “poor” and “non-poor” are defined by cbnp in Exercise 2.
                                             poor non-poor
            % Households                      ______    ______
            % Population                      ______    ______
            Average distance to paved road ______       ______
            Average distance to nearest bank ______     ______
            % Household has electricity       ______    ______
            % Household has sanitary toilet ______      ______
            Average household assets          ______    ______
            Average household land holding ______       ______
            Average household size            ______    ______
            % Household headed by men         ______    ______
            % Household headed by women ______          ______
            Average schooling of head         ______    ______
            Average age of head               ______    ______
            Average household total working
            Hours worked on non-farm          ______    ______

   6.2      More Poverty Comparison across subgroups
       Calculate headcount and poverty gap index using cbnpline for the following
subgroups:
                                           Headcount index Poverty gap index
       c)     Head with no education:            ________            ________
       d)     Head with primary education        ________            ________
       e)     Head with secondary or higher
                     education                   ________            ________
       f)     Large land ownership (>0.5/person) ________            ________
       g)     Small land ownership or landless   ________            ________
       h)     Large asset ownership (>50000)     ________            ________
       i)     Small asset ownership (<=50000)    ________            ________


                                                  149
Combined with the poverty measures computed in Exercise Three, describe the most significant
poverty patterns in Bangladesh?




                                               150
       Exercise 7 (Chapter Eight):
Develop and estimate a model that explains log(pcexp/cbnpline) using available data.
The regressors may include demographic characteristics such as gender of head and family
structure; access to public services such as distance to a paved road; household members’
employment such as working hours on farm and off farm; human capital such as average
education of working members; asset positions such as land holding; etc. You need to identify
potentially relevant variables and the direction of their effect. Then put all those variables
together, and run the regression. Report the result and discuss whether it matches your
hypothesis. If not, give possible reasons.

. gen y = log(pcexp/cbnpline)
. reg     y age age2 workhour x1-x3 [aw=weighti]

where x1-x3 are other explanatory variables that you want to include.

       Note that if you want to include categorical variables, you need to convert them into
dummy variables if the ranking of categorical values do not have any meaning. For example, you
need to generate three (NOT four) dummy variables from region:

. gen dhaka = 0
. replace Dhaka = 1 if region==1

        After the regression, you can plot the residuals against the fitted values to see whether it
is a good fit.

. predict yhat, xb
. predict e, residuals
. graph e yhat




                                                   151
       References

Alderman, Harold, Miriam Babita, Jean Lanjouw, Peter Lanjouw, Nthabiseng Makhatha, Amina
Mohamed, Berk Özler, and Olivia Qaba. 2000. Is Census Income an Adequate Measure of
Welfare? Combining Census and Survey Data to Construct a Poverty Map of South Africa.
Statistics South Africa Working Paper. Forthcoming.

Atkinson, Anthony B. 1987. ‘’On the Measurement of Poverty”, Econometrica. Vol. 55. pp.749-
64.

Bidani, Benu, and Martin Ravallion. 1992. “Constructing a Consistent Poverty Profile”. Mimeo.
Poverty Analysis and Policy Division. World Bank, Washington DC.

Clark, S., R. Hemming and D. Ulph. 1981. “On Indices for the Measurement of Poverty”.
Economic Journal. Vol. 91. pp. 515-526.

Dalaker, Joseph and Mary Naifeh. 1998. Poverty in the United States: 1997, U.S. Department
of Commerce, Washington DC.

Dalton, Hugh. 1920. Some aspects of the inequality of incomes in modern communities. London,
G. Routledge; New York, E.P. Dutton.

Deaton, Angus. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to
Development Policy, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

Duong, Nguyen Binh and Dinh Hien Trinh. 1999. “Identification of Poverty in Vietnam,” in
Dominique and Jonathan Haughton et al. (eds.), Health and Wealth in Vietnam: An Analysis of
Household Living Standards, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies Press, Singapore.

Elbers, Chris, Jean Lanjouw, Peter Lanjouw. 2000. Welfare in Towns and Villages. Micro-Level
Estimation of Poverty and Inequality. Tinbergen Institute Working Paper. Forthcoming.

Ferreira, M. L. 1996. “Poverty and Inequality during Structural Adjustment in Rural Tanzania”.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 1641, Washington D.C.

Gibson, Jonathan. 1999. A Poverty Profile of Cambodia, 1999. Department of Economics,
University of Waikato, New Zealand.

Grosh, Margaret and Juan Munoz. 1996. "A Manual for Planning and Implementing the Living
Standards Measurement Study Survey." LSMS Working Paper 126, The World Bank,
Washington D.C.

Haughton, Jonathan. 2001. The Impact of the East Asian Crisis: Poverty Analysis Using Panel
Data. Lecture notes prepared for the World Bank. Suffolk University and Beacon Hill Institute,
Boston, MA


                                                152
Hentschel, Jesko, Jean Lanjouw, Peter Lanjouw and Javier Poggi. 2000. “Combining Survey
Data with Census Data to Construct Spatially Disaggregated Poverty Maps: A Case Study of
Ecuador,” World Bank Economic Review, Volume 14 No. 1.

Huppi, Monika and Martin Ravallion. 1991. “The Sectoral Structure of Poverty During an
Adjustment Period. Evidence for Indonesia in the Mid-1980s”. World Development.

Knowles, James. 1998. Estimation of Updated Poverty Rates for Cambodia – 1997 Technical
Report. The World Bank.

Morduch, Jonathan. 1998. “Politics, growth, and inequality in rural China: does it pay to join the
party?”. Boston: Harvard Institute for Economic Research.

Newbery, David M.G. 1995. Tax and benefit reform in Central and Eastern Europe. London:
Center for Economic Policy Research.

Newbery, David, and Nicholas H. Stern, (eds.). 1987. The Theory of Taxation for Developing
Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Osberg, Lars and Kuan Xu. 1999. Poverty Intensity: How Well Do Canadian Provinces
Compare?” Canadian Public Policy (XXV:2).

Pradhan, Menno Asep Suryahadi, Sudarno Sumarto and Lant Pritchett. 2000. Measurements of
Poverty in Indonesia: 1996, 1999 and Beyond, SMERU, Jakarta, June.

Prescott, Nicholas and Menno Pradhan. 1997. A Poverty Profile for Cambodia, World Bank,
Washington DC.

Ravallion, Martin. 1988. “Expected Poverty under Risk-Induced Welfare Variability”. The
Economic Journal. Vol 98. pp. 1171-1182.

Ravallion, Martin and Benu Bidani. 1994. “How Robust Is a Poverty Profile?”, The World Bank
Economic Review, 8(1): 75-102.

Ravallion, Martin. 1996. “How well can method substitute for data? Five experiments in poverty
analysis,” The World Bank Research Observer, 11(2), 199-221, August.

Ravallion, Martin. 1998. Poverty Lines in Theory and Practice, Living Standards Measurement
Study Working Paper No. 133, World Bank.

Ravallion, Martin. 1999. Poverty Comparisons. World Bank document.

Sen, Amartya. 1976. “Poverty: An Ordinal Approach to Measurement” Econometrica, Vol. 46.
pp.437-446.




                                                  153
Sen, Amartya. 1983. “Social theory, social understanding, and political action” In Social Theory
and Political Practice. Edited by Christopher Lloyd. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York::
Oxford University Press.

Watts, Harold W. 1968. The measurement of poverty – an exploratory exercise. University of
Wisconsin.; Institute for Research on Poverty.; Discussion papers; 12-68.

World Bank. 1999. Vietnam: Attacking Poverty, Hanoi. Various questionnaires related to the
Vietnam Living Standards Surveys.

World Bank. 2000. World Development Report 2000-2001. Washington DC.




                                                 154
