                                                                        90305


THE OPPORTUNITIES
OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
How digitization of payments, transfers, and remittances contributes
to the G20 goals of broad-based economic growth, ﬁnancial inclusion,
and women’s economic empowerment


A report by the World Bank Development Research Group, the Better Than Cash
Alliance, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to the G20 Global Partnership for
Financial Inclusion.


Prepared for the G20 Australian Presidency
August 28, 2014
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
and Development/The World Bank
                                                    This report was prepared by Leora Klapper
1818 H Street NW Washington, DC 20433
                                                    and Dorothe Singer of the Finance and Private
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org                         Sector Development Team of the Development
This work is a product of the staff of the World
                                                    Research Group of the World Bank.
Bank with external contributions. The findings,
                                                    Inputs and guidance were received from Sheila
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this work do not necessarily reflect the views of   Miller of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation,
the World Bank, its board of executive directors,   Ruth Goodwin-Groen of the Better Than Cash
or the governments they represent.                  Alliance (hosted by UNCDF), Mary Ellen Isk-
The World Bank does not guarantee the ac-           enderian of Women’s World Banking, World
curacy of the data included in this work. The       Bank Group experts, as well as the members
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
                                                    and implementing partners of the G20 Global
information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of the        Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI),
World Bank concerning the legal status of any       including the Alliance for Financial Inclu-
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of       sion (AFI), the Consultative Group to Assist
such boundaries.
                                                    the Poor (CGAP), the International Fund for
Rights and Permissions                              Agricultural Development (IFAD), and the
The material in this work is subject to copy-       Organization for Economic Co-operation and
right. Because the World Bank encourages            Development (OECD).
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may
be reproduced, in whole or in part, for non-
commercial purposes as long as full attribution
to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including
subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the:

Office of the Publisher
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW Washington, DC 20433, US
fax: 202-522-2422
email: pubrights@worldbank.org
THE OPPORTUNITIES
OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS

KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR GOVERNMENTS 	                                        ii	

INTRODUCTION	1

I. THE BENEFITS OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS	                     3

II. THE CHALLENGES OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS	                  10

III. PROMOTING DIGITIZATION	                             13

CONCLUSION	17



FOCUS TOPICS

	   THE INCREASING IMPORTANCE OF REMITTANCES	            23	

	   EXPANDING ACCESS TO DIGITAL PAYMENTS IN RURAL AREAS	 24	

	   FOUR PRINCIPLES FOR PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGEMENT	       25
                                The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the Better Than Cash Alliance
      THE OPPORTUNITIES
ii    OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS    KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GOVERNMENTS

     Digitizing payments and remittances is vital to achieving G20 goals. The G20’s focus on
                                financial inclusion directly contributes to its core goal of achieving strong,
                                sustainable, and balanced growth. Studies show that broader access to and
                                participation in the financial system can reduce income inequality, boost job
                                creation, accelerate consumption, increase investments in human capital, and
                                directly help poor people manage risk and absorb financial shocks.

                                Strong action on financial inclusion by G20 countries and other key stakeholders will
                                contribute significantly to key G20 policy objectives by:
                                     • 	 Spurring broader and stronger economic growth, by deepening financial
                                         intermediation and increasing efficiency of and access to payment, savings,
                                         insurance, and credit services.
                                     • 	 Increasing life opportunities and economic benefits for migrant and
                                         diaspora communities, by enabling a sharp reduction of costs and increased
                                         transparency of remittances.
                                     • 	 Increasing women’s economic participation, by facilitating greater control
                                         over finances, household incomes, and budget decisions.
                                Rapid development and extension of digital platforms and digital payments can pro-
                                vide the speed, security, transparency, and cost efficiency needed to increase financial
                                inclusion at the scale required to achieve G20 goals.
                                In 2010, the G20 endorsed Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion to provide
                                guidance for policy and regulatory approaches (G20, 2010). This paper builds on that
                                guidance, synthesizing the evidence that the widespread adoption of digital payments
                                in all their forms, including international and domestic remittances, can be instrumental
                                in reaching the goals of the G20:
                                     • 	 Digitizing helps overcome the costs and physical barriers that have beset
                                         otherwise valuable financial inclusion efforts.
                                     • 	 Digital platforms offer the opportunity to rapidly scale up access to
                                         financial services using mobile phones, retail point of sales, and other
                                         broadly available access points, when supported by an appropriate financial
                                         consumer protection framework.
                                     • 	 Digital payments can promote women’s economic empowerment by
                                         facilitating greater account ownership and asset accumulation and
                                         increasing women’s economic participation. Digital payments, particularly
                                         by governments and employers, enable the confidentiality and convenience
                                         women require in financial services. Payments provided via an account
                                         can provide the on-ramp to financial inclusion and in many cases the first
                                         account that a woman has in her own name and under her control. Opening
                                         an account can be an important first step for introduction to the formal
                                         economy for an entrepreneur and can lead to formalization of her small
                                         business.
        THE OPPORTUNITIES
                                            KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GOVERNMENTS
iii     OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS


                                            While the opportunities abound, so do the challenges. There are real and complex
                                            barriers for governments to address through vision and leadership. Governments must
                                            address regulatory concerns, work with the private sector to develop infrastructure that
                                            can reach rural areas, and ensure interoperability and competition among providers
                                            and financial capability among their citizens. There is also a real and growing momen-
                                            tum on the part of governments, the private sector, multilateral development banks,
                                            and development partners in this direction, but with 2.5 billion people still outside the
                                            formal financial system, there is an urgent need for these issues to be more prominent
                                            in the agenda of governments.
                                            In the short term, we call on governments, when they meet in November 2014 at the
                                            G20 Brisbane Summit, to discuss how they can embrace a broad-based digital financial
                                            system as a path to growth, greater participation of women in the economy, and greater
                                            access to payments, including remittances.
      We encourage Turkey to carry forward the good work that Australia has begun within the Global Partnership on Finan-
                                         cial Inclusion (GPFI) on these issues, particularly with their work on remittances,
                                         markets, and payments. By the end of the 2015 G20 Summit hosted by Turkey,
                                         we call on governments to make progress and report back on the following steps:

      1.	 Digitize payments and receipts,   Digitizing has the potential to dramatically reduce costs, increase efficiency and trans-
          including social transfers.       parency, help build the infrastructure, and broaden familiarity with digital payments.
                                            When governments shift their social, salary, and procurement payments and taxation
                                            and licensing receipts to electronic form, it creates a foundation upon which the private
                                            sector and person-to-person payments, such as international and domestic remittances,
                                            can build.

      2. Engage actively                    Some regulators are still hesitant to embrace the digital financial revolution that is emerg-
         on the regulatory agenda.          ing, and have reasonable concerns that need to be specifically addressed. Governments
                                            need to encourage regulators to enable digital financial services in order to achieve G20
                                            goals. Specifically, regulation should:
                                                 • Foster competition by enabling a broad range of providers to introduce new
                                                    vectors of financial services.
                                                 • Ensure that consumer protection and risk-based prudential and integrity
                                                    requirements are met.
                                                 • Address the cost of entry and encourage business model innovation for
                                                    e-money issuers, retail agents, and account opening processes.
                                                 • Encourage new business models to address the critical concerns that
                                                    confront regulators, including anti-money laundering and counter financing
                                                    of terrorism (AML/CFT). The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has
                                                    issued guidelines that address these concerns, and many countries are
                                                    successfully implementing the guidelines. Brazil’s approach, with mobile
                                                    payments regulations that allow nonbanks to offer payments and savings
                                                    and to directly access the central bank’s clearing and settlement system,
                                                    is paving the way for a number of new commercial partnerships to go to
                                                    market. Mexico’s approach of tiered know-your-customer regulations is
                                                    providing more flexibility for private-sector providers who participate in the
                                                    distribution of government payments, and enabling the development of new
                                                    product design.


      The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
      and the Better Than Cash Alliance
       THE OPPORTUNITIES
iv                                            KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GOVERNMENTS
       OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS


     3.	 Convene public and private           Public and private sectors can converge around a payments platform, and enable in-
         sectors to create a basic            novation and competition in additional financial services. A safe, reliable, secure, and
         payment infrastructure to enable     affordable platform, open and shared among market participants, will act as the catalyst
         competing product development.       of financial inclusion and will foster adoption of basic financial services at a large scale.

     4.	 Create an environment                The private sector is a critical partner in this endeavor, and there is a real opportunity
         that fosters private sector          to catalyze private-sector growth. Yet governments need to offer a clear vision and
         innovation.                          tangible incentives in order to ensure that the private sector is an effective, competitive,
                                              transparent, and efficient partner. Part of this requires that a level playing field be set up,
                                              whereby governments do not create disproportionate hurdles for a broad and growing
                                              range of providers to participate in the global financial system. Limiting innovation and
                                              competition will ultimately lead to noncompetitive solutions in the market and reduce
                                              the availability of reliable, safe, and secure financial systems. Empowering a diverse range
                                              of private-sector providers will increase competition, reduce costs, empower consumers,
                                              increase the scale needed for sustainability, and drive financial inclusion.

     5.	 Guide digital financial service      Recipients should understand, for example, how the cash- transfer program works, the
         providers to educate consumers       importance of PIN numbers, what to do if something goes wrong, and how they can
         and small businesses about their     save some or all of the payment rather than withdrawing all of it upon receipt. Without
         options to increase confidence,      this, there is a risk that recipients could lose trust in the system, and financial inclusion
         competence, and adoption.            objectives would not be achieved. Evidence indicates that consumers and small busi-
                                              nesses rapidly learn how to be competent and comfortable in using these systems when
                                              they are appropriately designed, convenient, and efficient.

     6.	 Recognize that remittance            This means family members who are sending international and domestic remittances
         providers offer a digital entry      can send more money home. Instead of remittances being cashed out, remittances
         point to formal financial services   sent to a bank account, e-wallet, or smart card, for example, can go into accounts that
         for senders and receivers.           support safe saving and also increase transparency and traceability.

     7.	 Look to multilateral development     Governments may need technical assistance and resources as they undertake this
         banks and comparable agencies        agenda. It is particularly important that development banks pay focused attention to
         as sources of comparative            the role of women in the economy and develop special advice on the economic resource
         expertise in this emerging field.    presented by women.




                                              There is now a great opportunity for the G20 collectively to develop robust, specific
                                              initiatives under each of these action headings. Only governments have the author-
                                              ity to be prime movers on much of this agenda, especially with respect to regulatory
                                              reform, driving electronic payments via payroll and social benefit disbursements, but
                                              in partnership with the private sector.




     The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
     and the Better Than Cash Alliance
        THE OPPORTUNITIES
1       OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS                                 INTRODUCTION
                                                               Financial inclusion is broadly defined as both access to and usage of appropriate, af-
                                                               fordable, and accessible financial services. Comparative global data finds that the use
                                                               of a deposit account at a bank or other formally regulated financial institution varies
                                                               widely across regions, economies, and individual characteristics. Worldwide, 50 percent
                                                               of adults report having an individual or joint account at a formal financial institution,
                                                               according to data from the Global Findex database (Demirgüç-Kunt and Klapper, 2012).
                                                               But current statistics on the high rate of financial exclusion, particularly in developing
                                                               countries and among women, illustrate key challenges for policymakers to address:
                                                                    • Globally, more than 2.5 billion adults do not have a formal account.
                                                                    • Only about one out of every five adults living on less than $2 (U.S.) per day
                                                                       has a formal account—that means nearly 80 percent of poor adults are
                                                                       excluded from the formal sector.
                                                                    • While accounts are nearly universal in high-income economies, with 89
                                                                      percent of adults reporting that they have an account at a formal financial
                                                                      institution, less than half that number of adults in developing economies is
                                                                      banked: only 41 percent.
                                                                    • For women in developing countries, the situation is worse: Only 37 percent
    Adults with an account at a formal                                 have formal accounts, compared to 46 percent of men.
    financial institution (%)
             0–15
             16–30
             31–50
             51–80
             81+
             NO DATA




    Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and L. Klapper, 2013.

    IBRD 39220 MARCH 2012
    This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of the
    World Bank. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
    any other information shown on this map do not imply, on
    the part of the World Bank Group, any judgment on the
    legal status of any territory, or any endorsement or
    acceptance of such boundaries.




                                                               Without access to the formal financial system, women, poor people, small businesses,
                                                               and otherwise excluded people must rely on their own (extremely limited) informal
                                                               and semiformal savings and borrowing to finance educational and entrepreneurial
                                                               investments, thus making it harder to alleviate income inequality and spur broad-based
                                                               economic growth. However, those who are excluded from the formal financial system
                                                               are likely to be recipients of payments1—not just wages and government-sponsored
                                                               social transfers, but also, increasingly, remittances from family members who have left
                                                               home in search of economic opportunity either elsewhere in the country or abroad.
    THE OPPORTUNITIES
2   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                             INTRODUCTION


                             Indeed, Global Findex data also highlights the important role that deposit accounts can
                             play in the financial lives of adults in low-income countries when they do indeed have
                             accounts, especially with regard to the receipt of formal payments, such as wages,
                             government transfers, or remittances. While only 24 percent of adults in low-income
                             countries have an account, less than 40 percent of account holders in those countries
                             use their accounts for such payments.
                             Meanwhile, innovations in the payment sector have led to the emergence of electronic
                             payment service providers able to facilitate formal payments even in the absence of
                             accounts, such as over-the-counter (OTC) payments, mobile money payments, and
                             payment cards.
                             Improving access to financial services has progressed steadily on the G20 agenda
                             since leaders first committed to the effort at the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009 and then
                             endorsed the nine Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion at the Toronto Summit
                             in 2010. At the Seoul Summit, also in 2010, leaders established the Global Partnership
                             for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) to carry forward work on financial inclusion, including
                             implementation of the G20 Financial Inclusion Action Plan. 2
                             In this paper, we review the body of research that has emerged on digital payments—
                             defined as payment alternatives to cash— including domestic and international
                             remittances, and then suggest steps that all stakeholders—governments, the private
                             sector, and the international development community—can take to hasten the spread
                             of digital payments.
                             In the first section, we review the benefits of digital payments for governments, recipi-
                             ents, and providers. Not only do digital remittances lower costs for the senders and
                             recipients of payments, but they also increase access to the banking system, the privacy
                             and transparency that they afford, and security throughout the system. This has the
                             added advantage of giving a significant boost to women’s economic empowerment.
                             In the next section, we explore the challenges that face countries around the world
                             as they look to increase the use of digital remittances. For example, to put in place a
                             robust system of digital payments requires significant physical infrastructure— not just
                             mobile telecommunications, but also accessible cash- out points. Also, the literature
                             shows that one cannot ignore the human element: New users of digital payments need
                             to be educated about how to use them, the other banking options they open up, and
                             how the overall system works, as well as why it should be trusted.
                             The third section offers suggestions for governments and the private sector on how
                             they can facilitate the spread of digital payments within their countries and globally.
                             Governments can lead by example, both by using digital payments themselves and by
                             creating a regulatory environment conducive to digital innovation. The private sector
                             can continue to innovate, invest in infrastructure, leverage public-private partnerships,
                             and create and maintain convenient, reliable, and secure networks. And the international
                             development community can act as both a resource of expertise and a facilitator of
                             digital payment expansion, where appropriate.
                             Ultimately, overcoming the challenges of moving toward digitized payments will help
                             accomplish goals at the heart of the G20 countries’ efforts to encourage inclusive
                             economic growth around the world.
        THE  OPPORTUNITIES
3       THE
        OF
            OPPORTUNITIES
        OFDIGITIZING
            DIGITIZING    PAYMENTS
                     PAYMENTS                                      I.
                                                                   KEYTHE    BENEFITS
                                                                       FINDINGS          OF DIGITAL
                                                                                AND RECOMMENDATIONS      PAYMENTS
                                                                                                    FOR GOVERNMENTS


                                                                   A Gallup, Inc. survey of 11 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa found that more than 80
                                                                   percent of adults make bill payments or remittances with cash (Kendall et al., 2014).
                                                                   Given the lack of digital-payment penetration, governments, consumers, and financial
                                                                   providers in Sub-Saharan Africa are still bearing the high cost of cash payments—costs
                                                                   associated with manual acceptance, record keeping, counting, storage, security, and
                                                                   transportation.

    USE OF ACCOUNTS                                                Yet, advancements in technology and electronic-platform- based business models have
    TO RECEIVE PAYMENTS                                            allowed many governments to increase the efficiency and scope of their electronic
    Adults using an account in the past                            payments infrastructure. For example, a 2011 study of 62 developing and high-income
    year to receive payments (%)
                                                                   countries (representing approximately 81 percent of the total world population) found
    MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA                                     that over 77 percent of countries have an e-payments system in place for social se-
         6
                          FROM WORK                                curity contributions by citizens, and around 84 percent of countries researched have
                          OR SELLING GOODS
                                       FROM THE
                                                                   electronic and/or automated systems for vehicle-related payments such as fines and
         3                             GOVERNMENT                  tolls (EIU, 2012).
    SOUTH ASIA
                                                                   Digital payments have many benefits, to both senders and receivers. Moving from cash-
             7
                                                                   based to digital payments has the potential benefits of making payments more efficient
         3                                                         by lowering the cost of disbursing and receiving payments; increasing individuals’ risk
                                                                   management capacity; increasing the privacy of payments; increasing control over
    SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
                                                                   the funds received; increasing the security of payments and reducing the incidence of
                 10
                                                                   crimes associated with them; increasing the transparency of payments, and thus mak-
             6                                                     ing it less likely for there to be leakage between the sender and receiver; increasing the
                                                                   speed of payments; and providing a first entry point into the formal financial system.
    EAST ASIA & PACIFIC
                       17                                          In short, the benefits of digital payments go well beyond convenience; if provided ef-
                                                                   ficiently and effectively, they can transform the financial lives of those who use this
             6
                                                                   technology.
    LATIN AMERICA & CARIBBEAN
                            20
                                                                   BENEFITS FOR GOVERNMENTS WHEN THEY DIGITIZE PAYMENTS
                 10
                                                                   Increased transparency Given the liquidity and transactional anonymity of cash,
    EUROPE & CENTRAL ASIA                                          cash payments are subject to “leakage” (payments that do not reach the recipient in
                                  27                               full) and “ghost” (fake) recipients, particularly in the context of government transfers.
                  11                                               By moving toward digital payments, the traceability of the payment process is improved.
                                                                   First, recipients have digital records of the amount of the payments they are to receive.
    HIGH-INCOME ECONOMIES                                          Second, digital payments generally require more stringent identification documentation,
                                                          50       making it harder for ghost recipients to remain undetected.
                                                  42               Evidence from India shows that making social security pension (SSP) payments digitally
                                                                   via smart cards compared to manual cash payout at the village level by a government
    Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and L. Klapper, 2013. “Measuring Financial
    Inclusion: Explaining Variation in Use of Financial Services   official results in a 1.8 percentage point lower incidence of bribe demands for obtain-
    across and within Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity, 279-340.                                             ing the payment (compared to an incidence of 3.8 percentage points for manual cash
                                                                   payments: a 47 percent reduction) and the incidence of ghost recipients fell by 1.1
                                                                   percentage points (Muralidharan et al., 2014).




    The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
    and the Better Than Cash Alliance
    THE OPPORTUNITIES
4   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                             I. THE BENEFITS OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS


                             Lower costs  Moving from cash payments to digital payments can lead to significant
                             cost savings in the long term. The potential cost savings are especially striking when
                             considering large-scale government-to-public payments, such as social transfers.
                                  • 	 A rigorous evaluation of a social transfer program in Niger has shown that
                                      the variable cost of administering social transfer is 20 percent lower by
                                      mobile transfer than by manual cash distribution (Aker et al., 2013).
                                  •	 In South Africa, the cost of disbursing social grants in 2011 by smart card
                                     was a third that of manual cash disbursement (R13.50 compared to R35.92)
                                     (CGAP, 2011b).
                                  • 	 A study estimates that the Mexican government’s shift to digital payments
                                      (which began in 1997) trimmed its spending on wages, pensions, and social
                                      welfare by 3.3 percent annually, or nearly $1.3 billion (Babatz, 2013).
                                  • 	 A study by the management consulting firm McKinsey & Co. estimates
                                      that automating the delivery of government payments could save the Indian
                                      government approximately $22.4 billion (U.S.) per year resulting from
                                      reduced overhead, transaction costs, and fraud (Lochann et al., 2010).
                                  • 	 In Brazil, the Bolsa Família program reduced its transaction costs from 14.7
                                      percent of total payments to 2.6 percent when it bundled several benefits
                                      onto one electronic payment card (Lindert et al., 2007).


                             BENEFITS FOR RECIPIENTS OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS
                             Lower costs Data for 123 countries show that greater ownership and use of accounts
                             is associated with a better enabling environment for accessing financial services, such
                             as lower account costs and greater proximity to financial intermediaries. The results
                             suggest that digital payments that reduce the cost and increase the convenience of
                             financial transactions may expand the pool of eligible account users and encourage ex-
                             isting account holders to use their accounts with greater frequency and for the purpose
                             of saving (Allen et al., 2012). Recipients of cash payments in rural areas often have to
                             travel a considerable distance to designated locations such as a bank branch, money
                             transfer operator (MTO), counter, or government office, which may only be available
                             in a regional capital, in order to receive a remittance or government transfer or make
                             a bill payment. This results in significant travel time and travel expenses, and is further
                             costly in terms of income forgone while traveling and waiting to collect a payment.
                                  • In Niger, researchers from Tufts University found that administering social
                                     transfers by mobile transfer reduced overall travel and wait time to a quarter
                                     of the time required to collect manual cash transfers. Recipients of mobile
                                     transfers reduced travel time to a cash-out point by 40 minutes compared
                                     to manual cash distribution, which does not include the additional three
                                     hours in wait time involved in the average manual cash transfer. Digital
                                     transfers thus can translate into significant travel cost and time savings,
                                     increasing the time that can be spent instead on productive tasks (Aker et
                                     al., 2013).
                                  • The authors of the study in Niger calculated that, based on average
                                     agricultural wages, the time savings attributable to the digital transfer
                                     channel for each payment translated into an amount large enough to feed a
                                     family of five for a day (Aker et al., 2013).
    THE OPPORTUNITIES
5   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                             I. THE BENEFITS OF DIGITAL PAYMENTSS


                             Increased control Digital payments allow remitters greater control over money
                             sent home. Randomized studies suggest that migrants value and take advantage of op-
                             portunities to exert control over savings in their home country. There is also consistent
                             evidence that migrants have preferences over the extent to which remittance recipients
                             in the home country use remittances, in particular how much of the remittances are
                             saved (McKenzie et al., 2014).
                                  • Researchers found that migrants to the United States were much more likely
                                     to open savings accounts at a partner bank in El Salvador, and accumulated
                                     more savings at the partner bank, if they were offered an account with
                                     the greatest degree of monitoring and control. Migrants desired savings
                                     accounts in their name only, as opposed to accounts in the name of
                                     someone in El Salvador or joint accounts. (Ashraf et al., 2014).
                                  • In a field experiment, over 27 percent of a sample of Filipino migrants in
                                     Rome were interested in a product to directly pay remittances to schools in
                                     the Philippines. In a related lab experiment, the authors find that the “soft”
                                     commitment of simply labeling remittances for education raises remittances
                                     by more than 15 percent (De Arcangelis et al., 2014).
                             Increased incentive to save Only 22 percent of adults worldwide report having
                             saved at a formal financial institution in the past 12 months, and 77 percent of adults
                             living on less than $2 a day report not having an account at a formal financial institu-
                             tion (Demirgüç-Kunt and Klapper, 2012). Digital payments create the opportunity to
                             embed poor people in a system of automatic deposits, scheduled text reminders, and
                             positive default options than can help people overcome psychological barriers to saving.
                             A substantial collection of literature shows that small “nudges” may have a significant
                             impact on forward-looking financial and nonfinancial behaviors in settings as diverse as
                             defined-contribution pension accounts, insurance products, and commitment savings
                             products (Choi et al., 2004; Ashraf et al., 2010; Karlan et al., 2012; Karlan et al., 2014).
                                  • Randomized control trials conducted in Bolivia, Peru, and the Philippines find
                                     that digital text “goal-specific” savings reminders (e.g., for housing, school
                                     fees) increased savings by 16 percent (Karlan et al., 2014).
                                  • 	 Researchers found in Malawi that direct deposit of cash crop receipts into
                                      savings accounts helped boost farmer productivity. The farmers who were
                                      offered this option and chose to participate ended up investing 13 percent
                                      more in farm inputs than those who weren’t offered the option and received
                                      their crop sale proceeds in cash. Participating farmers saw a 21 percent
                                      increase in value of crop output and an 11 percent increase in household
                                      consumption after the harvest (Brune et al., 2013).
                                  • “Undersaving” could result in large part from inertia—if workers are
                                     automatically included in a direct-deposit 401(k) plan unless they opt out,
                                     participation is much higher than if workers must affirmatively sign up for
                                     the plan (Orszag and Orszag, 2005). A study in the United States found
                                     that setting automatic enrollment in 401(k) plans as the default option led
                                     to a 50 percent increase in participation (Madrian and Shea, 2001).
                                  • 	 Research in Kenya found that ATM cards with reduced transaction fees and
                                      more convenient access to cash had a negative effect on women’s use of
                                      accounts; this is largely attributed to the reduced control it afforded them
                                      over the cash (Schaner, 2013). The research suggests that women may
                                      prefer savings accounts with controls (or security features) that make it
                                      more difficult to accede to their spouses’ demands on them and their funds.
    THE OPPORTUNITIES
6   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                             I. THE BENEFITS OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS


                             Increased risk management Digital payments also connect individuals to the
                             broader economy and can strengthen informal insurance networks. Electronic net-
                             works allow families to expand their “community,” and can help households smooth
                             unexpected income shocks by accessing money or support from a community wider
                             than those physically proximate.
                                  • Researchers found that, in Kenya, M-PESA users were able to absorb large
                                     negative income shocks (such as severe illness, job loss, or harvest failure)
                                     without any reduction in household consumption. In contrast, statistically
                                     comparable households who weren’t connected to M-PESA experienced,
                                     on average, a 6-10 percent reduction in consumption in response to similar
                                     shocks. Furthermore, following a shock, households with access to M-PESA
                                     received funds from a larger network of senders, and from senders located
                                     further away. Digital payments thus appear to both facilitate the receipt of
                                     payments as well as strengthen and expand informal insurance networks
                                     among poor households (Jack and Suri, 2013).
                                  • Over a four-year period in Rwanda, researchers studying the quasi random
                                     timing and location of natural disasters found that people send mobile
                                     money to individuals affected by economic shocks. The recipients of shock-
                                     induced transfers also have larger social networks (Blumenstock et al.,
                                     2013).
                                  • A mobile operator and an insurance company in Kenya jointly offer micro-
                                     insurance to farmers to protect them against drought or excessive rains. The
                                     program protects more than 10,000 smallholder farmers in Kenya against
                                     extreme weather conditions. Weather stations automatically send data
                                     on rainfall to the insurance company, triggering payouts via mobile money
                                     payments, when too little or much rainfall is recorded. An estimated 46
                                     percent of their clients are women (Manfre and Nordehn, 2013).
                             Improved speed and timely delivery In contrast to a cash payment that travels
                             at the speed of its carrier, digital payments can be virtually instantaneous, regardless of
                             whether the sender and receiver are in the same town, district, or country. This means
                             that employees are paid on time, which might reduce demand for payday loans and
                             informal loans to meet monthly expenses. Especially in emergency situations that lead
                             to unexpected income shocks such as a health emergency or natural disaster, speed
                             and timely delivery can be of the essence. In digital form, payments—be they remit-
                             tances from abroad or government assistance in times of disaster situations—can be
                             made without delay when the need is greatest.
                             Increased security Recipients of cash payments not only often have to travel
                             considerable distances to receive their payments, but also are particularly vulnerable
                             to street crime once they carry the cash, due to the liquidity and transactional anonym-
                             ity of cash. While security is a concern when traveling with any large amount of cash,
                             this concern is especially salient for regular cash payments, such as social transfer or
                             wage payments, that are received at publicly known points in time. Digital payments
                             can also be held more securely than manual cash payments. By reducing travel times to
                             withdraw money, recipients can store value in either traditional accounts or e-wallets,
                             and cash out smaller amounts at their convenience or directly transfer funds onwards
                             to pay for bills such as electricity. At the same time, it is important to have in place
                             systems to prevent security breaches of digital payment mechanisms (e.g., stolen ac-
                             count numbers).
    THE OPPORTUNITIES
7   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                             I. THE BENEFITS OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS


                                  • 	 Evidence from the United States shows that when the government
                                      introduced the Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) in the mid-1990s and
                                      thus switched from delivering social cash transfers by paper checks, which
                                      needed to be cashed, to electronic debit cards, the overall crime rate over
                                      the next 20 years was reduced by almost 10 percent as a direct result.
                                      This corresponded to 47 fewer crimes per 100,000 people per county per
                                      month, as a direct result of switching welfare benefits from cash to credit.
                                      (Wright et al., 2014).
                             Increased financial inclusion Empirical evidence at the micro and macro levels
                             shows that inclusive financial systems are an important component to economic and
                             social progress on the development agenda (see Cull et al., 2014, for an overview).
                             Digital payments are often the first entry point into the financial system for individuals
                             and provide an opportunity to offer accounts—be they traditional formal bank accounts
                             or so-called e-wallets (or payment cards) that provide a store of value functionality—to
                             the unbanked for savings or payments.
                             However, the challenge is to encourage recipients of electronic payments to use their
                             accounts for other financial transactions. For example, a study in Mexico shows that
                             recipients of international remittances are more likely to have accounts, but not insur-
                             ance, credit, or other financial products, suggesting big opportunities to foster financial
                             inclusion on remittance recipients (Li et al., 2014). It can be practically feasible for
                             financial services to be linked in some way to remittance services, such as savings ac-
                             counts into which migrants can remit in the home country. For example, remittances
                             sent directly to a recipient’s bank account can facilitate access to loans and the use of
                             the account for automatic bank loan repayments and can help build long-term savings.
                             In very practical terms, offers of other financial services can occur when migrants are
                             visiting a branch location of a financial institution to make a remittance transaction.
                                  • 	 Studies show that following the provision of accounts to poor households in
                                      Mexico and Nepal, new account holders continued to deposit and maintain
                                      balances in their accounts, which led to a significant increase in household
                                      savings (Aportela, 1999, and Prina, 2012, respectively). This evidence helps
                                      motivate government and private-sector initiatives to open new accounts for
                                      receiving electronic wage and social transfer payments.
                                  • 	 From Mexico, there is evidence that accounts opened through the social
                                      transfer program increased frequency of remittances received through
                                      formal payment channels (Masino and Niño-Zarazúa, 2014).
                                  • 	 The randomized introduction of mobile money in rural Mozambique led to
                                      users’ increased marginal willingness to remit more frequently and to the
                                      substitution of mobile money for informal savings (Batista and Vicente, 2013).
                             Increases in women’s economic participation and empowerment One of
                             the significant benefits of moving to digital payments in both social transfers and remit-
                             tances is that it can contribute to a G20 commitment of increasing women’s economic
                             participation and empowerment, and can do this through a number of channels.3
                             Evidence suggests that digital transfers empower women within their households
                             (Docquier et al., 2009). This is particularly true for recipients of the social cash transfer,
                             because, in contrast to cash payments, the arrival of a digital payment is often private
                             information that allows the recipient to conceal the payment at least temporarily from
        THE OPPORTUNITIES
8       OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                                                                            I. THE BENEFITS OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS


                                                                            other household members or friends who may place demands on the use of the money
                                                                            (at the risk that recipients might also withhold funds from which the entire household
                                                                            is entitled to benefit). Sociocultural issues and other factors might prevent women from
                                                                            controlling their own money and assets. But electronic payment might give recipients
                                                                            greater agency with regard to how the money will be used, particularly if the payment
                                                                            is tied to a stored-value product, such as a formal account or an e-wallet, which makes
                                                                            it harder for family and friends to access the funds. It is also worth noting that women
                                                                            represent an increasing share of immigrants in high-income countries and that women
                                                                            are not only receivers, but also senders, of remittances (World Bank, 2014a).
                                                                                     • 	 From the social cash transfer program in Niger, for instance, there is
                                                                                         evidence that greater privacy and control of mobile transfers, compared to
                                                                                         manual cash transfers, shifts intrahousehold decision-making in favor of
                                                                                         women, i.e., the recipients of the social cash transfer (Aker et al., 2013).
                                                                                     • 	 Field experiments find that providing access to personal formal savings
                                                                                         instruments increases female empowerment (Ashraf et al., 2010) and
                                                                                         consumption and productive investment of female entrepreneurs (Dupas
                                                                                         and Robinson, 2009).
                                                                                     • 	 In Kenya, the arrival of mobile money transfers increased women’s
                                                                                         economic empowerment in rural areas, by making it easier to request
                                                                                         remittances from their husbands who migrated to urban areas for work
                                                                                         (Morawczynski and Pickens, 2009).
                                                                                     • 	 A large body of empirical literature suggests that income in the hands of
                                                                                         women, compared to men, is associated with larger improvements in child
                                                                                         health and larger expenditure shares of household nutrients, health, and
                                                                                         housing (for an overview, see Duflo, 2012).
                                                                                     • 	 The Global Findex data finds across 148 countries a positive and
                                                                                         significant relationship between female labor force participation and
                                                                                         female account ownership, but no similar relationship for men. This
                                                                                         suggests that women might benefit more from having an account
                                                                                         opened for them by someone else, such as an employer, and/or that only
    ACCOUNT PENETRATION BY GENDER                                                        employed women can afford or have necessary documentation for an
    Adults with an account at a formal financial                                         account of their own (Klapper et al., 2014).
    institution (%)

                                                                                                                                                                                                              92
           FEMALE                                                                                                                                                                                    87
                 MALE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GLOBAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AVERAGE
                                                                                                                                                                              58                                    MALE
                                                                                                                                               50                     52                                            55
                                                                                                               44                                                                                                   47
                                                                                41                                                    40                                                                            FEMALE
                                                                                                       35
                                                 27                    25
                   23                   22
          13




     MIDDLE EAST                    SUB-SAHARAN                          SOUTH                    LATIN AMERICA                      EUROPE &                        EAST ASIA                    HIGH-INCOME
    & NORTH AFRICA                     AFRICA                             ASIA                     & CARIBBEAN                     CENTRAL ASIA                      & PACIFIC                     ECONOMIES
    Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and L. Klapper, 2013. “Measuring Financial Inclusion: Explaining Variation in Use of Financial Services across and within Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 279-340.
    THE OPPORTUNITIES
9   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                             I. THE BENEFITS OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS


                             BENEFITS FOR PROVIDERS OF DIGITAL PAYMENT SERVICES
                             Increased credit information and fewer nonperforming loans The inclusion
                             of positive payment data in consumer credit files—such as utilities and telecommuni-
                             cations services bill payments—can potentially have a large impact on the financially
                             excluded. Biometric identification of borrowers allows lenders to collect positive and
                             negative credit information on loan performance. This information allows lenders to
                             withhold future loans from past defaulters while rewarding good borrowers with better
                             loan terms. While data collected from nonbank service providers can improve credit
                             assessments, at the same time regulators should ensure against data misappropriations.
                                 • A randomized field experiment in Malawi examined borrower responses
                                    to being digitally fingerprinted when applying for loans, in order to
                                    biometrically collect positive and negative credit information. This
                                    information allowed lenders to withhold future loans from past defaulters
                                    while rewarding good borrowers with better loan terms. The researchers
                                    found that fingerprinting led to substantially higher repayment rates for
                                    borrowers with the highest ex- ante default risk (Gine et al., 2014).
                                 • In the United States, the inclusion of utility and telecom payment histories
                                    reduced the share of adults who were “unscorable” from about 12 percent
                                    to 2 percent and reduced the estimated loan default rate. The greatest
                                    benefits accrued to lower-income Americans, members of minority
                                    communities, and younger and elderly Americans. For instance, those
                                    earning less than $20,000 (U.S.) annually saw a 21 percent increase in loan
                                    acceptance rates (Turner et al., 2012; Turner and Varghese, 2010).
10   THE OPPORTUNITIES
     OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS   II. THE CHALLENGES OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS
                              Despite the many benefits of moving from cash and paper-based payment instruments
                              to digital payments, doing so has many challenges. However, achieving a digital system
                              offers a dual win for providers and consumers.
                              SUPPLY-SIDE CHALLENGES
                              Safety and reliability An electronic payment system will not be effective and could
                              even have adverse effects if it does not work well. Payment delays or working with agent
                              networks in which liquidity is a problem can undermine an entire electronic transfer
                              program, as recipients fail to trust or understand the new system. It is important to
                              recognize that digital payment mechanisms can also have security breaches, such as
                              card numbers or account numbers being stolen. A reliable payment system should also
                              have safeguards to protect against fraud and cyber-attacks­  —and have an emergency
                              contingency plan in place.
                              Interoperability of bank and nonbank financial service providers Making
                              digital payments cost effective and sustainable for low-income, rural populations will
                              require leveraging new technologies such as mobile phones, ATMs, POS terminals,
                              and online services. Equally important, it will require ensuring that digital payments
                              can be made across the many parties that people deal with financially, such as friends
                              and family, employers, merchants, schools, utilities, and governments. No one provider
                              or sector can justify an investment in all of these elements or handle the contractual
                              requirements of dealing with so many players. Rather, multiple players must be able
                              to interconnect where necessary to provide individuals with a wide range of services,
                              and must be able to do so on fair and equitable cost and access terms.
                              Physical infrastructure Countries with advanced and broadly used payment and
                              banking systems might already have a physical infrastructure in place to process digital
                              payments. But in low-income countries with more rudimentary banking systems (whose
                              infrastructure is concentrated in urban areas), developing an adequate physical network
                              to deliver digital payments to all corners of the country is a significant challenge, one
                              that is often underestimated, as we have seen in countries such as Haiti, Kenya, Uganda,
                              and the Philippines (Zimmerman et al., 2014).
                              While the widespread use of mobile phones in low-income countries seemingly suggests
                              it would be easy to provide digital payments by mobile transfer even in countries with
                              the most rudimentary banking systems, widespread mobile phone use is not sufficient.
                              Providing physical access to financial services or cash-in/out points and ensuring suf-
                              ficient liquidity at access points, including in rural areas, remain the core challenges
                              in moving toward digital payments.
                              Furthermore, digital payments also face significant infrastructure challenges. The lack
                              of electricity with which to power mobile phones and cell towers, limitations in mobile
                              network coverage, and poor roads and transport networks are all hindrances to the
                              expansion of electronic financial services in rural areas.
                              The high cost of traditional brick-and-mortar bank branches concentrates financial
                              access points in urban areas where higher population density makes them profitable.
                              However, innovations such as mobile financial services and agent banking offer prom-
                              ise. Also, leveraging and modernizing existing infrastructure such as post offices can
                              provide new opportunities to reach rural and low-income individuals in a sustainable,
                              cost-effective manner. Moreover, providing access to financial services through ATMs
                              or POS terminals can be viable even in small communities.
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
11   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                                                 II. THE CHALLENGES OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS


                                                 Ultimately, while digital payments can be more cost effective in the long term, build-
                                                 ing an adequate physical infrastructure for reliable payments will require significant
                                                 up-front investments.
                                                 Increasing cash-out points While digital payments can make payments more
                                                 efficient, it is important to note that cash-out points are an important feature of the
                                                 financial system, even in a digitized environment. Indeed, a reliable cash-out experience
                                                 is key to the success of digital payments (Kendall and Voorhies, 2014).
                                                 Building an infrastructure that provides a reliable cash-out experience, however, remains
                                                 a significant challenge, especially in rural areas that are typically net-recipients of remit-
                                                 tance and social transfer payments. The experience of implementing digital government
                                                 transfer schemes in Haiti, Kenya, the Philippines, and Uganda has illustrated some of
                                                 the issues associated with such an effort (Zimmerman et al., 2014).
                                                 As a digital ecosystem evolves that allows recipients of digital payments to stay digital
                                                 by making digital payments, cash-out constraints will lessen. However, even then, people
     THE INCREASING
     IMPORTANCE                                  will look for a reliable cash-out experience, and financial systems will need to deliver one.
     OF REMITTANCES                              Sticky prices Lower operating costs driven by new technology- enabled models do
     Remittances are household income
     received from family members and            not always translate to lower fees paid by consumers. Some MTOs continue to charge
     friends who have migrated domestically      a uniform level regardless of the transfer method (whether cash-to-cash, account-to-
     or internationally for work. They can be
     sent in cash, in kind, or more commonly     account, or mobile tools) in order to increase their profit margin or not to potentially
     by some form of electronic or digital       upset their disbursing agents who operate in the cash-based system.
     transfer, through a variety of formal and
     informal channels. A review of recent       Building a digital ecosystem There is growing interest and political pressure for
     academic studies makes clear that
     remittances, including south-south          countries to rapidly shift from cash to electronic government payment programs. Yet
     transfers, play an increasingly important   it is important that countries first ensure sufficient technical capacity of their payment
                READ MORE…                       program and take the necessary program sequencing into account. For example, only
                                                 by building a digital ecosystem that encourages users to keep funds digitally by offering
                                                 store-of-value functionality and enabling digital bill payment products and digital pay-
                                                 ments at retailers will the cash-out constraint gradually be lessened. As long as digital
                                                 payments are cashed out immediately upon receipt, their contribution toward financial
                                                 inclusion, building a financial system, and reaping the benefits of moving beyond a
                                                 cash-based payments system will be limited. This will be especially important in rural
                                                 areas that are typically net-recipients of remittance and social transfer payments and
                                                 where cash-management issues are a considerable challenge (Faz and Moser, 2013;
                                                 CGAP, 2012).
                                                 Political economy issues A system that is hard to track, is less private, and entails
                                                 the use of liquid currency creates opportunities for individuals at every step of the money
                                                 transfer to skim off some of the funds. Thus, one can expect that those benefitting
                                                 from the current status quo of cash payments may work to obstruct the movement to
                                                 digital payments. This presents a political problem that individual countries may have
                                                 to address in their own way.
                                                 DEMAND-SIDE CHALLENGES
                                                 Customer experience It is critical that recipients of electronic payments, especially
                                                 cash transfers, feel comfortable with the payment process and financial instrument. This
                                                 includes understanding the program, payment process, conditional payment calculation,
                                                 and recourse mechanisms. If recipients do not understand how the program works or
                                                 if payments are inconsistent, recipients will lose trust in the system.
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
12   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                                                 II. THE CHALLENGES OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS


                                                 Product design The benefits of digitalization are only realized if they are as or
                                                 more ubiquitous, affordable, easy, proximate, and secure as cash. Technology-enabled
                                                 products should be designed from an ease-of-transaction perspective.
                                                 Consumer education Poor recipients and those living in remote areas might not
                                                 be familiar or comfortable with using a digital payment system. This is especially a
                                                 challenge for social cash transfer programs that by definition often target the poorest
                                                 people. Assuring basic financial literacy is necessary; for example, recipients should be
                                                 educated about using and remembering their PINs, understanding how much money
                                                 they should receive at each payout period, and knowing what to do if something goes
                                                 wrong (Zimmerman et al., 2014).
                                                 Addressing these challenges is necessary for effective product adoption. For example,
                                                 it is important that recipients know that they should not give their ATM card and PIN
                                                 to other people to withdraw money for them. A study of a government cash transfer
                                                 program to low-income women in Bangladesh illustrates some of the challenges that
                                                 come with making digital payments to a population that is, for the most part, illiterate.
                                                 Initially, many recipients did not understand the cash-out process at the banking agent,
     EXPANDING ACCESS                            nor were they able to use an ATM on their own to withdraw payments, due to insuf-
     TO DIGITAL PAYMENTS                         ficient communication and a product design that was not tailored to the needs of the
     IN RURAL AREAS
                                                 recipients. Subsequent education efforts focusing on how to use the digital payment
     Digitizing remittances can have an
     especially large impact on reducing costs   product, and adjustments in the design of the product, eventually led to an increase in
     in rural areas. More than 40 percent of     the understanding and use of the product (West and Lehrer, 2014).
     international remittances are sent to
     rural areas (IFAD, 2013). Most domestic
     remittances go from urban to rural areas,   Usage of accounts Another consideration is that digital payments, even when
     where fewer ﬁnancial institutions           linked to an account, do not automatically translate into the use of formal accounts
     operate. Leveraging postal networks,
     mobile payment providers, and microﬁ-       or savings products. Experience with social transfer programs in Brazil, Colombia, and
     nance branch networks can o er              Mexico has shown that recipients are unlikely to automatically use bank accounts for
     unbanked rural residents access to form-
                                                 more than withdrawing benefits (CGAP, 2012). This may be due to a lack of knowledge
                READ MORE…
                                                 that the payment is not lost if not withdrawn in full, unfamiliarity with formal financial
                                                 products and the benefits associated with them, lack of clarity on whether there are
                                                 costs associated with the use of the account, or a lack of trust that banks can keep the
                                                 money safe. Realizing the full potential benefits of electronic payments via increased
                                                 usage of payments and savings thus depends on products that allow for those uses
                                                 and on clear communication regarding these features.
                                                 Gender disparities in mobile ownership  Many digital financial services are ac-
                                                 cessed through mobile phones, but a 2010 survey (most recently available data) found
                                                 that globally there are 300 million fewer women subscribers than men. In developing
                                                 countries, women are roughly 21 percent less likely to own a mobile phone than men;
                                                 regionally, the largest gender gap is in South Asia, where women are 37 percent less
                                                 likely to own a phone than men (GSMA, 2013). Constraints that reduce women’s access
                                                 include cost (the primary reason); perceptions of women’s need for mobile phones (by
                                                 both women and men); fear of technology; and literacy levels. Greater access to and
                                                 use of mobile services can provide women with digital access to health and education
                                                 information, banking services, and tools for managing small businesses. And while
                                                 women in some regions or circumstances may access a phone through other means,
                                                 e.g., by borrowing a handset from family members, this ultimately reduces their control
                                                 over what is becoming a valuable individual and household asset.
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
13   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS   III. PROMOTING DIGITIZATION

                              Governments, the private sector, and the international development community all
                              have important roles in making payment systems more efficient and more accessible
                              to low-income consumers. Although all countries can benefit from digitalization, it is
                              important to consider that specific roles will vary on a country-by-country basis by local
                              market development and dynamics, regulations, and strength of institutions.
                              A ROLE FOR GOVERNMENT
                              Government effort is needed to facilitate the movement of financial transactions from
                              cash to digital, especially with regard to reaching individuals in financially underserved
                              areas. While the private sector is, for the most part, eager to introduce or expand on
                              digital payments solutions, governments have an essential role to play by creating
                              an enabling regulatory environment, promoting consumer protection and education,
                              and playing a catalytic role in building a digital ecosystem. Promoting digital financial
                              services, in close consultation with all the stakeholders involved, is especially essen-
                              tial for governments in countries where reaching individuals in underserved areas on
                              a cost-effective, sustainable basis has so far been a challenge due to low population
                              density and low incomes. Governments can:
                              Construct a supportive regulatory environment In order for the private sector
                              to be able to provide digital payments solutions, it needs the space to develop innovative
                              payment products. This means a regulatory environment that recognizes the contribu-
                              tions of financial sector players other than traditional banks, such as nonbank payment
                              services providers and mobile network operators. These nonbank service providers and
                              agents are important in reaching the poor, especially in rural areas.
                              Providing a clear and functional regulatory framework for these new players will be
                              important to ensure both a level playing field between the different actors in the digital
                              payment space and adequate protection of consumer funds. To that end, regulators
                              will have to address defining who can provide financial services and act as agents.
                              Regulators also must find the appropriate balance between promoting interoperability
                              and letting the market decide.
                              Since moving toward digital payments will bring many individuals into the formal pay-
                              ments system for the first time, regulators should establish appropriate “Know Your
                              Customer” (KYC) account opening and documentation requirements that do not have
                              the unintended consequence of excluding legitimate businesses and consumers from
                              the financial system. For example, documentation requirements for opening an account
                              may exclude workers in the rural or informal sector, who are less likely to have wage
                              slips or formal proof of domicile. Regulations should ensure that such safeguards also
                              support financial inclusion, for both traditional bank accounts and digital e-wallets.
                              Mexico’s approach to KYC—which provides tiered or “progressive” KYC—has been
                              documented on behalf of the G20 GPFI by the Alliance for Financial Inclusion.4
                              Finally, regulators must coordinate with each other, especially across complementary
                              sectors such as financial services and telecommunications.
                              Establish an appropriate financial consumer protection framework The
                              potential access by consumers to digital services that go beyond basic banking functions,
                              including credit, investments, and complex or bundled products, raises associated risks
                              for consumer segments with weaker financial capability. There are also significant issues
                              concerning fraudulent, misleading, and unfair commercial practices, and consumers
                              require the right to dispute any unauthorized transaction. Data privacy and security are
                              important issues to be raised, and governments should safeguard personal informa-
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
14   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                              III. PROMOTING DIGITIZATION


                              tion against loss or theft. Consumers should have access to appropriate (independent,
                              impartial, and free) redress mechanisms.
                              Play a catalytic role in building a digital ecosystem The sheer volume of
                              government payments, from salaries to pensions and social cash transfers, has the
                              potential to add significant volumes of transactions to service providers. By moving
                              its payments from cash to digital government can make a critical contribution to com-
                              mercial viability of financial infrastructure in currently underserved areas, such as rural
                              locations, and can help reach especially low-income households. This does not mean
                              that a government itself will necessarily provide for these digital payments. Rather, in
                              partnering with private-sector payment service providers, governments can help jump-
                              start the creation of digital payments infrastructure.
                              For example, consider Ecuador. In addition to high-income countries, such as Singapore,
                              South Korea, and Sweden, Ecuador stands out in the extent to which various government
                              transfers to citizens can be completed electronically. The country’s Internal Revenue
                              Service and the Ecuadorian Institute of Social Security facilitate various e-payments,
                              including electronic tax refunds, social security payments, unemployment, workers’
                              compensation, welfare, and government health benefits, among other payments (EIU,
                              2012).
                              Pakistan also has demonstrated government-to-persons (G2P) payment innovations.
                              For example, when the Benazir Income Support Program (BISP), the largest social cash
                              transfer program in the country, started in 2008, payments were delivered in person
                              and in cash by the Pakistan Post. Starting in early 2010, BISP experimented first with
                              smart cards and later with mobile phones. In February 2012, BISP transitioned to a new
                              payment mechanism using magstripe debit cards that can be used widely throughout
                              the country’s financial system (Rotman et al., 2013).
                              Digital payments can take different forms. Examples include direct deposits into bank
                              accounts, payment cards, and mobile payments. It is important for governments to
                              carefully consider which type of digital payment channel is best suited for any particu-
                              lar case; this depends on a number of context- and country-specific factors including
                              broad economic, demographic, and policy environment factors (Faz and Moser, 2013).
                              For instance, in developed countries with advanced and broadly used banking systems,
                              digital payments by direct deposit into bank accounts are already common. In low-income
                              countries with more rudimentary financial systems that provide services to a limited
                              segment of the population (primarily in urban areas), digital payments channels based
                              on prepaid payment cards or mobile transfers may be more suitable.
                              Optimal channels may also vary within a country or within a specific payment type.
                              For example, Brazil’s cash transfer program, Bolsa Família, which makes payments to
                              more than 13 million families, allows recipients to choose whether to receive the cash
                              transfer through smart cards, through direct deposit into a no-frills bank account, or,
                              in rare circumstances, through cash payment (CGAP, 2011a).
                              Promote product understanding Consumer education will be critical in convinc-
                              ing a largely unbanked population of the benefits of digital payments and winning their
                              widespread acceptance. At the same time, it needs to be stressed that the onus is on
                              the private sector to design digital payment solutions that are tailored to the needs of
                              individuals and easy to understand. Consumers must be informed and assisted in how
                              to use PINs, ATMs, and the other basics of digital payments technology.5
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
15   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                              III. PROMOTING DIGITIZATION


                              A ROLE FOR GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGEMENT
                              Recognizing that governments need to establish an enabling environment that fosters
                              low-cost innovative inclusive solutions by the private sector means that, in turn, the
                              private sector can use its expertise and compete to provide low-cost innovative solu-
                              tions in a sustainable manner. Without a vibrant private sector to build and maintain
                              sustainable infrastructure and design appropriate products, governments will not be
                              able to foster an inclusive and responsible digital financial ecosystem. A true public-
                              private partnership is needed to drive innovative financial inclusion.
                              Support private-sector investment in infrastructure and the massive
                              scale-up of cash-out points: agent networks This includes branches and
                              agent networks for bank and mobile accounts, and in payment infrastructure for POS
                              retail purchases.
                              Enable the private sector to develop networks that are convenient, reli-
                              able, secure, and private These four attributes are especially critical in promoting
                              product elements that will be attractive to women. Studies show that women seek
                              financial tools and services that meet these criteria because they correspond to a
                              number of different constraints women face (GSMA, 2013): Distance and length of
                              travel are not only inconvenient but can have significant costs and safety risks for both
                              urban and rural women. Women are more likely than men to cite the lack of access
                              to an agent as the reason they have not tried mobile financial services (GSMA, 2013).
                              Where women’s mobility is restricted to their homes, having access to a phone can
                              facilitate financial transactions that otherwise would not be possible or would have to
                              be mediated through other individuals.
                              Social norms that reduce women’s control over income and other assets make privacy
                              and security especially important, but not without complications. A global survey revealed
                              that 68 percent of women who saved money in the home had lost it through theft or
                              the demands of friends and relatives. They also reported spending their saved cash
                              too easily. In Pakistan, among women who save in the home, only 67 percent consider
                              it secure. And while women have benefitted from savings groups, their public design
                              makes it easy to know when individual women have received a lot of cash (GSMA, 2013).
                              Foster the development of innovative business models This includes mobile
                              money and agent banking ventures, for instance encouraging nonbank players—such
                              as retailers, e-commerce platforms, and telecommunication firms—to join the system
                              of financial services delivery and access providers.
                              An approach to drawing women into digital financial services is to expand efforts to-
                              ward electronic salary payments where there is a large female workforce, such as the
                              garment industry in India and Bangladesh, flower packing in Kenya, and other agricul-
                              tural enterprises. Studies show that using digital financial payments can bring many
                              workers into the formal sector for the first time, help workers save more effectively,
                              offer security benefits on payday, boost mobile services, and reduce employer costs
                              (Blumenstock, 2013; BGCCI, 2014).
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
16   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                                                 III. PROMOTING DIGITIZATION


                                                 Create opportunities and an environment for cooperation Because of the
                                                 high start-up costs and the often limited market incentives for private-sector entities
                                                 to act, in many cases it may take private-sector organizations working with trade and
                                                 labor organizations as well as governments to implement a digital payments solution.
                                                 For example, electronic government payments can offer the unbanked access to basic
                                                 deposit accounts.
                                                 National identification numbers can also function as payment cards and provide iden-
                                                 tification for banks and money-transfer operators. Identification systems have great
                                                 potential for increasing financial inclusion if they are made easily available online to
                                                 all financial service providers in a country. By developing a robust, online database of
                                                 secure identification cards that can be easily verified, financial service providers can
                                                 much more easily—and cheaply—conduct KYC and credit checks on potential custom-
                                                 ers, streamlining the account opening process and making access more convenient
     FOUR PRINCIPLES FOR                         to users. The greater efficiency enabled by such systems can also go a long way in
     PRIVATE SECTOR
     ENGAGEMENT                                  reducing the cost of service provision.
     Of the nine G20 principles of innovative    For example, with the Banco de Bogotá, the National Federation of Coffee (FNC)
     ﬁnancial inclusion four give direction on
     private-sector engagement:                  Growers of Colombia developed an Intelligent Coffee Growers Identity Card, which
                                                 has a magnetic band and an intelligent chip that allows FNC-run cooperatives to pay
     Diversity
     Implement policy approaches that pro-       farmers for their crops electronically, and the government to distribute subsidies to
     mote competition and provide market-        farmers electronically. Farmers can withdraw cash through associated ATM networks,
     based incentives for delivery of sustain-
     able ﬁnancial access and usage of a         and farmers—many of them unbanked—have the ability to buy agricultural inputs with
     broad range of a ordable services           an electronic payment mechanism. By year-end 2013, 450,000 small farmers had an
     (savings, credit, payments and transfers,
                                                 intelligent identity card and received disbursements in subsidies and in credit of $740
                READ MORE…
                                                 million (U.S.) in 5.3 million transactions (Mueller et al., 2013).
17   THE OPPORTUNITIES
     OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS   IV. CONCLUSION

                              As we have demonstrated, broader adoption of digital payments—with regard to
                              both remittances and other payments—can significantly advance the global financial
                              inclusion agenda and support the priority areas of the Global Partnership for Financial
                              Inclusion (GPFI). Not only are digital payments more efficient than cash payments, but
                              their broader adoption also can reduce rates of corruption and violent crime, reduce
                              the cost of government wage and social transfer payments, offer new pathways into
                              the financial system for the disadvantaged, and, importantly, contribute to the ongoing
                              objective of women’s economic empowerment.
                              The international community must work with both governments and the private sec-
                              tor to address the challenges of digitizing payments in order to achieve the potential
                              benefits, especially when it comes to government “cash” transfers. These challenges
                              include generating up-front investment in payments infrastructure, ensuring that recipi-
                              ents understand how each cash-transfer program works, and taking steps to guarantee
                              reliable and consistent payments. It is also important that consumers are educated on
                              the basic interactions involved in a digital payment ecosystem—using and remember-
                              ing their PINs, understanding how much money they should receive at each payout
                              period, and knowing what to do if something goes wrong. Otherwise, recipients can
                              lose trust in the system and not use their accounts beyond withdrawing to collect their
                              government payment—and the broader financial inclusion objectives will not be met.
                              Technology-enabled business model innovation can help build inclusive financial sec-
                              tors that enable people to improve their lives. Governments, the private sector, and the
                              international community should focus on addressing the challenges of a move toward
                              making digital payments available to the billions of unbanked adults around the world.
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
18   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS   REFERENCES

                              Aggarwal, R., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and S. Martínez Pería, 2011. “Do remittances promote financial
                              development?” Journal of Development Economics 96(2), 255–264.
                              Aker, J., R. Boumnijel, A. McClelland, and N. Tierney, 2013. “How Do Electronic Transfers
                              Compare? Evidence from a Mobile Money Cash Transfer Experiment in Niger.” Tufts University
                              Working Paper.
                              Allen, F., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, L. Klapper, and S. Martínez Pería, 2013. “Foundations of Financial
                              Inclusion.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.
                              Aportela, F., 1999. “Effects of Financial Access on Savings by Low-Income People.” Banco de
                              Mexico mimeo.
                              Ashenfelter, O., 2012. “Comparing Real Wages.” National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER
                              Working Paper 18006.
                              Ashraf, N., D. Aycinena, C. Martinez, and D. Yang, 2014. “Savings in Transnational Households:
                              A Field Experiment Among Migrants from El Salvador.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
                              forthcoming.

                              Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin, 2010. “Female Empowerment: Further Evidence from a Com-
                              mitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” World Development 28(3): 333–44.
                              Babatz, G., 2013. “Sustained Effort, Saving Billions: Lessons from the Mexican Government’s
                              Shift to Electronic Payments.” Better Than Cash Alliance Evidence Paper: Mexico Study.
                              Barua, R., G. Kartini Shastry, and D. Yang, 2012. “Evaluating the Effect of Peer-Based Financial
                              Education on Savings and Remittances for Foreign Domestic Workers in Singapore.” Working
                              paper.
                              Batista, C. and P. Vicente, 2013. “Introducing Mobile Money in Rural Mozambique: Evidence
                              from a Field Experiment.” Nova Africa Center for Business and Economic Development Work-
                              ing Paper Series.
                              BGCCI (Bangladesh German Chamber of Commerce & Industry), 2014. “Digitizing the Wages
                              of Garment Workers.” Feasibility study for Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Financial Services
                              for the Poor team.
                              Blumenstock, J., N. Eagle, and M. Fafchamps, 2013. “Motives for Mobile Phone–Base Giving:
                              Evidence in the Aftermath of Natural Disasters.” Working paper.
                              Brune, L., X. Gine, J. Goldberg, and D. Yang, 2013. “Commitments to Save: A Field Experiment
                              in Rural Malawi,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5748.
                              CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor), 2011a. “CGAP G2P Research Project: Brazil
                              Country Report.” Washington, DC.
                              CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor), 2011b. “CGAP G2P Research Project: South
                              Africa Report.” Washington, DC.
                              CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor), 2012. “Social Cash Transfers and Financial
                              Inclusion: Evidence from Four Countries.” Washington, DC.
                              Choi, J.J., D. Laibson, and B.C. Madrian, 2004. “For Better or for Worse: Default Effects and
                              401(k) Savings Behavior,” from D. Wise, Perspectives on the Economics of Aging. Cambridge,
                              Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
                              Clemens, M. and D. McKenzie, 2014. “Why Don’t Remittances Appear to Affect Growth?”
                              World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6856.
                              Clemens, M., C. Montenegro, and L. Pritchett, 2008. “The place premium: wage differences
                              for identical workers across the US border.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4671.
                              Clemens, M. and T. Ogden, 2014. “Migration as a Strategy for Household Finance: A Research
                              Agenda on Remittances, Payments, and Development.” Center for Global Development Work-
                              ing Paper 354.
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
19   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                              REFERENCES


                              Cull, R., T. Ehrbeck, and N. Holle, 2014. “Financial Inclusion and Development: Recent Impact
                              Evidence.” CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor) Focus Note 9/2014.
                              De Arcangelis, G., M. Joxhe, D. McKenzie, E. Tiongson, and D. Yang, 2014. “Directing remittances
                              to education with soft and hard commitments: Evidence from a lab-in-the-field experiment and
                              new product take-up among Filipino migrants in Rome.” Working paper.
                              Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and L. Klapper, 2013. “Measuring Financial Inclusion: Explaining Variation in
                              Use of Financial Services across and within Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
                              279-340.
                              Demirgüç-Kunt, A., E. López Córdova, M.S. Martínez Pería, and C. Woodruff, 2011. “Remit-
                              tances and banking sector breadth and depth: Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Development
                              Economics 95(2), 229–241.
                              Docquier, F., L. Lowell, and A. Marfouk, 2009. “A gender assessment of highly skilled emigra-
                              tion.” Population and Development Review 35(2), pp. 297–321.
                              Doi, Y., D. McKenzie, and B. Zia, 2012. “Who You Train Matters: Identifying Complementary
                              Effects of Financial Education on Migrant Households.” World Bank Working Paper 6157, Wash-
                              ington, DC.
                              Duflo, E., 2012. “Women Empowerment and Economic Development.” Journal of Economic
                              Literature 50(4), pp. 1051–1079.
                              Dupas, P., and J. Robinson, 2009. “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development:
                              Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER
                              Working Paper 14693.
                              EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit), 2012. “2011 Government E-Payments Adoption Ranking.”
                              Economist Intelligence Unit: New York.
                              Faz, X. and T. Moser, 2013. “Advancing Financial Inclusion through Use of Market Archetypes.”
                              CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor) Focus Note 86/2013. Gallup, 2014. “Gallup
                              World Poll.” Available at http://www.gallup.com.
                              Gibson, J. and D. McKenzie, 2010. “The Development Impact of a Best Practice Seasonal Worker
                              Policy,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5488.
                              Gibson, J. and D. McKenzie, 2012. “The Economic Consequences of Brain Drain of the Best and
                              Brightest: Microeconomic Evidence from Five Countries.” Economic Journal 122:560, 339–375.
                              Gibson, J., D. McKenzie, and B. Zia, 2012. “The Impact of Financial Literacy Training for Mi-
                              grants.” World Bank Working Paper 6073, Impact Evaluation Series No. 57, Washington, DC.
                              Gine, X., J. Goldberg, and D. Yang, 2014. “Credit Market Consequences of Improved Personal
                              Identification: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.” American Economic Review 102(6):
                              2923–54.
                              G20 Financial Inclusion Experts Group ATISG Report, 2010. “Innovative Financial Inclusion:
                              Principles and Report on Innovative Financial Inclusion from the Access through Innovation
                              Sub-Group of the G20 Financial Inclusion Experts Group.” Available at http://aid.dfat.gov.au/
                              Publications/Documents/G20financialinclusion.pdf
                              G20 Principles of Innovative Financial Inclusion 2010. Available at http://www.gpfi.org/publica-
                              tions/principles-and-report-innovative-financial-inclusion
                              GSMA Mobile Money for the Unbanked, 2013. “State of the Industry 2013 Mobile Financial
                              Services for the Unbanked” Available at: http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-
                              content/uploads/2014/02/SOTIR_2013.pdf
                              IFAD, 2013. “The FFR Brief: Five Years of the Financing Facility for Remittances and the Road
                              Ahead.” The International Fund for Agricultural Development: Rome.
                              Jack, B. and T. Suri, 2013. “Risk Sharing and Transaction Costs: Evidence from Kenya’s Mobile
                              Money Revolution.” American Economic Review 204:1, 183–223.
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
20   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                              REFERENCES


                              Karlan, D., M. McConnell, S. Mullainathan, and J. Zinman, 2012. “Getting to the Top of Mind:
                              How Reminders Increase Saving.” Working paper.
                              Karlan, D., A.L. Ratan, and J. Zinman, 2014. “Savings By and For the Poor: A Research Review
                              and Agenda.” Review of Income and Wealth 60:1, 36–78.
                              Kendall, J., J. Godoy, R.D. Tortora, and J. Sonnenschein, 2012. “Payments and Money Transfer
                              Behavior of Sub-Saharan Africans.” Mimeo.
                              Kendall, J., R. Schiff, and E. Smadja, 2014. “Sub-Saharan Africa: A Major Potential Revenue Op-
                              portunity for Digital Payments.” McKinsey & Company, February 2014.
                              Kendall, J., M.R. Standish, D. Liu, and N. Naurath, 2013. “Remittances, Payments and Money
                              Transfers: Behaviors of South Asians and Indonesians.” Mimeo.
                              Kendall, J. and R. Voorhies, 2014. “The Mobile-Finance Revolution: How Cell Phones Can Spur
                              Development.” Foreign Affairs March/April.
                              Klapper, L., S. Singh, and A.M. Munoz, 2014. “The Gender Gap in the Use of Financial Services
                              in Turkey.” Mimeo.
                              Li, J.J., J.C. Salinas, T. Ramírez, C. Hoyo, and C. Serrano, 2014. “Do remittances foster financial
                              inclusion in Mexico?” BBVA Research: Financial Inclusion Economic Watch.
                              Lindert, L., Hobbs, and de la Briére, 2007. “The Nuts and Bolts of Brazil’s Bolsa Família Program:
                              Implementing Conditional Cash Transfers in a Decentralized Context.” World Bank Social Pro-
                              tection Working Paper No. 0709.
                              Lochann, R., I. Mas, D. Radcliffe, S. Sinha, and N. Tahilyani, 2010. “The Benefits to Government
                              of Connecting Low-Income Households to an E-Payment System: An Analysis in India.” Lydian
                              Payments Journal 2.
                              Madrian, B. and D. Shea, 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
                              Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116:4, 1149–1187.
                              Manfre, C. and C. Nordehn, 2013. “Exploring the promise of information and communication
                              technologies for women farmers in Kenya.” Cultural practice, LLC, MEAS Case Study #4. Urbana,
                              USA: Modernizing Extension and Advisory Services (MEAS).
                              Masino, S. and M. Niño-Zarazúa, 2014. “Social Service Delivery and Access to Financial Innova-
                              tion.” UNWIDER Working Paper 2014/034.
                              McKenzie, D., C. Theoharides, and D. Yang, 2014. Distortions in the International Labor Market:
                              Evidence from Filipino Migration and Wage Responses to Destination Country Economic Shocks.
                              American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
                              Miller, M., J. Reichelstein, C. Salas, and B. Zia, 2014. “Can You Help Someone Become Financially
                              Capable? A Meta-Analysis of the Literature.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6745.
                              Morawczynski, 0. and M. Pickens, 2009. “Poor People Using Mobile Financial Services: Observa-
                              tions on Customer Usage and Impact from M-PESA.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                              Mueller, B., M. Gomez, and K. Ricketts, 2013. “An Evaluation of Extension Services of the Co-
                              lombian Coffee Growers Federation.” Mimeo.
                              Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar, 2014. “Payments Infrastructure and the Per-
                              formance of Public Programs: Evidence from Biometric Smartcards in India.” National Bureau
                              of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper 1999.
                              Orozco, M., 2004. “The Remittance Marketplace: Prices, Policy, and Financial Institutions.” Pew
                              Hispanic Center Report.
                              Orozco, M., E. Burgess, and L. Romei, 2010. “A Scorecard in the Market for Money Transfers:
                              Trends in Competition in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Inter-American Dialogue, mimeo.
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
21   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS
                              REFERENCES


                              Orszag, J.M. and P.R. Orszag, 2005. “Individual Accounts: Lessons from International Experi-
                              ence.” Science 309:5732, 250-251.
                              Prina, S., 2012. “Do Basic Savings Accounts Help the Poor to Save? Evidence from a Field Ex-
                              periment in Nepal.” Case Western Reserve mimeo.
                              Rotman Parker, S., K. Kumar, and M. Parada, 2013. “An Overview of the G2P Payments Sector
                              in Pakistan.” CGAP Report.
                              Schaner, S., 2013. “The Cost of Convenience? Transaction Costs, Bargaining Power, and Savings
                              Account Use in Kenya.” Russell Sage Foundation Working Paper.
                              Turner, M., and R. Varghese, 2010. “The Economic Consequences of Consumer Credit Informa-
                              tion Sharing: Efficiency, Inclusion, and Privacy.” PERC Press.
                              Turner, M., P. Walker, C. Sukanya, and R. Varghese, 2012. “A New Pathway to Financial Inclu-
                              sion: Alternative Data, Credit Building, and Responsible Lending in the Wake of the Great
                              Recession.” PERC Press.
                              West, H. and R. Lehrer, 2014. “Working with the Poorest Women in Bangladesh.” Available at
                              http://www.cgap.org/blog/working-poorest-women-pakistan.
                              World Bank, 2014a. “Report on the Remittance Agenda of the G20.” Available at http://
                              siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/282884-1400093105293/
                              GPFI_Remittances_Report_Final072014.pdf
                              World Bank, 2014b. “World Development Indicators.” Available at http://data.worldbank.org.
                              Wright, R., E. Tekin, V. Topalli, C. McClellan, T. Dickinson, and R. Rosenfeld, 2014. “Less Cash,
                              Less Crime: Evidence from the Electronic Benefit Transfer Program.” National Bureau of Economic
                              Research. NBER Working Paper 1996.
                              Yang, D., 2008. “International Migration, Remittances and Household Investment: Evidence
                              from Philippine Migrants Exchange Rate Shocks.” Economic Journal 118:528, 591-630.
                              Yang, D., 2011. “Migrant Remittances.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 129-52.
                              Yang, D., and C. Martinez, 2005. “Remittances and Poverty in Migrants’ Home Areas: Evidence
                              from the Philippines.” In International Migration, Remittances, and the Brain Drain, eds. Ç. Özden
                              and M. Schiff, 81-123. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.
                              Zimmerman, J., K. Bohling, and S. Rotman Parker, 2014. “Electronic G2P Payments: Evidence
                              from Four Lower-Income Countries.” CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor) Focus
                              Note 93/2014.
     THE OPPORTUNITIES
22   OF DIGITIZING PAYMENTS   NOTES

                              1.	 For ease of reference, by digital payments, we refer to transfers and payments of money
                                  from any sender to any recipient, cross border and domestic.

                              2.	 G20 Leaders Statement,Pittsburgh Summit, September 24-25, 2009, under section
                                  “Strengthening Support for the Most Vulnerable” #41. “We commit to improving access
                                  to financial services for the poor. We have agreed to support the safe and sound spread of
                                  new modes of financial service delivery capable of reaching the poor and, building on the
                                  example of micro finance, will scale up the successful models of small and medium­sized
                                  enterprise (SME) financing. Working with the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP),
                                  the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and other international organizations, we will
                                  launch a G20 Financial Inclusion Experts Group. This group will identify lessons learned on
                                  innovative approaches to providing financial services to these groups, promote successful
                                  regulatory and policy approaches, and elaborate standards on financial access, financial
                                  literacy, and consumer protection. We commit to launch a G20 SME Finance Challenge,
                                  a call to the private sector to put forward its best proposals for how public finance can
                                  maximize the deployment of private finance on a sustainable and scalable basis.” Among
                                  the goals of the GPFI are to initiate and stimulate the knowledge exchange about designing
                                  and implementing favorable regulative frameworks; to support the dialogue between all
                                  relevant stakeholders internationally as well as nationally; and to collect relevant data.

                              3.	 G20 Leaders Statement, Los Cabos Summit, June 18-19, 2012, under section “Employment
                                  and Social Protection” #23. “We commit to taking concrete actions to overcome the bar-
                                  riers hindering women›s full economic and social participation and to expand economic
                                  opportunities for women in G20 economies. We also express our firm commitment to
                                  advance gender equality in all areas, including skills training, wages and salaries, treatment
                                  in the workplace, and responsibilities in care-giving.”

                              4.	 Alliance for Financial Inclusion, “Mexico’s Engagement with the Standard Setting Bodies
                                  and Its Implications for Financial Inclusion,” available at http://www.gpfi.org/sites/default/
                                  files/documents/04%20Mexico.pdf

                              5.	 A meta analysis of the literature on financial education interventions finds that financial
                                  literacy and capability interventions can have a positive impact in some areas-such as in-
                                  creasing savings-but not in others, such as credit default (Miller et al., 2014).For example, a
                                  financial literacy intervention was provided to Filipino foreign domestic workers in Singapore,
                                  and no effect was found on financial knowledge, savings, or remittance behavior; assignment
                                  of a financial education class surprisingly had a negative effect on saving outcomes among
                                  female migrants (Barua et al., 2012). Another study provided financial literacy training to
                                  migrants in Australia and New Zealand, which appeared to increase financial knowledge
                                  and information-seeking behavior and reduce the risk of switching to costlier remittance
                                  products-but did not find an impact on either the frequency or level of remittances (Gibson
                                  et al., 2012).A field experiment in Indonesia provided a financial literacy program to future
                                  migrants and evaluated its effects on financial knowledge,behaviors, remittance, and sav-
                                  ings outcomes. This study found that training both the migrant and the family had a larger
                                  impact than training the family alone, suggesting the value of exploiting a teachable moment
                                  to provide financial information (Doiet al., 2012).
FOCUS:
                                                               Remittances are household income received from family members and friends who have
                                                               migrated domestically or internationally for work. They can be sent in cash, in kind,
                                                               or more commonly by some form of electronic or digital transfer, through a variety of
THE INCREASING                                                 formal and informal channels. A review of recent academic studies makes clear that

IMPORTANCE                                                     remittances, including south-south transfers, play an increasingly important role in the
                                                               financial lives of people in low-income countries:
OF REMITTANCES                                                     • 	 Since the late 1990s, remittances sent home by international migrants have
                                                                       exceeded official development assistance and portfolio investment, and in
                                                                       several years have approached the magnitude of the flow of foreign direct
                                                                       investment (Yang, 2011).
                                                                   • 	 Global international remittances in 2012 are estimated at $514 billion (U.S.).
USE OF ACCOUNTS FOR FAMILY                                             a 10.77 percent increase from 2011,including $401 billion sent to developing
REMITTANCES                                                            countries (World Bank, 2014b).
Adults using a formal account in the                               • 	 As remittance volumes have grown, the private sector has responded
past year to transfer money to or from                                 to provide payment services, such as money transfer operators (MTOs)
relatives living elsewhere (%)
                                                                       like Western Union and MoneyGram, as well as banks and other financial
SOUTH ASIA                                                             institutions, mobile phone operators, and payment card providers such as
       2                           TO RECEIVE MONEY
                                                                       MasterCard and Visa (Orozco, 2004; Orozco et al., 201O).

       2                           TO SEND MONEY
                                                                   • 	 While international remittances dominate the global dialogue about migration
                                                                       and development, they are only part of the conversation. Globally, Gallup, Inc.
MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA                                             surveys in 135 countries reveal that households worldwide are three times
                                                                       more likely to get financial help from individuals within the same country
           3
                                                                       (9 percent) than from outside the country (3 percent). In 43 countries, 10
       2                                                               percent or more of the adult population report receiving money or goods from
                                                                       someone living inside their country (Gallup, 2014).
LATIN AMERICA & CARIBBEAN
                                                                   • 	 Likewise, more than 14 percent of adults surveyed in Sub-Saharan Africa
               4
                                                                       and Asia reported sending money within the country in the previous 30
           3                                                           days (compared to 1 to 2 percent internationally), and 32 percent reported
                                                                       receiving money sent from within the country in the previous 30 days (again
EUROPE & CENTRAL ASIA
                                                                       compared to 3 percent internationally) (Kendall et al., 2012; Kendall et al.,
                   5                                                   2013).
           3                                                   It is further clear that facilitating this process could be of enormous benefit to poor
                                                               people in emerging markets (Clemens and Ogden, 2014):
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

                               9                                   • 	 Moving to cities causes very large income gains for rural workers, and
                                                                       workers who move from a poor country to a rich country can experience an
                       6
                                                                       earnings increase of hundreds of percent (Clemens et al., 2008; Gibson and
EAST ASIA & PACIFIC
                                                                       McKenzie, 2012), even for exactly the same tasks (Ashenfelter, 2012).
                               9                                   • 	 Having a family member overseas typically produces large increases in the
                                                                       living standards of the origin household (Yang, 2008; Gibson and McKenzie,
                           7
                                                                       2010).
HIGH-INCOME ECONOMIES                                              • 	 Data on remittance flows to 109 developing countries over more than 30
                                        18                             years shows a significant and robust link between remittances and financial
                                                                       development (Aggarwal et al., 2011). Furthermore, a study in Mexico finds
                                                     13
                                                                       that remittances are strongly associated with greater banking breadth and
                                                                       depth, increasing the number of branches and accounts per capita and the
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and L. Klapper, 2013. “Measuring Financial
Inclusion: Explaining Variation in Use of Financial Services
                                                                       amount of deposits to GDP (Demirgüç-Kunt et al., 2011).
across and within Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 279-340.                                                 • 	 While evidence on the relationship between remittances and country-level
                                                                       economic performance is inconclusive (Clemens and McKenzie, 2014),
                                                                       remittances have been shown to have an impact on the receiving household’s
                                                                                                                                  —but not on
                                                                       investment in businesses and ability to exit poverty status­
                                   RETURN TO TEXT                      household consumption (Yang, 2008; and Yang and Martinez, 2005).
 FOCUS:
 EXPANDING ACCESS
 TO DIGITAL PAYMENTS
 IN RURAL AREAS


                                                                                                                                                 89
     ACCOUNT PENETRATION IN URBAN AND RURAL AREAS                                                                                           88

     Adults with an account at a formal financial institution
                                            THE WORLD         (%) 	
                                                            BANK                                    BILL&MELINDA GATES foundation
                                                                                                                                69                       GLOBAL
                                                                                                                                                        AVERAGE
                                                                                                                                                         URBAN
    RURAL                                                                                                     53                                         60
                                                                                                                          50
             URBAN                                                                          43                                                           RURAL
                                                                       38                               39                                               44
                                           37                                          35
                                  31

             19                                                   21

     9



 MIDDLE EAST                        SOUTH                       SUB-SAHARAN         LATIN AMERICA        EUROPE &         EAST ASIA       HIGH-INCOME
& NORTH AFRICA                       ASIA                          AFRICA            & CARIBBEAN       CENTRAL ASIA       & PACIFIC        ECONOMIES



 Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and L. Klapper, 2013. “Measuring Financial          Digitizing remittances can have an especially large impact on reducing costs in rurala-
 Inclusion: Explaining Variation in Use of Financial Services
 across and within Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic            reas. More than 40 percent of internationalremittances are sent to ruralareas (IFAD,
 Activity, 279-340.
                                                                       2013). Most domestic remittances go from urban to rural areas, where fewer financial
                                                                       institutions operate. Leveraging postal networks, mobile payment providers, and micro-
                                                                       finance branch networks can offer unbanked rural residents access to formal payment
                                                                       and saving services beyond traditional brick-and-mortar bank branches. A review of
                                                                       recent studies suggests the potential impact (IFAD, 2013):
                                                                              • In six West African countries, the cost of sending remittances through the
                                                                                 postal network was reduced up to 50 percent in 355 rural localities after
                                                                                 local post offices were provided with simple computers, point-of-sale [POS]
                                                                                 terminals, and telecommunications equipment. In Cameroon, the cost of
                                                                                 domestic remittances has been reduced by 20 percent in 24 rural areas,
                                                                                 following the development of a new electronic money transfer system.
                                                                                 These cost reductions are driven by substantial innovations to the postal
                                                                                 network and might also be driven, in part, by the increase in competition in
                                                                                 the remittance payment market.
                                                                              • FINCA International issued 3,000 debit cards and piloted the use of
                                                                                 POS terminals in its branches in rural Uganda, providing cheaper, faster
                                                                                 remittance transfers. After the rollout of the cards, FINCA International
                                                                                 opened more than 2,100 new savings accounts, mobilizing $90,000
                               RETURN TO TEXT                                    (U.S.) in formal savings; 60 percent of new savers had previously relied on
                                                                                 informal modes of saving, or did not save at all prior to receiving a card.
FOCUS:
FOUR PRINCIPLES
FOR PRIVATE SECTOR
ENGAGEMENT
Of the nine G20 principles of innovative financial inclusion
four give direction on private-sector engagement:


PRINCIPLE 2
Diversity
Implement policy approaches that promote competition and provide market-based
incentives for delivery of sustainable financial access and usage of a broad range of
affordable services (savings, credit, payments and transfers, insurance) as well as a
diversity of service providers.
PRINCIPLE 3
Innovation
Promote technological and institutional innovation as a means to expand financial
system access and usage, including addressing infrastructure weaknesses.

PRINCIPLE 4
Protection
Encourage a comprehensive approach to consumer protection that recognizes the
roles of government, providers, and consumers.

PRINCIPLE 6
Cooperation
Create an institutional environment with clear lines of accountability and coordination
within government; and also encourage partnerships and direct consultation across
government, business, and other stakeholders.


Source: G20 Financial Inclusion Experts Group ATISG Report, 2010




       RETURN TO TEXT
