                                                                                             90331

                                Terms of Reference
                               ICP Tool Pack Testing

I. Introduction
The primary objective of the Tool Pack is to improve national and international data
collection and processing capacity. Its aim is to strengthen key areas of data
development, including (a) supporting national price collection efforts; (b) standardizing
price collection and gap filling methods within and across countries; (c) permitting data
validation through a systematic procedure as the price data is moved back and forth
through a hierarchy of processing to regional and global offices; and (d) ensuring data
collection consistency over time and space.

The Tool Pack is an integrated system with two physically separate modules: Price
Collection Module (PCM) and Price Administration and Analysis Module (PAM). The
Tool Pack allows upload of product specifications from an Excel file generated from the
Structured Product Description (SPD) software. This is an independent software
developed to facilitate the preparation and the uploading of product specifications to the
PAM.

The PCM and PAM are self-standing modules. Such modularity helps facilitate easy
deployment of the PCM in the field, where only price collection is carried out, while
reserving the more sophisticated administration and analysis module for the country
management centers. If the country in question is a large country and regional price
levels are of interest, the PAM can be installed in several centers.

I.a. Price Administration Module
The PAM is a web based system, accessible using an Internet Explorer browser and a
userid/password, over the intranet. It would normally be installed at the ICP country
coordinator’s office, and optionally, at any regional centers within a country, if the
country is large and has a large number of data collection centers. The PAM has a
number of integrated functionalities.

   1. Survey Set Up: The PAM is instrumental in setting up surveys. Survey set-up
      consists of designing surveys, loading product specifications (PSs), setting up
      location hierarchies [country – regions – sub-regions – district – etc.], identifying
      price collectors, outlets, and finally creating “price collector – outlet – product list”
      mappings.

   2. Uploading Facilities: This allows users to upload the product specifications,
      including product characteristics, attributes and parameters from Excel files
      generated by the SPD software, which is independent of the Tool Pack. It also
      allows users to set up their surveys outside of the Tool Pack using Excel files and
      to upload them to the PAM. Product images can also be uploaded. The facility
      also allows countries and regions to upload only average prices rather than
      individual price observations.

   3. Editing and Validation: The primary focus is on non-sampling errors. There are
      two main types of non-sampling errors in ICP. First, a price error occurs when the
      product for which the price is to be collected is correctly identified in the right
      outlet, but the price actually collected is incorrect, or alternatively the price
       collected is correct initially but an error is subsequently introduced into the price
       somewhere in the process of recording, transmitting or editing the price. Second,
       a product error occurs when the product for which the price is collected is not in
       fact the product specified on the ICP list. When the product is wrong, its price
       may be correctly recorded and processed, but it is still an incorrect price for ICP
       purposes.

       First, the PCM can be used by the national coordinator to carry out the initial
       checks on the individual price observations for a single product within a single
       country. Second, the PAM can be used by the national coordinator to check the
       average prices of different products within the same basic heading in a single
       country. Third, the PAM can be used by the national coordinators and the
       regional coordinator working in collaboration to check the average prices of the
       same product in different countries when converted into a common currency
       using exchange rates or PPPs.

       There are three diagnostic tables for validation. Tables 1 and 2 will be used by
       the countries. Table 1 has two parts. The first part provides a summary of the
       number of products within each basic heading, number of products with price
       quotations, number of products with representative quotations, as well as the
       average prices for the basic heading. Users can pick any one of the basic
       headings for more detailed diagnostic information. This will lead to the second
       part of Table 1, which shows the number of price quotes for each item, the
       minimum and maximum prices, and coefficient of variation, defined as the
       standard deviation divided by the average price. There is one line in the table for
       each item in the basic heading. Table 2 can be produced for each item in a basic
       heading. It provides a listing of the individual prices, the prices adjusted to a
       common/preferred measurement unit, the ratio of the price to the mean, and a t-
       value. T-value is the divergence between an individual price observation and the
       average price for that product divided by the standard deviation of the price
       observations. Table 3 is what is known as the Quaranta tables in the Eurostat
       system and contains summary level data at the basic heading level, but for all
       countries in the region. Table 3 will be used by regional coordinating agencies
       and the global office.

   4. Analysis and Reporting: The Analysis module provides various gap filling
      methods, including EKS and CPD for ICP, and a number of additional
      procedures for the CPI. It also allows calculation of PPPs and CPIs inclusive of
      all aggregation methods used in current practice. This is conducted at basic
      heading levels as well as total aggregate levels. Reports are generated at
      various levels using a combination of criteria. For example, reports of CPI can be
      generated by provinces, outlet types, urban and rural areas for any combination
      of baskets.

I.b. Price Collection Module
The PCM is a stand-alone module that can be installed on a computer in any of the data
collection centers. Price collection forms (generated from the PCM) are used for data
collection. The price observations recorded by the collectors are then entered into the
PCM. A preliminary validation of the data to correct data entry errors is performed in the
PCM, and then the data are transferred to the regional or country PAM for further
validation, aggregation, analysis and index calculation.
II. Terms of Reference for Testing the PCM and PAM
These terms-of-reference (ToR) lay out the tasks that will be performed to test the ICP
Tool Pack for the following functionalities, which are necessary at this stage in the price
collection phase. The ICP surveys will be launched in October 2004 and modules of the
Tool Pack that are needed for data collection will be provided to the countries by the end
of May. Modules of the Tool Pack needed for analysis and reporting will be available for
testing by end-June.

1. ICP -- PAM and PCM installations

In these tasks, the PCM and PAM should be separately tested for installation on “clean”
machines. That is, these machines should have the operating systems (Windows 2000,
XP or Windows 2003) installed on them afresh and Microsoft Excel, as described in the
hardware/software requirements in the installation manuals. The hardware/software
requirements are provided in the installation manuals (Annexes 1 and 2) and technical
support is provided by Ms Ying Chi (202 473 3884) ychi@worldbank.org and Mr.
Ramgopal Erabelly (202 458 5785) rerabelly@worldbank.org. Ms. Chi will be away from
the office 5-9 April.

2. ICP – PAM and PCM Modules

User manuals for PAM and PCM are provided in Annexes 3 and 4, respectively, and
technical support is also available. Please call Mr. Yuri Dikhanov (202 458 2667)
ydikhanov@worldbank.org          or     Ms.    Nada       Hamadeh        (202   473     3201)
nhamadeh@worldbank.org. Tool Pack Testing Steps are provided in Annex 5.
Please be sure to follow the steps in the sequence they are outlined. For example, when
setting up surveys, if location attributes are not defined, outlet profiles cannot be created.
Similarly, if price attributes are not defined first in the PAM, the transfer of information
from PAM to PCM will fail. The recommended testing steps are particularly useful to
upload the product list and associated characteristics, and to map files to the Tool Pack.

II.a. What will be tested at this stage?
     a. Survey set up: All the survey set up functionalities should be tested.
     b. Uploading facilities: All the uploading facilities should be tested, with the
        exception of the uploading of average prices from other systems. This will be
        available for testing in May. A step-by-step guide for uploading the product list
        is provided in Annex 5.
     c. Transferring data from PAM to PCM: This is a two-stage process. The first step
        concerns exporting survey details from PAM. This involves creating XML files
        for the list of products, location hierarchy, data collectors’ profiles, etc. The
        second step involves importing the XML files to the PCM.
     d. Setting options in the PCM: This includes setting an active survey, determining
        averaging methods and choosing time frames for the surveys.
     e. Printing Data Collection Forms and related Annexes.
     f. Entering price observations into the PCM, and checking and editing outliers.
     g. Transferring data from PCM back to PAM: This is for further data validation,
        processing, analysis, and reporting.
     h. Editing and validation in the PAM: Tables 1 and 2 should be tested. Table 3,
        which involves data validation at the regional level, will be available in June.
II.b. What is NOT being tested at this stage?
  1. Price data processing, including data aggregation for analysis and index
     computations.
  2. Transfer of country level price averages, or country level raw prices data, to the
     Regional ICP Coordinators
  3. Analysis and reporting functionalities.

II.c. Documentations and software
  The following documentations and software modules can be downloaded from our
  FTP site ftp://ftp.worldbank.org/pub/decftp/icp/toolpack. The package is also sent by
  DHL.

          1.   Price Collection Module Installation Guide (Annex 1)
          2.   Price Administration Module Installation Guide (Annex 2)
          3.   Installation software
          4.   PAM software
          5.   PCM software
          6.   User Manual for PAM (Annex 3)
          7.   User Manual for PCM (Annex 4)
          8.   Recommended Tool Pack Testing Steps for the PAM and PCM (Annex 5)
          9.   Sample Training Exercises for PAM (Annex 6)
         10.   Sample Training Exercises for PCM (Annex 7)
         11.   The 300 points Recommended Testing Procedures for PCM (Annex 8)
         12.   Sample product list files and the survey set up files, including locations,
               outlets and price collectors’ profiles (Folder for set up files)
         13.   Sample Product Images (Folder for image files).

III. Expected outputs and time frame.
  The proposed time frame for the testing is between April 5 and April 23. We
  propose to divided the report into two sections.

  Section 1: The first section should focus on whether the Tool Pack delivers what is
  expected of it, in terms of facilitating data collection, verification and processing
  primarily for ICP. This should include the following.

     •    A short report on the user friendliness and usefulness of the software for the
          ICP surveys and for capacity building in developing countries.
     •    Test results for the installation package as well as for the PCM and PAM,
          including any problems/bugs found with the system.
     •    A short report on the manuals (though the manuals are in a draft form, we
          would appreciate any comments and suggestions) as well as on the training
          exercises for the PAM and PCM packages

  Section 2: The second section should provide comments and recommendations for
  future improvement. This should include features or functions, if any, that the tester
  considers important for the software and that are not in the ICP Tool Pack.

                                     Thank You!
