                         90388



Global Review of
Grievance Redress Mechanisms
in World Bank Projects
Acknowledgements


This note was completed in February 2013 and summarizes the findings of a desk review of GRM usage and
implementation issues in the Bank’s portfolio. The principal author was Marie Brown, with research assistance
from Bruce Jenkins, Patricia Leon and Aaron Seyedian. It was prepared under the guidance of Amar Inam-
dar, Manager, OPSOR. A detailed study on GRMs was also prepared for the LCR region by Juan Dumas; this
paper includes some of the findings from the LCR report. The following staff provided advice and inputs or
commented on earlier drafts: Sanjay Agarwal, Sadig Aliyev, Andre Bald, Christopher Bennett, Paul Berming-
ham, Alexandra Bezeredi, Greg Browder, Jacques Buré, Sergio Coltrinari, Kevin Crockford, Ibrahim Dajani,
Fei Deng, Juan Dumas, Benedictus Eijbergen, Soulemane Fofana, Parthapriya Ghosh, Nagaraja Harshadeep,
Peter Johansen, Kelly Johnson, Markus Kostner, Pilar Larreamendy, Iftikhar Malik, Maria Elena Garcia Mora,
Glenn Morgan, Grant Milne, Satya Mishra, Somin Mukherji, Knut Opsal, GNV Ramana, Cordula Rastogi, Julie
Rieger, IUB Reddy, Sona Thakur, Miguel Vargas-Ramirez, Harvey Van Veldhuizen, Chaohua Zhang.
Global Review of
Grievance Redress Mechanisms
in World Bank Projects
ii   Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . v

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1

REVIEW METHODOLOGY .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5

FINDINGS .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7

RECOMMENDATIONS .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19

ANNEX 1: Summary Table of GRMs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21

ANNEX 2: Case Studies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 31




                                                                                                                                                                  Contents                                     iii
iv   Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Abbreviations and
Acronyms
AFR	Africa Region                          IFC	      International Finance
ARD	    Agriculture and Rural                        Corporation
        Development sector                 INT	      Integrity Vice Presidency
CAO	    Compliance Advisor                 IPP	      Indigenous Peoples Plan
        Ombudsman                          IPPF	     Indigenous Peoples Planning
CPS	    Country Partnership Strategy                 Framework
CSI	    Core Sector Indicators             ISDS	     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
DPL	    Development Policy Loan            ICR	      Implementation Completion
DRP	    Dispute Resolution and                       Report
        Prevention unit (OPCS)             ISR	      Implementation Status Report
EAP	    East Asia and Pacific Region       LCR	      Latin America & Caribbean
ECA	    Eastern Europe and Central                   Region
        Asia Region                        MENA	 Middle East and North Africa
EDU	    Education sector                         Region
ENV	    Environment sector                 OPCS	 Operations Policy & Country
FPD	    Financial and Private Sector             Services
        Development                        ORAF	 Operational Risk Assessment
GAC	    Governance and Anti-Corruption           Framework
GRM	    Grievance Redress Mechanism        P4R	      Program for Results Loan
HNP	    Health, Nutrition and Population   RAP	      Resettlement Action Plan
IBRD	   International Bank of              SAR	      South Asia Region
        Reconstruction and                 SDV	      Social Development
        Development                        SP	       Social Protection
ICT	    Information and                    WBI	      World Bank Institute
        Communication Technology
IDA	    International Development
        Association




                                                   Abbreviations and Acronyms           v
vi   Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
INTRODUCTION AND
BACKGROUND
1.01 Effectively addressing grievances from people impacted by World Bank projects
is a core component of managing operational risk and improving a project’s results.
Grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs) can be an effective tool for early identification,
assessment, and resolution of complaints on projects. Understanding when and how
a GRM may improve project outcomes can help both project teams and beneficiaries
improve results. However, there is little data available on the prevalence, quality, or
impact of GRMs in existing World Bank projects. This note provides a snapshot of current
usage of GRMs in World Bank projects, a qualitative assessment of selected GRMs, and
recommendations for improved risk management via GRM implementation and design.


WHAT IS A GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM?

1.02 A grievance redress mechanism is a locally based, formalized way to accept,
assess, and resolve community feedback or complaints.1 They are increasingly
used to improve project outcomes through creating more predictable, timely and
results-oriented responses to citizen concerns. There are several development and
operational benefits of a well designed GRM:


•	   Improve project outcomes at lower cost: GRMs focus on corrective actions that
     can be implemented quickly and at a relatively low cost to resolve identified
     implementation concerns before they escalate to the point of harm or conflict.
•	   Help to prioritize supervision: Using citizen feedback, GRMs are a channel for
     early warning, helping to target supervision to where it is most needed.
•	   Identify systemic issues: As part of a management system, GRMs can be used to
                                                                                            CAO Advisory Note “A Guide to
                                                                                           1 
     identify some systemic implementation issues and trends that need to be addressed.
                                                                                           Designing and Implementing Griev-
•	   Promote accountability: Because most GRMs rely to some degree on local people         ance Mechanisms for Development
     and institutions, an effective GRM can help improve local ownership of devel-         Projects.”
     opment projects.




                                               INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND                          1
                                        1.03 Many countries and municipalities have their own GRMs which can receive
                                        feedback on a broad range of issues, for example through an Ombudsman office or
                                        grievance mechanism tied to a line ministry. “Project-specific” GRMs can be linked
                                        to existing institutions or stand-alone entities. They are designed to receive feedback
                                        on issues related directly to a project’s design and/or implementation and generally
                                        refer grievances on unrelated issues elsewhere. This note assesses project-specific
                                        GRMs and does not review local or national grievance entities.


                                        THE BUSINESS CASE FOR MANAGING GRIEVANCES

                                        1.04 A recent Goldman Sachs report found that seventy percent of 192 major
                                        infrastructure projects around the world were stalled because of land issues.
                                        Similarly, the Compliance Advisor Ombudsman (CAO) at the IFC found that “land,
                                        water, and labor are the source of the majority of complaints” on IFC projects. 2
                                        Factors such as demographics, the spread of democracy, and advances in commu-
                                        nications contribute to increasing demand for accountable, participatory processes
                                        —especially on projects with significant impacts on local communities.


                                        1.05 The costs of ignoring such conflicts—or responding too late—are high. Research
                                        from the extractives industry found that the greatest costs of conflict with communities
                                        are the delays in project execution, the most frequent costs are lost opportunities, and
                                        the most overlooked cost is management distraction.3 A core characteristic of an effec-
                                        tive grievance mechanism is the ability to identify minor community incidents before
                                        they escalate into unmanageable disputes. In many instances, the grievance process
                                        can provide the opportunity for resolution via independent mediation or alternative
                                        dispute resolution, versus a lengthy court proceeding or compliance investigation. At
                                        present, mediation is rarely used to facilitate resolution of disputes on World Bank
2 
   “CAO at 10”
                                        projects. However, it can be a powerful tool under the right circumstances to achieve
3 
   Davis, Rachel & Daniel Franks,       rapid, low-cost, and lasting development solutions.
(2011), “The costs of conflict with
local communities in the extractive
                                        1.06 When linked to existing country institutions, GRMs can have lasting impact
industry.” In: David Brereton,
Dante Pesce and Ximena Abogabir,
                                        that continues even once Bank engagement ends. Building and strengthening exist-
“Proceedings of the First Interna-      ing country systems for managing grievances allows for greater impact, improved
tional Seminar on Social Responsi-      sustainability and an increase in potential value to the Borrower and beneficiaries.
bility in Mining, First International
                                        Simply using existing systems however, does not automatically strengthen them.
Seminar on Social Responsibility in
Mining,” Santiago, Chile, (1–13),
                                        The decision to use a local or national GRM structure to capture concerns on a Bank
19–21 October 2011.                     project requires a credibility assessment and, in certain instances, targeted capacity
                                        building. The goal is to create stronger, more credible institutions capable of managing
                                        risks and conflicts in many different areas.




                         2                        Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
1.07 The Bank has taken steps to strengthen
operational grievance management by creating                 The Dispute Resolution and Prevention Facility provides
the Dispute Resolution and Prevention (DRP)                  in-house support to project teams in the following areas:
team within OPCS. DRP was created to strengthen
the Bank’s work on grievance redress and support             •	   Practical advice on approaches to better predict and
project teams in their supervision and implemen-                  resolve citizen grievances addressed to the Bank —includ-
tation efforts.4 Recognizing some of the findings                 ing through the use of borrower systems and project
on project delays noted above, DRP’s objective                    mechanisms;
is to help the Bank to better support countries              •	   Mediation services through its extensive regional roster

to achieve improved development outcomes via                      of independent experts;
                                                             •	   A knowledge platform and skills development program to
lower cost, more rapid resolution of operational
                                                                  improve the capacity of project teams to better respond
complaints. DRP’s work is complementary to
                                                                  to citizen feedback and complaints.
existing initiatives within the Bank, including
the GRM-related work of the Social Development
anchor, GAC agenda, WBI and others.


MANAGING GRIEVANCES ON BANK PROJECTS

1.08 Borrowers and Bank staff focus on grievance redress during both project
preparation and implementation. During preparation, the goal is to work with the
borrower to better predict and prevent potential disputes before they arise. Risk
assessments, structured collaboration, dialogue and stakeholder consultations are
an essential part of the toolkit for building trust and credibility. Identifying project
beneficiaries (and potential losers) or vulnerable groups is critical to achieving results.
Some of this work is built into Resettlement Action Plans and Indigenous Peoples
Plans, but there is scope for much broader risk assessments that take into account
the concerns of impacted communities, whether related to our safeguards or not.
The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility is a good example where the Bank allocates
resources to identify issues during project preparation and build capacity with coun-
tries before major project investments start to flow.


1.09 Not all complaints can be predicted, but the Bank can design more pre-
dictable systems to help staff and borrowers manage potential problems during
implementation. Grievance redress mechanisms help the borrower as well as external              4 
                                                                                                  For additional information
stakeholders to have a more systematic and managed approach to addressing questions             on DRP’s mandate and work,
or concerns. This helps ensure that project-affected people have a place to register            see “Addressing Grievances in
a complaint or grievance—and helps the project sponsors and government work to                  Bank Operations: A Risk-Based
                                                                                                Approach” circulated to the Board
resolve issues early on. GRMs give the Bank and the borrower real-time feedback
                                                                                                May 24, 2012. (SecM2012-0245)
on issues and concerns and allow for better service delivery and ultimately better




                                                INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND                              3
              results. This concept—of using GRMs to enhance results, strengthen accountability,
              and improve risk management—is embedded into the theory behind Program-for-Re-
              sults and is increasingly advocated by senior management. Our findings, however,
              indicate there is room for improving implementation in this area.




“GRMs can help not only identify and address implementation problems in a timely manner,
 but also be the conduit to receive suggestions to improve agency services or project imple-
   mentation, and can significantly contribute to improving program or project outcomes.”
                                                        —Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez, Sector Director, SDN LCR




              1.10 Due to the scale and complexity of the Bank’s work, some disputes and
              conflict between stakeholders are inevitable. Ensuring that access to low cost,
              relatively rapid processes for dispute resolution, including mediation, facilitation or
              other informal problem solving, can make a difference between project success and
              failure. Mediation has been mainstreamed into the operations and legal contracts of
              many large private sector developers as well as other international financial institu-
              tions (the IFC and regional development banks all have a complaints handling office
              that encourages the use of mediation to resolve disputes) but still remains a relatively
              unknown tool inside the World Bank. Unlike in the private sector, the active promotion
              of mediation and/or alternative dispute resolution (ADR) as an option for resolving
              disputes is not part of our standard bidding documents, policies, or procedures.


              1.11 Increasingly, project teams working in difficult regions or sectors are looking for
              independent experts who can provide a neutral forum for resolving project-related
              disputes. The Natural Resources Management Project in Kenya is just one example
              where the project team brought in a regionally-based mediator to work with commu-
              nities and the borrower to agree an action plan for resolving some controversial and
              challenging issues. Given the increased focus in some regions on fewer, larger-scale
              projects—especially big infrastructure projects—we anticipate increased demand for
              ADR options to keep projects on schedule and delivering results. While mediation
              does not work in all situations, it can be a powerful tool for resolving grievances and
              creating greater ownership over projects.




   4                    Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
REVIEW METHODOLOGY
2.01 The goal of the review is to provide project staff and managers with:


•	   A quantitative overview of current GRM application in project design;
•	   Qualitative assessment of GRM implementation issues;
•	   Recommendations for improved risk management via GRM design and
     implementation.


2.02 For the quantitative assessment, DRP staff conducted a desk review of all
new approvals in FY2011 (463 total projects; $44 billion in total commitments). The
product lines include: IBRD, IDA, GEF, and Recipient Executed Trust Funds (RETF).5
For each project, the team reviewed the PAD and, where available, the Resettlement
Policy Framework, the IPP (Indigenous Peoples Plan), or the IPPF (Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework).


2.03 DRP staff also solicited input on GRM case studies from regional managers,
safeguards specialists, and SDV specialists and conducted qualitative reviews
of 23 projects spread across the six regions. The qualitative reviews are based on
interviews with the relevant TTLs and Social Development Specialists along with
a desk review of the project documents. We asked a series of yes/no questions
designed to measure the quality of GRM design and implementation; these responses
are summarized in Annex 1 for all 23 cases. Written write-ups of 9 of these projects
provide additional detail (Annex 2). The projects included in the qualitative reviews
were approved between 2005 and 2011 to ensure that we captured projects with a
sufficient track record of implementation. We used the interviews to understand how
                                                                                        5 
                                                                                          Only RETFs over $5 million were
GRMs worked in practice and what challenges arose during implementation. Where
                                                                                        included, consistent with IEG’s
available, we requested supporting documentation in order to verify input received      methodology for assessing total
from the interviews. We were not able to conduct field visits to verify information     projects in a given fiscal year.
received from staff or found in project documents.




                                                      REVIEW METHODOLOGY                         5
    2.04 Based on the quantitative and qualitative data, we developed recommen-
    dations for project teams and managers to improve GRM implementation and
    design. Opportunities for improved project and portfolio risk management are also
    considered. Throughout this process, we have not considered GRMs as a cure-all for
    every project risk. Rather, we consider an effective GRM to be one tool among many,
    and the decision to include a GRM in a project should be risk-based. All the projects
    reviewed predate the creation of the DRP unit in 2012. This note will thus serve as
    baseline data against which progress can be measured in future years.




6             Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
FINDINGS
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS

3.01 GRMs are included in a much larger share of the portfolio than previously
thought. Of all FY11 projects, exactly 50 percent include a grievance mechanism in
the project design, either as an explicit reference in the project documents6 or because
the project triggered the Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) or Indigenous Peoples
(OP 4.10) safeguards (see Figure 1). An earlier study based on a limited sample of
FY08 approvals found that just 28 percent of projects contained GRMs, thus there has
been a significant increase in GRM coverage in recent years.7 OPs 4.10 and 4.12 both
require grievance redress mechanisms, either as part of an Indigenous Peoples Plan
(IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), or a Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP). Program-for-Results, which was approved in 2012, also requires an assessment
of a borrower’s capacity for managing grievances.


Figure 1.  World Bank projects with a Grievance Redress Mechanism



                                                                                           6 
                                                                                              This includes the PAD, IPP, IPPF,
                                                                 Linked to                 and/or RAP where applicable.
                                                                 Safeguards                7 
                                                                                              “Governance and Anticorrup-
                                                                 78%
                                                                                           tion: A Benchmarking and Learn-
     No GRM              GRM                                                               ing Review” produced BY QAG in
     50%                 50%
                                                                                           2009. The QAG statistic is based on
                                                                         Not Linked        a limited sample of FY08 approv-
                                                                         22%               als and the exact methodology is
                                                                                           unclear. Therefore, the data are not
                                                                                           strictly comparable but can be con-
                                                                                           sidered a rough comparator.




                                                                     FINDINGS                        7
                                      3.02 However, the relatively broad usage of GRMs in projects is primarily linked
                                      to projects that trigger OP 4.10 or OP 4.12. 78 percent of GRMs are included because
                                      of these two safeguard requirements. Thus, it is still too early to say that grievance
                                      mechanisms are being mainstreamed into project design outside of the safeguards
                                      requirements.


                                      3.03 Almost all Category A projects (93 percent, or 38 out of 41) have a GRM.
                                      The same number (38 out of 41) triggers either OP 4.10 and/or 4.12 (Figure 2).8 This
                                      is consistent with the increased corporate attention and budget devoted to Category
                                      A projects, both in the design and implementation phases, and consistent with the
                                      risk profile of Category A projects.


                                      Figure 2.  GRM Coverage by Categorization                                3.04 72 percent of Category B proj-
                                                                                                               ects included a GRM in project
                                                            250                                                design (173 projects out of 240).
                                                                                                               Unlike Category A projects, which
                                                            200                                                generally entail “irreversible” risks,
                                                                                                               there is a much broader spectrum of
                                       Total Projects (#)




                                                            150                                                risks within the Category B portfolio.
                                                                                                               And unlike the Cat A projects, where
                                                                                          72%
                                                            100                                                GRM usage is required under certain
                                                                                                               circumstances, there is no consistent
                                                             50                                                basis for determining whether the
                                                                            93%
                                                                                                               risks in Cat B projects merit a GRM or
                                                                                                        22%
                                                              0                                                not. It is unclear whether this is the
                                                                    Cat A         Cat B         Cat C
                                                                                                               “right” number, i.e. whether GRMs
                                                                            GRM           No GRM               are appropriately targeting the right
                                                                                                               universe of projects based on risks.


                                      3.05 Interestingly, 22 percent of Category C projects contained a GRM in the proj-
                                      ect design (14 out of 65). None of these Category C projects were required to have
                                      a GRM, and yet they did. To get a better sense for which types of projects included
                                      GRMs even when they were not a requirement, we looked at the full universe of
                                      projects (not just Category C) that had a GRM not triggered by a safeguards policy,
8 
  However, two of the projects with
                                      and compared the sectoral breakdown of this group with those GRMs linked to OP
no GRM do trigger OP 4.12, thus
they are technically out of compli-   4.10 and/or 4.12. We found that GRMs triggered by the safeguards were clustered
ance with the Bank’s requirements.    in infrastructure-related sectors (Figure 3). GRMs not triggered by the safeguards
                                      (Figure 4) also covered infrastructure projects (Transport, Energy, Urban, and Water
                                      made up 20% of the total), but there was significant coverage within social sectors
                                      (Social Protection and Education in particular), Agriculture and Rural Development




                       8                                          Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
(17 percent), and Economic Policy (9 percent). This is consistent with anecdotal
evidence that GRMs are being increasingly used in Community-Driven Development
(CDD) projects, and especially cash-transfer projects that would fall under Social
Protection or Education.

Figure 3.  GRM Triggered by the            Figure 4.  GRM not Triggered
Safeguards: Where are They?                by     Safeguards
                                              thenot
                                            GRM       Triggered by the Safeguard:
                                            Where are They?

                                                                                     Urban
                                                                                     5%    Water
                                                                                           5%
                                                                                                   Energy
                                                                                                   & Mining
   ICT           Other    ARD                                          Social                      7%
   5%            15%      18%                                          Prot.
                                                                       21%
                                                                                            HNP
                                                                                            7%
         Urban              Transport
         10%                16%                                  ARD                                   Econ
                                                                 17%                                   Policy
           Water                                                                                       9%
                         Energy                                                          EDU
           11%
                   ENV   & Mining                                                        9%
                         14%                                                    Other
                   11%
                                                                                10%
                                                                 Transport
                                                                 10%




3.06 In terms of compliance with           Figure 5.  GRM Compliance
the Bank’s safeguards policies, the
data show broad compliance but                                   180

some gaps. We looked at breakdowns                               160

according to Categorization (Figure 5)                           140
and policy triggered (Figures 6 and 7).                          120
                                            Total Projects (#)




95 percent of the Category A projects                            100
that were required to have a GRM did
                                                                  80
indeed have one (36 out of 38). The
                                                                  60
comparable number for Category B
                                                                  40
projects is 89 percent (145 out of 163).
                                                                  20
Compliance within the Category B uni-
verse is clearly weaker than in Category                           0
                                                                             Cat A             Cat B
A, where almost all projects that were
required to have GRM had one.                                    Trigger w/ GRM         Trigger but No GRM


3.07 We also wanted to understand whether compliance with the GRM require-
ment varied across the two policies, OP 4.10 and OP 4.12. Figure 6 shows the share




                                                                                         FINDINGS               9
                                       Figure 6.                                         Figure 7. 

                                           Projects that
                                           trigger                    Projects that        140
                                           OP 4.10 only               trigger
                                                                      OP 4.12 only         120                            12%

                                                                                           100

                                                                                            80

                                                                                            60

                                                                                            40                                         5%
                                                                                                          23%
                                                                                            20

                                                                                             0
                                                                                                 Projects that               Projects that
                                                                                                                 Projects that
                                                                                                  trigger OP      trigger OP  trigger OP
                                        All other                    Projects that
                                                                                                   4.10 only       4.12 only   4.10 and
                                        projects                     trigger OP 4.10
                                                                                                                                OP 4.12
                                                                     and OP 4.12
                                                                                                             GRM        No GRM


                                       of projects that trigger one or both policies; Figure 7 indicates compliance coverage
                                       within each sub-group. Projects that triggered both policies had the best compliance
                                       with the GRM requirement: only 5 percent of these projects had no GRM (Figure 7).
                                       Of the 131 projects that triggered only OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), 12 percent
                                       had no GRM. However, of the 31 projects that triggered only OP 4.10 (Indigenous
                                       Peoples), a surprising 23 percent had no GRM. The absence of GRMs in even a small
                                       number of the projects where their use is mandated indicates a need for further man-
                                       agement attention and better monitoring and tracking by project teams.


                                       3.08 Many have asked whether grievance redress mechanisms are also being
                                       used in the World Bank’s budget support loans, i.e. DPLs. The Program-for-Results
                                       instrument (P4R) is also budget support, but it was approved in FY12 and thus is not
9 
    Mongolia – Development Policy
Credit 2; Indonesia – 7th DPL; India   part of our FY11 data set. DPLs are a significant part of the Bank’s portfolio: in the
– E-Delivery of Public Services.       FY11 portfolio, 15 percent of projects were DPLs (71 of 463), which equated to 26
10 
    These were listed as “key mea-     percent of total lending by volume ($12 billion out of $44 billion total). Only three
sures” or “benchmark actions,” i.e.
                                       of these DPLs included a grievance redress mechanism in their project design.9 Two
actions that would get monitored
during implementation but are not      of these included specific actions on GRM design and implementation that would be
required for disbursement of funds.    measured during implementation.10

                                       3.09 Are some regions performing better than others in terms of application of
                                       GRMs to their higher risk projects? This is a broad question, which the data can only
                                       partially address. Figure 8 shows the share of Category A and B projects by region,
                                       along with each region’s share of projects with and without GRMs. Some interesting
                                       points: Africa has the most Category A and B projects and MENA has the fewest,




                       10                           Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
however almost none of MENA’s Category A and B projects contain GRMs (only 2
out of 9) whereas 70 percent of Africa’s higher risk projects have a GRM (76 out of
109). EAP and SAR similarly “outperform” relative to their peers in terms of GRM
coverage within their Category A and B portfolio.


3.10 Figure 8 of course only tells part of the story. What is harder to assess is
whether the regions are targeting the “right” projects in terms of using grievance
redress mechanisms, and how do regional staff determine what the these projects
are. Most regions we interviewed had their own internal list of higher risk projects—
based not just on categorization or sector but broader criteria. However, only some
regions could identify the specific criteria that would place a project on their internal
risk list, and there are no consistent criteria for assessing project risks that are used
across the Bank. Triggering of specific safeguards is an important determinant—but
not the only one. Staff and managers have significant discretion in determining which
projects are deemed higher risk. Despite the increased focus on collecting beneficiary
feedback—via GRMs and other means—we found few instances where this feedback
made it back into the Bank’s internal system and was factored into the Bank’s risk
management and supervision.


3.11 While it is appropriate for Bank clients to operate and manage GRMs, the fact
that project-based GRM data rarely if ever reach the TTL illustrates a major lost
opportunity for the Bank to improve its own supervision. We found one innovative
TTL who identified this problem and designed a simple SMS system for projects that


Figure 8.  Category A & B Projects by Region

                               120

                               100
 Category A & B Projects (#)




                                80

                                60

                                40

                                20

                                 –
                                     AFR   EAP    LCR    SAR      ECA           MNA

                                                 GRM    No GRM




                                                                     FINDINGS               11
                                                automatically sends all grievances received to not
                                                only the project manager, but also the TTL and other
“Any GRM where the Bank doesn’t get
                                                World Bank staff in real time in an unfiltered format.
            the data isn’t worth it.”           This allows the TTL to monitor and support response
                            —TTL (EAP)          and resolution of issues by the implementing agency.
                                                The data on grievances received and resolved is then
                                                input into the projects’ ISRs and ICRs and used to
                                                drive supervision attention. This system was produced
             quickly (2 months) and cheaply (under $5,000) and has been replicated in a number
             of projects in this TTL’s portfolio. However, this example is unique.


                 3.12 As with the regional data, there were some points of divergence when the
                 data is broken down by sector (Figure 9). Of the 22 Category A and B projects clas-
                 sified as Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP), for example, more than half had no
                 GRMs. On the other end of the spectrum, Water sector projects had very good GRM
                 coverage (21 out of 24 Category A and B projects, or 88 percent). There were only
                 three Governance projects in the sample, but none of them had a GRM—especially
                 interesting given that GRMs themselves are a key tool of demand-side governance in
                 projects. Similarly, HNP bears closer scrutiny: one hypothesis is that HNP projects
                 are not triggering OP 4.10 or 4.12—and therefore are less likely to have a GRM—but
                 still involve other risks that are not being captured by safeguards.




                 Figure 9.  Category A & B Projects by Sector

                                                60

                                                50
                  Category A & B Projects (#)




                                                40

                                                30

                                                20

                                                10

                                                 0
                                                      ARD

                                                             Transp.

                                                                       Energy

                                                                                Urban

                                                                                        Water

                                                                                                HNP

                                                                                                      ENV

                                                                                                            EDU

                                                                                                                  FPD

                                                                                                                        ICT

                                                                                                                              SD

                                                                                                                                   SP

                                                                                                                                        Governance

                                                                                                                                                     Econ Policy




                                                                                                GRM          No GRM




   12                                                Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
3.13 The sectoral and regional breakdowns don’t provide the full picture, and
there are other types of projects that could trigger concerns, disputes, and con-
flicts—for example CDD projects with large numbers of beneficiaries or budget
support loans (i.e. DPLs or P4R) in countries with limited capacity to manage risks.
It is important to remind ourselves that it’s not just projects with negative impacts
(i.e. involuntary resettlement) that can trigger conflict, but also projects where the
direct impacts are overwhelmingly positive (i.e. cash transfers) due to concerns and
disputes over who should receive benefits. Similarly, budget support loans that support
contested reforms or programs can exacerbate pre-existing conflicts if not managed
well; conversely, they also can provide opportunities to strengthen domestic capacity
to manage such conflicts.


QUALITATIVE REVIEW

3.14 We solicited input for case studies from sector directors and managers, safe-
guards advisors, and other staff. We encouraged submission of cases that reflected
a wide range of experience, with the goal of identifying and learning from the more
challenging issues. In practice, however, most of the cases referred to us by managers
were above-average in their GRM implementation and many had already received
prior recognition as ‘best practice.’ We thus supplemented the cases referred to us by
managers with a random selection of additional cases from the FY11 database. When
we randomly selected cases from the 2011 sample, we found that many of the GRMs
existed on paper but not in practice. This was consistent with the findings of a review
on GRMs commissioned by the LCR Social Development network,11 which found a
much wider range of implementation experience. We received over 30 examples and
completed interviews on 23, with at least one project from every region. Interviews
were conducted with either the TTL or the Social Development Specialist, or both.
We solicited cases that were not triggered by OP 4.10 or 4.12 but did not receive any.
While the case studies are not a representative sample, several trends emerged from
our discussions that are worth highlighting.


3.15 Most project teams understood that strengthening grievance redress capacity
at the country level is preferable to creating stand-alone or duplicative grievance
systems. In most instances, the Bank team either relied completely on existing grievance
structures or paired a Bank-designed grievance system with existing capacity. Both
are consistent with two principles of effective grievance redress, i.e. (i) keeping the
                                                                                              11 
                                                                                                 The review covered 70 projects
process as close to the source (i.e. the complainant) as possible and (ii) using culturally
                                                                                              in the LCR SDV portfolio approved
appropriate systems. However, we found no examples where the Bank worked with                 since 2008 and was completed in
the client to assess the credibility of pre-existing grievance systems against objective      2012.




                                                                       FINDINGS                        13
                                      criteria and then used this assessment to help prioritize how to best strengthen griev-
                                      ance capacity.12 Many staff acknowledged that existing systems were weak, but their
                                      responses to this tended to fall in one of two extremes: either (i) relying on existing
                                      systems completely but with limited or no effort to improve them; or (ii) setting up
                                      an independent, stand-alone system that reflected best practices but was ultimately
                                      not used because it was not linked to existing systems. We found few instances where
                                      staff worked with the client to either assess credibility of existing systems or try to
                                      link up existing systems to a Bank-designed GRM.13


                                      3.16 Political and cultural context matters. Not surprisingly, we found that in
                                      countries with strong domestic support for grievance redress (i.e. via legislation or
                                      existing institutions), Bank projects had better GRM design and implementation. India
                                      is a good example of this; grievance redress is mandated by law as part of the gov-
                                      ernment’s public service delivery responsibilities and all Bank projects in India have
                                      a grievance component. Some borrowers are skeptical of the value of a GRM—they
                                      don’t want to hear about complaints. Presenting a GRM not as a forum for complaints
                                      but rather as an opportunity to improve service delivery helped in some instances.
                                      Some TTLs said that when grievance redress is a tough sell to the borrower, they
                                      introduced the issue only after trust had been established working on other issues.
                                      On other projects, TTLs created stand-alone GRMs in order to ensure some of the
                                      basic principles of transparency, fairness, and accessibility. These, however, tended
                                      to be less used by the locals.


                                      3.17 In all regions—even those with GRM issues mainstreamed into project
12 
    DRP has prepared a two-page       design—GRM implementation, monitoring, and evaluation is sketchy at best.
diagnostic tool, “Evaluating a        Only 7 of the 23 projects covered in Annex 1 had data on grievances received—one
GRM,” to help clients and staff       indication that GRMs may be included in project documents but not put in place.
discuss how well existing grievance
                                      Staff acknowledged this is a problem and voiced a number of possible causes: (i)
mechanisms are working.
13 
    The latter is happening in sev-   Bank budgets are allocated primarily to project preparation, not implementation; (ii)
eral projects that have received      GRM implementation is rarely included in results frameworks and therefore is not
Inspection Panel complaints and       monitored; (iii) beneficiaries still strongly rely on informal country systems versus
are working to improve grievance
                                      Bank-designed GRMs; (iv) Environmental and Social Specialists—who tend to be
handling on the ground: Hondu-
ras Land Management is a good         better versed in GRM issues—are hired by TTLs and are not always asked to join
example.                              supervision missions, and (v) GRMs are just not a priority for clients.


                                      3.18 When a GRM is fully operational in a project and its value is undisputed,
                                      the TTL will prove knowledgeable about it and sufficient documentation will be
                                      easily available to account for its operation, even if it is not fully developed. On
                                      the contrary, when a GRM is not considered essential for the project, the TTL is likely
                                      to know little about it and rely on the Social Specialist to meet with policy require-




                      14                        Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
ments. In these cases, some additional documentation may describe the GRM but
it is not readily accessible. We found many champions of GRMs internally, but little
institutional support or guidance for those seeking implementation support (versus
support in the design phase).


3.19 In the same vein, projects with thorough descriptions of specific GRMs in
their IPPF, IPP, RFP, or RP turned out to have good mechanisms working on the
ground. Those that only offer a description—no matter how extensive—of all the
options available to citizens in the national legislation to exercise their right to seek
redress but do not describe any institutional arrangements to apply them to the project,
do not necessarily have good GRMs on the ground. These projects may have been
able to “check the GRM box” during the preparation stage but cannot provide infor-
mation to understand how many complaints have been filed about the project, who
they have been handled, and how the project has improved thanks to this interaction.


3.20 Generally, GRMs appear to be set up only to meet the requirements of OP
4.10 and 4.12. Good GRM practice found in only a few projects seems to stem more
from the individual conviction of the TTL or the Social Development Specialist, or
from the already existing practices of the borrower, than from an institutional com-
mitment of the Bank.


SUMMARY FINDINGS

3.21 The following points summarize our key findings from the interviews and group
discussions with key Bank staff and managers. In many instances, issues raised during
the interviews echoed the quantitative data or provided a more nuanced picture of
the Bank’s current approach to grievance redress.


GRMs in Project Preparation:
1.	 Overall usage of GRMs has increased in recent years; currently almost half of
    all projects include a description of a GRM in the project documents. There
    is increased management attention to beneficiary feedback systems, including
    GRMs, and their ability to provide real-time information on project risks and
    effectiveness.
2.	 GRM usage among Category A projects is almost universal (93 percent),
    whereas it is much lower among Category B projects (only 73 percent have
    GRMs). Category A projects tend to have better documentation of risks at
    approval and almost all contain a GRM in the project design. GRM references in
    Cat A projects are explicit and often detailed whereas most Cat B projects do not




                                                                     FINDINGS               15
                                           include explicit references.14 Aside from the two safeguards policies, there are no
                                           risk-based criteria used to determine whether a project may benefit from a GRM.
                                       3.	 GRMs are primarily tied to projects that trigger OP 4.10 or 4.12. Most (but not
                                           all) staff viewed GRMs as something you do only if your project triggers OP 4.10
                                           or 4.12. There is limited consideration of either the development impact or cost
                                           implications of using a GRM to address other types of risks. In some instances,
                                           mandated usage turns the GRM into a “box-checking” exercise that is not truly
                                           owned by the Bank or the client.
                                       4.	 Project design documents emphasize reliance on a country’s existing grievance
                                           systems but do not explicitly identify the strengths and weaknesses of those
                                           systems. Assessing credibility to the users is not something the Bank has artic-
                                           ulated or attempted to document in a systematic way. The absence of a capacity
                                           assessment is often reflected in implementation, for example in projects that
                                           underestimated social risks or fail to learn from (and link to) existing traditional
                                           ways of managing grievances.


                                       GRMs in Implementation:
                                       1.	 GRMs exist on paper but not always in practice. Many PADs reference a GRM,
                                           but the findings from our random sampling indicate that many have not been put
                                           in place. Only 7 of 23 projects in the qualitative sample were able to provide data
                                           on grievances received and resolved. Reasons vary: lack of dedicated financial
14 
    We defined a project as having         resources, project staff overburdened and/or uninformed, GRMs are rarely in
an “implicit” reference to a GRM
                                           results matrices and therefore are not monitored, etc. We found that a key driver
if it triggered OP 4.10 or OP 4.12
but had no explicit reference in the
                                           of whether a GRM moved from paper to reality was whether both the TTL and
PAD to either a grievance or feed-         the borrower are convinced of the GRM’s value to the project. When the business
back mechanism. An explicit ref-           case is not clear to those in the driver’s seat, the GRM often falls by the wayside.
erence means the PAD or support-
                                       2.	 Of the GRMs in existence, many are not being used. This was most evident
ing documents described the GRM,
irrespective of whether OP 4.10 or
                                           in projects that set up stand-alone GRMs and didn’t link them to existing struc-
4.12 was triggered.                        tures (i.e. village chiefs, local councils, etc). In Vietnam and China, for example,
15 
    There is a Core Sector Indica-         we found GRMs in place but most project beneficiaries with concerns sought
tor (# grievances received/# griev-
                                           redress through existing channels such as village leaders versus the ‘formal’
ances resolved) that is an option-
al metric staff can track in certain
                                           project GRM.
projects. When selected, CSI data      3.	 The Bank does not systematically document or measure GRM implemen-
are intended to be incorporated            tation. There is a wealth of literature on GRM design principles, best prac-
into a projects’ results matrix and
                                           tices, and “how-to” notes. However, we found no accessible documentation
tracked in ISRs and ICRs. As of
early 2013 however, no staff had
                                           on experience with GRM usage and impact, either in Implementation Status
opted to include the CSI on griev-         Reports, Implementation Completion Reports, Country Partnership Strate-
ances received and resolved.               gies, the ORAF, or the Corporate Scorecard. GRM data is not systematically
                                           tracked at either a project level (via ISRs and ICRs) or a corporate level. 15




                       16                        Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
GRMs and Internal World Bank Risk Management:
1.	 There is no link between GRM data received on projects and internal Bank
    risk management on those projects. Because borrowers ultimately implement
    projects, there is no automatic link that sends grievances filed on individual
    projects to the relevant Bank staff. While it is appropriate for the implementation
    agency to be the first line of response for most grievances, the Bank could use
    grievance data to better prioritize its supervision efforts. As one TTL noted, “any
    GRM where the Bank doesn’t get the data isn’t worth it.”
2.	 Basic knowledge of grievance mechanisms among staff is mixed. With some
    notable exceptions, TTLs often had only cursory knowledge of GRM design and
    implementation techniques and no understanding of how a GRM could help with
    overall risk management. Many TTLs relied on Social Development specialists to
    handle all aspects of GRM design.
3.	 Bank systems do not have the capability to quickly pull up data on GRM usage
    or implementation. Many of the Bank’s internal systems (Business Warehouse,
    Business Intelligence, Client Connections, etc) are hampered by inconsistent
    and poor quality data combined with complicated user interfaces. The ORAF
    is an attempt to correct some of these problems, but data quality is variable
    and the data is not searcheable. None of our existing systems (ORAF, Business
    Warehouse) or reports (ISRs, ICRs, or CAS) systematically track the existence or
    content of grievance mechanisms. With the exception of a small number of high
    profile projects,16 monitoring of GRM implementation is non-existent, and data
    on GRMs can only be found by manually searching individual project documents.
    This means Bank staff and managers can’t do quick portfolio reviews, systematic
    knowledge sharing on project implementation isn’t possible, and basic questions
    about regional or sectoral portfolios are hard to answer.


AVAILABLE GRM GUIDANCE FOR STAFF

There is some in-house material on GRM principles and best practices and a wealth
of information from external sources. While there is a good amount of material on         16 
                                                                                             Mumbai Urban Transport Proj-
principles and best practices related to GRM design, we found limited guidance on         ect is a good example, as a detailed
                                                                                          monitoring report of the resettle-
GRM implementation; DRP created the first three documents to respond to this need.
                                                                                          ment process, including the GRM
Key internal and external resources on GRM issues are listed below:                       structures, was completed by an
                                                                                          independent consultant.
Internal Resources:


Items 1-3 can be found on the internal DRP website (furl “disputeresolution”)




                                                                    FINDINGS                        17
     Items 4-6 can be found at the Social Accountability and Demand for Good Governance
     (DFGG) internal website (furl “dfggdb”)


     1.	 The World Bank’s Approach to Grievance Redress in Projects: A practical framework
         that can be used by clients and project teams to (i) assess anticipated grievances,
         (ii) review the credibility and capacity of existing grievance systems, and (iii)
         build or strengthen grievance redress capacity.
     2.	 Evaluating a Grievance Redress Mechanism: A two-page checklist of questions to
         evaluate an existing grievance redress mechanism.
     3.	 Grievance Redress Mechanisms: Frequently Asked Questions.
     4.	 GAC How-to Notes: Feedback Matters: Designing Effective Grievance Redress Mech-
         anisms for Bank-financed Projects, Part 1 & 2.
     5.	 Using Demand-Side Governance Approaches to Identify and Manage Risks in Projects
     6.	 Beneficiary Feedback and Third Party Monitoring in Bank-Financed Projects.
     7.	 IFC CAO: A Guide to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for
         Development Projects.




18             Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on our findings, we offer the following recommendations to enhance the impact
of grievance redress mechanisms and, more broadly, improve service delivery and risk
management on projects. Many of the recommended actions were proposed by Bank
staff and managers in our discussions with them; others are our own. The Dispute
Resolution and Prevention team is already working on a number of immediate issues
and is prepared to provide support on other items, as needed.


1.	 Create diagnostic tools to support GRM implementation and strengthening
    of existing country capacity in a credible manner. The strong push to support
    and strengthen existing country institutions for grievance redress is a good start,
    but staff needs practical diagnostic tools to do this in an informed way. Products
    that staff said would be useful include: case studies of GRM implementation,
    evaluating existing GRMs, linking a GRM to existing country systems, and a man-
    ual of basic GRM principles and procedures. (Action: Completed – DRP Team)
2.	 Improve risk assessment within the Category B portfolio in order to better
    prevent and avoid conflict. We need to assess the portfolio—Category B projects
    in particular—and risks that could lead to conflict beyond those required in OP
    4.10 and 4.12 (for example, projects that take place in an area where land tenure
    is weak or CDD projects with large cash transfers in areas with weak governance).
    The objective would be to identify where GRMs could add value. (Action: Regional
    and Sector Managers, with DRP support)
3.	 Use feedback received via GRMs to prioritize supervision. Having real-time
    information from local citizens on project implementation is an obvious tool to
    help Bank teams target and prioritize limited supervision budgets. This is espe-
    cially relevant for geographically-dispersed projects and/or projects with large
    numbers of beneficiaries. However, very few TTLs receive GRM data—even in
    summary form—that would allow them to make small course corrections during
    implementation. (Action: Regional Managers)
4.	 Create incentives for monitoring and improving GRMs during implementation.
    At present there is no systematic monitoring or evaluation of GRM implemen-




                                                          RECOMMENDATIONS                 19
                                            tation at the project or corporate level. One relatively easy option would be to
                                            require all projects with a GRM to track the existing CSI related to grievances in
                                            project ISRs and ICRs. At present, CSIs are optional selections for project teams;
                                            as of early 2013, no team had chosen to track the grievance-related CSI (Action:
                                            OPCS, Regions).
                                        5.	 Improve our own internal handling of complaints on projects. The Bank could
                                            improve the predictability around its own handling of complaints by encouraging
                                            all complaints to be routed to the TTL, setting clear timetables for responses,
17 
   A similar procedure is in place
                                            and putting in place corporate tracking to ensure all grievances are responded to
for the handling of complaints relat-
ed to procurement on Bank proj-             and addressed (if not ultimately resolved) in a timely manner.17 (Action: OPCS,
ects (BP 11.00).                            Regions).




                       20                         Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
ANNEX 1:
Summary Table
of Grievance Redress
Mechanisms




        ANNEX 1: Summary Table of Grievance Redress Mechanisms   21
                                                      Tanzania: Zanzibar Urban
Project name                                          Services Project               Uganda: Electricity Sector Development Project
Region                                                AFR                            AFR
Country                                               Tanzania                       Uganda
Project number                                        P111155                        P119737
Approval date                                         February 2011                  June 2011
Closing date                                          June 2016                      February 2017
World Bank commitment ($ mil)                         $38                            $120


Total project amount ($ mil)                          $38                            $153
Instrument                                            SIL                            SIL
Environmental categorization                          A                              A
Safeguards triggered                                  EA, PCR, IR                    EA, NH, PCR, IR, F

Sector                                                Flood protection, sub-         Transmission/Distrib electricity, public admin
                                                      national govt admin, solid
                                                      waste mgmt
World Bank contact(s)                                 Andre Bald                     Somin Mukherji

Questions – Grievance Redress Mechanism
Is there a register or database that records          Yes                            Not specified
complaint handling?


How many complaints have been received?               Data not available             Data not available
Are there rules or procedures to ensure timely        If not resolved in 14 days,    Village GC to respond within 3 days. If not resolved, District Land
responses?                                            referred to Regional           Tribunal to decide w/in 1 week.
                                                      Manager of Resettlement
                                                      Coordination Unit who
                                                      seeks resolution w/in 21
                                                      days. If no resolution,
                                                      recourse to courts.
Is the GRM appropriately advertised and               PAPs provided notification     Yes
communicated to project-affected people?              of GRM

Do multiple uptake channels exist?                    Yes, through local leaders     Verbal and written forms specified
                                                      (Shehas) or grievance officer.
                                                      Form not specified




Can anonymous grievances be filed?                    Not specified                  Not specified
Is there a system to categorize, assign priority,     Not a formal system            Yes, Resettlement Unit classifies as local (route to Village GC) or central
and route grievances to the appropriate entity?                                      (to Resttl Unit)



Are complaints acknowledged in writing?               Not specified                  Not specified

Does the acknowledgment outline the GRM               Not specified                  Not specified
process, provide contact details and indicate how
long it is likely to take to resolve the grievance?
Are there clear timetables that are publicly          Yes
available?
Is action taken on every grievance?                   Yes                            Not specified
Are there indicators to measure grievance             Database is to record          Indicators not specified but indep monitoring required to look at overall
monitoring and resolution?                            resolution and time required   status of PAPs
                                                      for resolving each complaint
Is there right to appeal? If yes, are GRM users       Unresolved disputes            May appeal to District Land Tribunal and, if not resolved, to courts.
informed about this right?                            forwarded to Resettlement      Weakness of Land Tribunals noted.
                                                      Coordinating Unit. PAPs
                                                      informed of right to appeal
                                                      to courts.
Innovations/Addl Info                                                                Utilizes a 3 tier grievance process all resting on local/national systems.
                                                                                     Village GCs primary, District Land Tribunals serve as 1st referred
                                                                                     instance, then courts. Project acknowledges some weaknesses in
                                                                                     existing country systems (for example, complainant generally needs
                                                                                     to pay for travel, food, allowance for District Land Tribunals to hear
                                                                                     complaint).




          22                               Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Chad: Local Development                                                                     Indonesia: Upper Cisokan            Lao PDR: Nam Theun 2
Program Support APL II    Cameroon: Sanitation APL          Lake Victoria Phase II, APL 2   Pumped Storage                      Hydropower
AFR                       AFR                               AFR                             EAP                                 EAP
Chad                      Cameroon                          Burundi, Rwanda                 Indonesia                           Lao PDR
P113030                   P117102                           P118316                         P112158                             P076445
March 2011                June 2011                         June 2011                       May 2011                            March 2005
June 2015                 August 2015                       June 2017                       December 2018                       2017
$25                       $30                               $30                             $640                                $20 mil (IDA grant);
                                                                                                                                $50 mil (IDA PRG); $200
                                                                                                                                mil (MIGA guarantee)
$77                       $39                               $30                             $800                                $1,450
APL                       APL                               APL                             SIL                                 IL
B                         B                                 B                               A                                   A
EA, PM, PCR, IR, PIW      EA, IR                            EA, NH, F, PM, PCR, IP, IR,     EA, NH, PCR, IR, SoD                EA, NH, PM, CP, IR, IP, DS,
                                                            Dams, PIW                                                           PID, PDA, F
Agriculture & fishing,    Sanitation, public admin.         Water sanitation and flood      Large hydro                         Large hydro
health, prim edu, water                                     protection, agriculture and
supply, public admin.                                       fishing, public admin.
Soulemane Fofana          Miguel Vargas-Ramirez             Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep         Peter Johansen (TTL)
                                                                                            Lis Nainggolan (SDV)

Not specified             Not specified. Notes              Grievances to be registered     Yes                                 Yes
                          that Commission records           but unclear at what stage
                          complaint and sends to Local      and by which entity
                          Resettlement Committee
None to date              Data not available                Data not available              None to date                         Data not available
Not specified             Not specified                     No, "response time depends      Yes, 7 days to classify and refer to Yes
                                                            on issue," but should be        agencies which respond w/in 14d,
                                                            addressed efficiently           GTF responds to complainant w/
                                                                                            in 21 days



Not specified             Not specified                     PAPs directly informed but      Yes
                                                            unclear re broader outreach
                                                            and comms
Not specified             No, RPF states complainants       Multiple channels noted         Yes, in writing, phone, email,
                          fill out form and send to         (local chief, PPCT, PAP         SMS
                          Commission                        Committee), but process
                                                            and relationships could be
                                                            further clarified. Form of
                                                            complaints (verbal, written,
                                                            etc) not specified
Not specified             Not specified                     Not specified                   Not specified                       Not specified
Not specified             Not specified                     Not specified, but implied in   Yes
                                                            role of PAP Representative
                                                            Committee (inform PPCT of
                                                            serious issues, refer cases
                                                            to GRC)
Not specified             Not specified                     Not specified                   No (notice sent after decision if
                                                                                            issue not addressed on the spot)
Not specified             Not specified                     No acknowledgment               No initial acknowledgment
                                                            specified

                          Not specified                     Not specified                   Yes

Not specified             Not specified                     Not specified                   Yes                                 Yes
Not specified             Not specified                     Not specified                   Yes                                 Yes, both internal and
                                                                                                                                external monitoring

Yes, to courts.           May appeal to courts only after   Yes, if not satisfied by        Not specified, may go to court      Yes, to District Grievance
                          rejection by Commission           decision of local chief, may                                        Committee, then to
                                                            appeal to courts                                                    Provincial Court


                          In addition to reference to                                       Project provides technical
                          local and traditional bodies, 2                                   assistance for mediating
                          structures noted: Commission                                      committee, legal counseling,
                          on Findings and Evaluation                                        independent monitoring agency,
                          and a Local resettlement                                          external compliance monitoring
                          Committee.
                                                                                                                                 (continued on next page)




                                            ANNEX 1: Summary Table of Grievance Redress Mechanisms                                            23
(continued)
Project name                                          China: Hubei Yiba Highway Project    Vietnam: Trung Son Hydro
Region                                                EAP                                  EAP
Country                                               China                                Vietnam
Project number                                        P101258                              P084773
Approval date                                         March 2009                           April 2011
Closing date                                          December 2015                        December 2017
World Bank commitment ($ mil)                         $150                                 $330
Total project amount ($ mil)                          $2,194                               $412
Instrument                                            SIL                                  SIL
Environmental categorization                          A                                    A
Safeguards triggered                                  EA, NH, PCR, IR                      EA, NH, PM, PCR, IR, IP, DS, PIW
Sector                                                Roads and highways                   Power
World Bank contact(s)                                 Fei Deng (current TTL),              Pilar Larreamendy
                                                      Chris Bennett (former TTL)
Questions – Grievance Redress Mechanism
Is there a register or database that records          Yes                                  Yes, maintained and reviewed by an independent
complaint handling?                                                                        entity
How many complaints have been received?               < 300                                Data not available


Are there rules or procedures to ensure timely                                             Yes
responses?


Is the GRM appropriately advertised and               Yes                                  Yes, leaflets include info on both the Bank-designed
communicated to project-affected people?                                                   GRM and Vietnamese GRM


Do multiple uptake channels exist?                    Yes                                  Yes




Can anonymous grievances be filed?                    Yes, web, SMS, in person             Not specified
Is there a system to categorize, assign priority,     Yes, but none received               Yes
and route grievances to the appropriate entity?


Are complaints acknowledged in writing?               Yes                                  Not specified
Does the acknowledgment outline the GRM               Not specified                        Yes
process, provide contact details and indicate how
long it is likely to take to resolve the grievance?
Are there clear timetables that are publicly          Yes                                  Yes
available?

Is action taken on every grievance?                   Client says yes                      Not specified
Are there indicators to measure grievance             Yes                                  No
monitoring and resolution?
Is there right to appeal? If yes, are GRM users       Not specified                        Yes
informed about this right?
Innovations/Addl Info




          24                               Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Turkey: ECSEE APL#6                       Azerbaijan: Highway 3                                     Azerbaijan: Highway 2
ECA                                       ECA                                                       ECA
Turkey                                    Azerbaijan                                                Azerbaijan
P110841                                   P118023                                                   P094488
August 2010                               May 2010                                                  January 2006
December 2015                             March 2015                                                February 2014
$220                                      $242                                                      $675
$240                                      $356                                                      $1,028
APL                                       SIL                                                       SIL
B                                         A                                                         A
EA, IR                                    EA, IR                                                    EA, IR
Transm & distrib electricity              Roads & highways                                          Roads & highways
Sergio Augusto Gonzalez Coltrinari        Jacques Bure                                              Jacques Bure


Not specified. Appeals filed with court   Yes                                                       Yes

Data not available                        No complaints received so far as land acquisition         33
                                          and civil works on sections with potential impact to
                                          population have not started yet
15 days to complain upon filing           Yes, framework is defined in the RAP and also in          Yes, framework is defined in the RAP and also in
of expropriation lawsuit; 15 days         the Presidential decree on Review and Solution of         the Presidential decree on Review and Solution of
to challenge court-specified              Complaints.                                               Complaints.
compensation
Affected persons notified of              Yes                                                       Yes
expropriation process and rights.
Expropriations announced in local
papers
Complainants either directly negotiate    Yes, there are number of available channels such as       Yes, there are number of available channels such as
or appeal to court                        directly applying to Road Agency or through Monitoring    directly applying to Road Agency or through Monitoring
                                          Specialist and Supervision Engineer. There are also       Specialist and Supervision Engineer. There are also
                                          many cases when grievances are directly submitted to      many cases when grievances are directly submitted to
                                          contractors and resolved without escalating to higher     contractors and resolved without escalating to higher
                                          level.                                                    level.
No                                        Yes                                                       Yes
No. Only narrow range of grievances       There is not a formal categorization system—but if        There is not a formal categorization system—but if
allowed, appeals filed with court         solution of complaints depend on other agencies,          solution of complaints depend on other agencies, the
                                          the road administration forwards the grievances           road administration forwards the grievances accordingly
                                          accordingly and supervise till the issue addressed.       and supervise till the issue addressed.
Not specified                             Not specified                                             Not specified
Not specified                             Not specified                                             Not specified


Yes, 15 days to appeal                    Yes, complaints that do not require investigations are    Yes, complaints that do not require investigations are
                                          replied to within two weeks. Complaints requiring         replied to within two weeks. Complaints requiring
                                          investigation are replied to within a month.              investigation are replied to within a month.
Yes, on every appeal filed                Yes                                                       Yes
Not specified                             Yes, reports of a supervision consultant and monitoring   Yes, reports of a supervision consultant and monitoring
                                          consultant                                                consultant
Yes, only to courts                       Yes                                                       Yes

Complaints 100% through courts and                                                                  International consultant was involved under the project
Turkish legal system, no additional                                                                 to support the road administration in designing GRM.
GRM process.                                                                                        Local NGOs were also involved in channeling complaints
                                                                                                    to respective agencies.

                                                                                                                                   (continued on next page)




                                                ANNEX 1: Summary Table of Grievance Redress Mechanisms                                         25
(continued)
                                                                                 Kyrgyz Republic:
                                                                                 National Road             Colombia: Rio              Southern West
                                                      Kazakhstan: South          Rehabilitation (Osh       Bogota Environment         Bank Solid Waste
Project name                                          West Roads Project         transport)                Infrastructure             Management
Region                                                ECA                        ECA                       LAC                        MENA
Country                                               Kazakhstan                 Kyrgyz Republic           Colombia                   West Bank
Project number                                        P099270                    P107608                   P111479                    P105404
Approval date                                         April 2009                 November 2009             December 2010              May 2009
Closing date                                          June 2015                  December 2014             June 2016                  December 2014
World Bank commitment ($ mil)                         $2,150                     $25                       $250                       $12
Total project amount ($ mil)                          $2,500                     $31                       $487                       $26
Instrument                                            SIL                        SIL                       SIL                        SIL
Environmental categorization                          A                          B                         A                          A
Safeguards triggered                                  EA, IR                     EA, IR                    EA, NH, PM,PCR, IR         EA, PCR, IR
Sector                                                Roads & highways/          Roads & highways/         Wastewater treatment,
                                                      transportation             transportation            flood protection, public
                                                                                                           admin.
World Bank contact(s)                                  Jacques Bure (TTL)    Cordula Rastogi               Greg J. Browder            Ibrahim Dajani (TTL)
                                                       Lola Ibragimova (SDV)
Questions – Grievance Redress Mechanism
Is there a register or database that records          Yes                        Yes                       Yes                        Yes
complaint handling?
How many complaints have been received?               < 10; includes group       6                         Data not available         Multiple; exact data not
                                                      grievances                                                                      available
Are there rules or procedures to ensure timely        Yes                        Yes                       Yes, 15 days. If cannot    Yes
responses?                                                                                                 address w/in 15 days,
                                                                                                           partial response
Is the GRM appropriately advertised and               Yes                        Yes                                                  Yes
communicated to project-affected people?
Do multiple uptake channels exist?                    Yes                        Yes                       Yes, website,              Yes
                                                                                                           telephone, main office,
                                                                                                           neighborhood office
Can anonymous grievances be filed?                    No                         Yes                       Not specified              Yes but none received
Is there a system to categorize, assign priority,     No specific                No (informal)             Time bound routing         Yes
and route grievances to the appropriate entity?       categorization and                                   process to appropriate
                                                      priority                                             authority. Unclear on
                                                                                                           prioritization
Are complaints acknowledged in writing?               Yes                        Only complaints           Not specified              Not required; written
                                                                                 involving significant                                or verbal confirmation
                                                                                 funding                                              acceptable
Does the acknowledgment outline the GRM                                          No                        Not specified              Yes
process, provide contact details and indicate how
long it is likely to take to resolve the grievance?




Are there clear timetables that are publicly          Yes                        Yes                       Yes                        Yes
available?
Is action taken on every grievance?                                              Yes                       Yes, requires follow up    Yes
                                                                                                           on each complaint
Are there indicators to measure grievance             Yes, progress reports      Yes                       Monthly status reports     Yes
monitoring and resolution?


Is there right to appeal? If yes, are GRM users       Yes, court appeals are     Not explicit, can go to   Not specified              Yes, but only after
informed about this right?                            typically used             courts                                               review and negotiation
Innovations/Addl Info                                 GRM is primarily           Very proactive PIU        Utilizes existing          WB encouraged getting
                                                      designed to channel        and direct high-level     grievance procedures       political commitment
                                                      grievances related to      govt presence. State      of client.                 upfront from the local
                                                      the RAP although it        Secretary has directly                               mayor AND neighboring
                                                      has also been used to      attended consultations.                              mayors.
                                                      channel issues related
                                                      to non-resettlement
                                                      impacts from civil works




         26                                Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
India: Mumbai Urban        India: Vishnugad                         India: National Ganga River
Transport Project (MUTP)   Hydropower                               Basin Project                 India: Tamil Nadu Empowerment Project
SAR                        SAR                                      SAR                           SAR
India                      India                                    India                         India
P113028                    P096124                                  P119085                       P079708
June 2010                  June 2011                                May 2011                      July 2005
June 2015                  December 2017                            December 2019                 September 2014
$971                       $648                                     $1,000                        $120m ($154m add)
$430                       $922                                     $1,556                        $159
SIL                        SIL                                      SIL                           SIL
B                          A                                        A                             B
EA, IR                     EA, NH, PCR, IR, F, DS, PIW              EA, PCR, NH, IR, IP, PIW      EA, IP, PM, CP
Railways, public           Power, renewable energy                                                Agriculture/social services
administration

Satya Mishra, IUB Reddy    Parthapriya Ghosh                        Parthapriya Ghosh             Kevin Crockford



Yes                        Yes                                      Yes                           Yes, at District/ State levels,
                                                                                                  not in each village
~ 3700                     Data not available                       100+                          No central database

Yes                        Yes, 2 weeks                             Yes, 15 days                  Partial


Not avail                  Yes, word of mouth and brochures         Yes                           Varied across villages; contact information clearly
                                                                                                  presented
Written only               Yes                                      Yes                           Yes


Not specified              Yes, but none filed to date              Not specified                 Yes
Yes                        Yes                                      Yes                           No (informal)



Not specified              Yes                                      Yes                           After complaint addressed


Yes                        Yes, the aggrieved person is informed Yes                              No initial ackn
                           about the process and time required
                           either by the NGO contract for RAP
                           implementation or Senior Manager
                           Social and Environment of THDC who
                           is also the member secretary of the
                           GRC.
Not specified              Yes                                   Yes, 15 days                     Yes, in some villages; no at District/State levels

Yes                        Yes and PAPs are informed in writing.    Procedures say yes            Unclear

Yes                        Yes, M&E consultants keeps track of      Process says web accessible   Not formalized, but sig monitoring
                           the complaints filed and decisions       database
                           taken. They also evaluate whether
                           PAP is happy or not with the decision.
Yes                        Yes                                      Yes                           Not formal, but Yes

                                                                                                  Participatory mechanisms create space for
                                                                                                  addressing grievances without formal grievance
                                                                                                  procedures.




                                                                                                                                (continued on next page)




                                           ANNEX 1: Summary Table of Grievance Redress Mechanisms                                          27
(continued)
                                                    India: Second Madhya Pradesh       India: Eastern Dedicated        Pakistan: Floods Emergency
Project name                                        District Poverty Initiatives       Freight Corridor                Cash Transfer Project
Region                                              SAR                                SAR                             SAR
Country                                             India                              India                           Pakistan
Project number                                      P102331                            P114338
Approval date                                       June 2009                          May 2011                        March 2011
Closing date                                        December 2012                      June 2017                       June 2013
World Bank commitment ($ mil)                       $100                               $975                            $125
Total project amount ($ mil)                        $110                               $1,458                          $580
Instrument                                          SIL                                APL
Environmental categorization                        B                                  A                               C
Safeguards triggered                                EA, PM, IP, NH, F                  EA, IR, PCR
Sector                                              Agro-industry/ agriculture         Railways
World Bank contact(s)                               Kevin Crockford                    Benedictus Eijbergen            Kelly Suzanne Johnson,
                                                                                                                       Iftikhar Malik
Questions – Grievance Redress Mechanism
Is there a register or database that records        Not at village level but at PFT,   Yes                             Yes
complaint handling?                                 district and state

How many complaints have been received?             Data not available                 Data not available              1.1 million appeals/
                                                                                                                       5500 complaints
                                                                                                                       (see case study)
Are there rules or procedures to ensure timely      Partial                            Yes                             Yes
responses?

Is the GRM appropriately advertised and             Contacts made clear but GRM        Yes                             Yes
communicated to project-affected people?            process unclear

Do multiple uptake channels exist?                  Yes                                Yes                             Yes

Can anonymous grievances be filed?                  Yes                                Not specified                   No

Is there a system to categorize, assign             No (informal)                      Yes                             Yes
priority, and route grievances to the
appropriate entity?

Are complaints acknowledged in writing?             After complaint addressed          Yes                             Yes

Does the acknowledgment outline the GRM             No initial acknowledgment          No                              Yes
process, provide contact details and indicate
how long it is likely to take to resolve the
grievance?

Are there clear timetables that are publicly        No                                 Partial                         No
available?

Is action taken on every grievance?                 Yes                                Yes                             Yes

Are there indicators to measure grievance           Yes                                Tracking, but unclear on        Yes
monitoring and resolution?                                                             indicators

Is there right to appeal? If yes, are GRM users     Not formal, but Yes                Yes                             Yes
informed about this right?

Innovations/Addl Info                               Participatory mechanisms create    Project-level Ombudsman
                                                    space for addressing grievances    serves as appeals body
                                                    without formal grievance           empowered to review and
                                                    procedures.                        recommend resolution. Two-
                                                                                       level grievance committees
                                                                                       with CSO reps enhance
                                                                                       accountability and legitimacy




         28                                Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
ANNEX 2:
Case Studies




               ANNEX 2: Case Studies   29
30   Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Kazakhstan SW Road Project

Overview
At the time of approval, this was one of the largest investment loans the Bank had
ever done. The team was under pressure from the Borrower to finalize the project
details and start implementation quickly. As a result, the initial EIA and RAP had some
flaws, including a significant underassessment of social impacts and project affected
persons. Bank management—with strong support from the MD on down—worked
proactively with the Borrower to improve the documents prior to approval. How-
ever, once implementation began, it became clearer that
social risks—which had been deemed relatively minor at
                                                                       Project Details:
first —were in fact going to be considerable. In particular,
                                                                       $2.125 billion IBRD Investment Loan to upgrade 1,062
the project required mobilization of a massive work force              km section of the old Silk Road trade route linking
(over 35,000 people employed directly or indirectly) which             China to Russia and Western Europe. The total project
generated significant issues that needed to be managed.                cost is $7.5 billion.
In addition, there were several requests for an Inspection
Panel investigation.                                                   •	 Project Approval: April 2009
                                                                        •	   TTL: 	Mr. Jacques Bure

GRM Structure                                                           GRM Rationale
During implementation, the Bank team realized they needed       The project triggers OP 4.12.
a much more structured grievance mechanism to handle
the questions and complaints coming in on the project.
They put in place a multi-level structure that encouraged immediate resolution of
issues on the ground but created access to more senior authorities to handle issues
that could not be resolved on the ground.


The contractor and PIU focal points were encouraged to log all complaints on the
spot and resolve immediately. Grievances that couldn’t be immediately resolved on
the ground by the contractor or PIU focal points moved to the local multi-stakeholder
committee. Issues that could not be resolved at that level would move to a national
multi-stakeholder committee.




                                                              ANNEX 2: Case Studies                        31
                                                                Implementation Issues
                                                       In practice the ad hoc local and national com-
      “You understand better because you have
                                                       mittees were never formed. Instead, beneficia-
information coming from the field with the real
                                                       ries went to their local authorities since that
                      concerns of the people.”         is what they were used to doing. Some cases
                              —Jacques Buré, TTL       were referred to the local Kazakh courts. Thus,
                                                       a key implementation challenge was creating the
                                                       conditions necessary for locals to use the Bank-de-
                                                       signed grievance system, and to appropriately link
                                                       this system to the traditional practice of resolving
                                                       issues through local authorities. The numbers of
                      complaints received by the Bank-designed system (less than 200 total) indicates that
                      this remains a challenge.




                                                      National multi-stakholder cmte
                                                   (NGOs, community members, borrower)



                                                       Local multi-stakeholder cmte
                                                   (NGOs, community members, borrower)



                                 Grievance focal point                                  Grievance focal point
                                  (contractor on site)                          (individual within PIU; independent)




                         However, once complaints did start coming in, both the Bank team and the client
                         acknowledged the value of the feedback. According to the TTL, even the client, who
                         was initially skeptical, took the GRM seriously. While only a small portion of the total
                         complaints were lodged with the Bank-designed GRM (< 200 total), the TTL said the
                         system was very effective at picking up many of the indirect impacts of the road on
                         both the local communities and the more than 35,000 people indirectly employed by
                         the project. Employee issues that were raised and addressed via the GRM included
                         low salaries and sexual harassment. In addition, there were compliance concerns
                         that needed to be addressed at a higher level, related to improper land acquisition
                         on behalf of the government.




           32                      Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
             Lessons Learned
             The project team has identified a number of opportunities for improved outcomes:


             •	                      Better up-front assessment of the potential social impacts and risks related to
                                     the workforce;
             •	                      Need to do a more structured assessment of capacity and credibility of existing
                                     GRM mechanisms in the Kazakh system;
             •	                      Train project staff in mediation and conflict-resolution skills prior to implemen-
                                     tation to better manage discussions with both the Borrower and the impacted
                                     communities;
             •	                      Going forward, improve the link between the Bank-designed GRM and the tradi-
                                     tional systems for resolving disputes. One basic step is to ensure all complaints
                                     lodged through local authorities are logged and tracked, and that data on reso-
                                     lutions is made public.

                                                                                                                                                                                                               To                                                                                 To
                                                    KAZAKHSTAN                                                                                    60°E                               65°E
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tyumen‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70°E                                75°E                    Novosibirsk          80°E                                        85°E


              SOUTH WEST ROADS PROJECT                                                                               55°N
                                                                                                                                                      To Chelyabinsk
                                                                                                                                                                         To Kurgan                           Chistoe                      Karakuga                                                                         To                                           RUSSIAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Novosibirsk
                                                                    50°E                               55°E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FEDERATION
                                                                                                                                                                                 l                        NORTH               Petropavlovsk                                  Pnirtyshskoe
                                                                                                                                                                             Toby
                                                                           To                                                                     Kaerak
                                                                         Samara          RUSSIAN FEDERATION                                     To
                                                                                                                                                                                                      KAZAKHSTAN
                                                    lga




                                                                                                                                                Ufa
                                                  Vo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kokshetau                                                                                                       To Barnaul
                                            To
                                          Saratov
                                                                                                               To Orenburg                                                 Kostanay                          Ruzaevka                                                                             Pavlodar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ob
                                                                                 Pogodaeva                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Krasny




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AKMOLA                                            PAVLODAR                                             Aul
                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                                    Ura




                                                    Kamenka                                                                                                                                                     Zhaksy                                                                  Ekibastuz     Er                                                                                        50°N
             50°N                                                 Ural'sk                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ti
                                                                                                                        km
                                                                                                                    102km
                                                                                                                   102                                                                                                                                                       Shiderty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s(




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Esil (Ishim)                                                                                                                        Öskemen
                                                                                                                                                                       KOSTANAI                                                                      ASTANA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Irt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   )
                                                             Chapaevo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Ust-Kamenogorsk)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Semipalatinsk
                                                                        Zhaiyk




                                              WEST                                                        Aktobe
                                                                            (Ura




                                           KAZAKHSTAN                                                                                            Karabutak                                      Arkalyk                                           Karagandy                                                                         EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lake
                                                                                l)




                                                                                                                                                                                       gh a i                                                                                                                                                                          Zaisan
                                                                                                                                                                                   Tor

                                                                                                                            273
                                                                                                                             273km
                                                                                                                                 km                                       Turgay                                                                                                                                                 KAZAKHSTAN
                              Vo




                                                                                                                              Embi                           215 km
                                                                                                                                                             215 km                                                                                                                                                                 Ayakos
                                                                            ATYRAU
                               lga




                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                        Zhe
                                                                                                               AKTOBE                       Shalkar
              To Astrakhan‘




                                                                        Atyrau                                                                                                                                         Zhezkazgan
                                            Kotyaevka                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Balkhash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KARAGHANDY
                                                                                                                                                  Aral                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   To
              45°N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Leps                                                  45°N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dostyk        Urumqi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  su




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Saryshaghan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Balkash                        ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       K




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                To Urumqi
                                                                                             Beyneu                                                                        Baikonur                                                                                                     Ile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ALMATY                         Taldykorgan
                                                                                                  Beyneu                             Aral                                                   Kyzyl-Orda                                               Shu
                                                                                                                                                       KYZYLORDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1062 km
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1025                                              u)
                                                Aktau                                                                                Sea                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Khorgos
                                                                        MANGYSTAU                                                                                                                                                                     ZHAMBYL                                      205 km
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 To Korla
                                     Ca




                                                                        Zhanaozen                     To Nukus                                                                                     rd                                            Ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   las
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar                                                      480km
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            464  km      Shu
                                      sp




                                                                                                                                                                                                       iya
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Almaty
                                             Ferry to Baku                                                                                                                                                                Turkistan
                                       ian




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kordai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         80 km Taraz                                                                              301km                                  CHINA
                                                     Bekdash                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Merke
                                                                                                                                                  UZBEKISTAN                                                                                                                                             To Naryn

             AZERBAIJAN                                                                                                                                                                                                   Shymkent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     203 km
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     123 km                    KYRGYZ
                                             Sea




             40°N                                                                                                                                                            SOUTH                                                       Zhibek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R E P.                                                                   80°E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Zoly
                                                                                                                                                                        KAZAKHSTAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40°N                          BORDER CROSSINGS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MARITIME PORTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                    To

                                     WESTERN EUROPE – WESTERN CHINA CORRIDOR                                   TURKMENISTAN                                                                       Bukhoro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 To Dushanbe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MAIN ROADS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RAILROADS
                                     SOUTH WEST ROADS PROJECT                                                                                                                                                                            TAJIKISTAN                                                                                                             MAIN CITIES AND TOWNS
                                     SOUTH WEST ROADS PROJECT RESTRUCTURING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OBLAST CAPITALS
                                     OTHER ROAD DEVELOPMENT CORRIDORS:                                                                                                                                                                                                                          This map was produced by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Map Design Unit of The World                                    GALASY (CITIES WITH
                                      EBRD AND GoK FINANCING                                                   0        100               200         300 Kilometers                                                                                                                            Bank. The boundaries, colors,                                   REGIONAL STATUS)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                denominations and any other
                                      GoK FINANCING                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             information shown on this map do                                NATIONAL CAPITAL
MARCH 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IBRD 36239




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                not imply, on the part of The
                                      ADB, IDB AND GoK FINANCING                                               0                    100                 200 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                  AFGHANISTAN                                                                                   World Bank Group, any judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                on the legal status of any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OBLAST BOUNDARIES

                                      REHABILITATED SECTIONS 55°E                                                                                                                                                                                                                               territory, or any endorsement or                                INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
                        50°E                                                                                                 60°E                                             65°E                                                            70°E                                              acceptance of such boundaries.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ANNEX 2: Case Studies                                                                                                                         33
34   Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Pakistan Flood Emergency Cash Transfer Project

Overview
Over the course of July and August 2010, Pakistan          Project Details:
experienced the worst floods in its history, affecting     $125 million IDA Emergency Recovery Credit to support Phase
nearly 10 percent of its population across a vast          II of the Government of Pakistan’s flood recovery cash transfer
geographical area. 60% of flood-affected house-            program.
holds were without a main source of livelihood
post-floods and 53% of households reported a               •	   Project Approval: March 2011
76–100% decline in household income.                       •	   TTL: Andrea Vermehren & Iftikhar Malik


                                                           GRM Rationale
Given the infancy of Pakistan’s pre-existing social
                                                       Large-scale cash transfer project in an emergency situation.
safety nets, the government of Pakistan set up a
rapid response cash transfer program focused on
supporting flood-affected families—the Citizen’s
Damage Compensation Program. Phase I of the CDCP provided immediate relief to
1.8 million families. The Flood Emergency Cash Transfer Project provided technical
assistance and helped finance emergency cash grants for Phase II of the CDCP’s
post-flood assistance.


Actions to address the shortfalls of Phase I were included in the MOU signed by the
government of Pakistan and its development partners for the project: the World Bank,
DFID, USAID and the Government of Italy. Among the improvements agreed upon
were the strengthening of CDCP grievance redress mechanisms and the institution
of a robust public information campaign.


The GRM
Each of the program’s facilitation centers includes a grievance redress counter staffed
by the National Database Registration Authority (NADRA). A public information
campaign spread information about the grievance redress process through television,
radio and print, as well as word-of-mouth communication facilitated by NGOs and
community networks.


In addition to the centers, the grievance redress system is able to receive complaints
through text messages and phone calls. Depending on the nature of the grievance,
different stakeholders are responsible for providing solutions:


•	   Grievances related to Computerized National Identity Cards: National Database
     Registration Authority: NADRA handles the updating of CNICs to include changes




                                                          ANNEX 2: Case Studies                         35
                                                                            in family status, address, family name,
                                                                            etc. Hotlines operate specifically for CNIC
                                                                            grievances.
                                                                        •	 Grievances related to eligibility/targeting:
                                                                            •	 Beneficiaries who believe they are incor-
                                                                                 rectly listed as ineligible first check with
                                                                                 their local authority (village level).
                                                                            •	 Appeals are run through basic filters in
                                                                                 the national database (does the appellant
                                                                                 live in a flood affected area? Have they
                                                                                 already been included in the program?)
                                                                                 and reviewed by a panel of local notables
                                                                                 made up of respected, apolitical profes-
                                                                                 sionals who were not involved in the
                                                                                 original survey.
                                                                            •	 Eligibility status updates are then sent to
                                                                                 the District Administration, which turns
685 people help to administer the grievance redress mechanism
across the various service providers (Pakistani government,
                                                                                 them over to the Provincial Disaster Man-
World Bank, other donors).                                                       agement Authority.
                                                                            •	 The Provincial Appeals Secretariat of
As of December 2012:                                                             the PDMA is the final decision-making
                                                                                 authority. The PDMA informs NADRA
•	 49% of eligibility appeals and 85% of complaints have                         whether an appeal is verified for inclusion
     been resolved                                                               or disapproved.
•	 1.087 million eligibility appeals have been logged                       •	 NADRA enters the decisions into the case
•	 536,846 eligibility appeals have been resolved                                management system and formal lists for
•	 139,841 of these resolved appeals were accepted for                           issuance of debit cards are released.
     inclusion and issuance of cash transfer debit cards                •	 Grievances related to payments: Partner com-
•	 5500 complaints (nonworking cards, requests for bribes,                  mercial banks respond to grievances related to
     etc.) have been logged
                                                                            payments, such as lost or nonworking debit
                                                                            cards, forgotten PIN numbers, etc. Partner
                                                                            banks operate offices and dedicated hotlines
                                                                            to address these grievances.
                                •	 Grievances related to maladministration or unanswered complaints: Grievance
                                     related to inefficient service delivery, bribery or malpractice (termed ‘complaints’)
                                     are forwarded for resolution to the District Administration or NADRA depending
                                     upon the agency to which these complaints pertain (e.g there are complaints against
                                     NADRA or District Administration staff asking for bribes, etc.). If complainant
                                     remains dissatisfied with the resolution of complaints by the concerned agency,
                                     she can approach provincial or federal ombudsmen for redress.




              36                         Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Lessons Learned
The project team has identified a number of points for improved outcomes:


•	   Communication strategy is key – public information campaign critical to
     participation.
•	   Developing standard practices – given the large and multi-nodal grievance redress
     structure, standard practices are essential for successfully administering the case load.
•	   Training for all parties to the GRM – links to standard practices. All nodes of
     the grievance redress process must have the same understanding of the process.
•	   Ownership of District Administration is essential for efficacious functioning of
     the committee of notables.




                                                              ANNEX 2: Case Studies              37
38   Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty Reduction Project
(India)

GRM Structure
The project does not have a formalized, uniform GRM. Village committees, self-help
groups, and other participatory bodies involved in project priority setting provide
open fora for addressing grievances without for-
malized grievance procedures. Village may inno-
vate in grievance redress. For example, publicly       Project Details:
posted “problem tree” information boards provide       $120 million (restructured with additional $154 million) IDA
contact information for appropriate authorities,       credit to improve the livelihoods and quality of life of the
timelines for complaint handling, and to whom          rural poor in Tamil Nadu (particularly women and other dis-
appeals may be directed (see accompanying blog         advantaged groups) through social, economic and democratic

post). District-level Public Grievance Committees      empowerment. This is a CDD project with over 581,000 target
                                                       households in 2500 villages.
may receive complaints and route to appropriate
authorities. In addition, grievances may be filed
                                                       •	 Project Approval: July 12, 2005 (Restructured Nov 18, 2010)
at the project level, though the project website or
                                                       •	 TTL: 	Kevin Crockford
contact person. The Project Director, plus nominat-
ed staff at state and district levels, may categorize
                                                       GRM Rationale
grievances and establish enquiry committees to         OP 4.10 triggered
investigate and report back.


Implementation Issues
Existing systems and structures: Grievance redress relies principally on established
local and state structures. Villages utilize local committees and decision-making
structures. Existing administrative processes for grievance redress, including those
instituted to ensure implementation of India’s Right to Information Act, provide more
formalized approaches.


Participation and accountability: The participatory nature of the project provides
multiple opportunities for identification and redress of emerging grievances within
the community-driven structures of the project. Social accountability mechanisms and




                                                          ANNEX 2: Case Studies                      39
         A “Problem Tree” Assures that Complaints are Quickly Addressed
         in Tamil Nadu

         Submitted by Kalesh Kumar on Thu, 07/07/2011, 19:31


                                   The multi-colored ‘problem tree’ on the branch of a Banyan tree in
                                   Elamangalam Village in the Kadaloor district of Tamil Nadu grabs
                                   your attention. You see it as soon as you enter the village and
                                   English letters ending in @worldbank.org immediately piqued our
                                   curiosity despite our lack of knowledge of the local language. This
                                   poster, placed around the Village Poverty Reduction Committee
                                   (VPRC) and established under the World Bank supported Tamil
                                   Nadu Empowerment and Poverty Reduction Project (TNEPRP
                                   – “Vazhndu Kaatuvom”), in Elamangalam and other villages in
                                   Tamil Nadu gives the title, addresses and phone numbers of all the
                                   responsible project leaders from the government and the World
         Bank to help solve any complaints.


         This innovative Complaint Redressal System provides a timeframe within which a complaint
         is expected to get a response. If unsatisfactory, the plaintiff can appeal to a higher authority.
         Having clear time lines for escalation and resolution of problems is an essential cornerstone
         of good governance and social accountability in projects that are implemented at the grass
         root level. The last row of the poster has the name and email address of the project lead-
         er from World Bank and suggests 48 hrs as the time available for her to provide a response!
         The former project team leader confirmed to have received about 20 emails from across
         Tamil Nadu in her Washington office over two years reflecting the utilization of the system.


         The beneficiaries in other villages also had stories to tell about the effectiveness of this sort
         of complaint redressal systems. In Keerapalayam Village, 14 hand pumps were distributed
         without any loss. Feedback prompted water pipelines to be more evenly distributed across
         the village. Taking the process to the next level, in some villages we visited like Pathur, the




     external process monitoring (undertaken by competitively elected CSOs) strengthens
     downward accountability to project beneficiaries.


     Information tracking: Grievances filed through the public district authorities as well
     as at the project level are recorded and tracked. At the village level, it is unclear the




40              Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Social Audit Committee had also set up a complaint and
suggestions box in a central location.


TNEPRP is an empowerment and poverty alleviation
project implemented by the Rural Development and
Panchayat Raj Department of Government of Tamil
Nadu with World Bank assistance. The project covers
2509 Villages in 70 Blocks in 16 districts. The target pop-
ulation of this project are poor households, the most vulnerable including the physically
challenged and the marginalized communities. The project follows the community driven
development (CDD) approach where village communities identify their own needs, design
                               and plan interventions and implement and monitor them.


                               An operation manual was developed by the community and
                               project staff, listing the principles of the livelihood approach
                               to poverty reduction and the institutions that should be
                               established or strengthened. It includes guidelines on how
                               procurement should happen, how finances should be man-
                               aged and how social accountability should be handled. This
involvement of the community in generating user friendly guidelines helps ensure that the
community knows what third party oversight entails and a series of workshops ensured
that the community was informed.


Communication materials targeted to rural households of illiterate and semi literate pop-
ulace has been a hallmark of the project, pictorial posters (shown in pictures) are used to
communicate community procurement procedures and processes. The project has thus far
received much recognition for its pro poor approach and has set the stage for adaptation
of its key principles in many grass root level initiatives of the state government.


How can this be useful for your community? Source: Ending Poverty in South Asia blog,
World Bank, at http://tinyurl.com/3esv37r




degree to which grievances are registered. However, there is no centralized tracking
of all grievances received under the entire project.


Service standards: While the lack of uniform GRM procedures at the start of the proj-
ect provided flexibility to address grievances through a variety of community-driven




                                                                  ANNEX 2: Case Studies           41
     mechanisms/processes, the initial lack of standards (i.e., process guarantees regarding
     acknowledgements, response times, appeals procedures) at the village level could
     also have led to idiosyncratic approaches in addressing grievances. Subsequently,
     procedures regarding response times and appeals were incorporated.


     Lessons Learned
     CDD projects present a challenge given the geographic dispersion of the projects and
     the number of unique sub-projects. In this instance, the client could improve greater
     consistency and credibility among sub-project GRMs by applying the GRM Evaluation
     tool produced by DRP (available at furl “disputeresolution”). This is a short 2-page
     checklist of questions to ask of a GRM to assess it against some basic principles:
     legitimacy, accessibility, predictability, fairness, rights compatibility, transparency,
     and capability. It is not prescriptive but rather a tool that clients can use to strengthen
     existing structures and ensure they are credible and effective for the targeted users.




42             Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Upper Cisokan Pumped Hydroelectrical Power Project
(Indonesia)

GRM Structure
                                                           Project Details:
A two-level Grievance Task Force (GTF, with griev-
                                                           $640 million IBRD Specific Investment Loan for con-
ance units in the project area and a grievance             struction of a dam and 1040 MW power generation
center in Bandung) includes NGO and academic               station, transmission lines and access roads; and design
community development experts charged with                 and feasibility studies for an 880 MW pumped storage
assisting complainants with filing grievances and          power project.
navigating the redress process. While part of the
project team, the GTF is to operate independently.         •	   Project Approval: May 26, 2011
Multiple uptake channels, including a hotline num-         •	   TTL: Mr. Peter Johansen
ber and SMS, reach the GTF which then classifies
grievances and routes them to appropriate actors.          GRM Rationale
In addition, the GTF may assist complainants to            OP 4.12 is triggered, with both land acquisition and displace-

access additional support services funded by the           ment of households expected. Pre-feasibility focus group
                                                           discussions found that project affected peoples had insisted
project, including a mediating committee and
                                                           that a complaints handling mechanism be established.
legal counseling


Implementation Issues
The GTF is consciously designed to be quasi-independent from the project team (its
Terms of Reference were approved by the Bank team) and to serve as an advocate
for project affected persons which may help drive complaints toward rapid resolu-
tion. Tight timetables for grievance processing (initial action/referral within 1 week,
response of competent office/authority within 2 weeks, completed handling within
3 weeks) also support quick resolution. The project also supports additional services
(such as legal counseling and a mediating committee) to help complainants obtain
satisfactory redress.


The project engages an Independent Monitoring Agency to track implementation of
project commitments. Grievance forms a central part of the monitoring process with
grievance tracking forms and indicators for number of cases, meetings and field visits,




                                                         ANNEX 2: Case Studies                         43
     Mechanism of Grievance Handling for the Upper Cisokan Pump Storage Project

       Project Affected                                                          Governor
        People (PAP)
                                                            Head of District
     Grievances Taskforce


        Land, Physical
        Asset and Trees
         Acquisition
                             Head of Village      Head Sub          Land
          Grievance
                            Informal Leader       District       Acquisition
                                                                 Committee            Resettlement
         Resettlement                                                                    Policy
          Grievance                                               Resettlement        Formulation
                                                                 Implementation          Team
                                                                     Team


                                                                                     PLN
         Construction                                                           Hydroelectric
                               Contractor
          Grievance                                                            Development of
                                                                                  Java-Bali




     and satisfactory disposition of cases. Independent verification of the GTF’s handling
     of grievances should strengthen accountability and delivery of results. Monitoring
     indicators include (i) cases of land acquisition referred to court, pending and set-
     tled; (ii) number of grievance meetings; (iii) number of village-level meetings; (iv)
     number of field visits by PLN/RIT/RPFT officers; (v) number of cases resolved to
     the satisfaction of PAPs.




44             Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Hubei Yiba Highway Project (China)

Overview
This road construction project required signifi-              Project Details:
cant resettlement (around 10,000 people) and the              $150 million IBRD Investment Loan for highway construction
road went through a national park with sensitive              through an ecologically sensitive area (Three Gorges Geological

environmental features. The project documents                 Park). The total project cost is $2.2 billion.

lay out a good basic GRM structure that includes
                                                              •	   Project Approval: March 2009
multiple access points, an appeals process, and a
                                                              •	   TTL: 	Ms. Fei Deng (current)
centralized complaints database.
                                                              	         Christopher Bennett (former)


Implementation Issues                                         GRM Rationale

Once implementation was underway, it became                The project triggered both OP 4.10 and OP 4.12, and the client
                                                           requested Bank assistance in managing the environmental
clear that the system had some considerable draw-
                                                           impacts of the project.
backs, namely that it was not being widely used
and, when it was being used, not all grievances
were being entered into the central database. Thus,
the data that was received was less useful to the client (and the Bank team) since it
wasn’t giving the full picture.


The first indicator that something was not working right was the number of com-
plaints received (fewer than 200) compared to the scale and scope of the project,
which involved the resettlement of 10,000 people and went through a national park.
Christopher Bennett, the TTL at the time, said “As a TTL, I should have been really
happy with no complaints, but I just didn’t believe it.” The team was concerned
that not all grievances were making it into the system. To assess whether this was
happening, the TTL and Social Development Specialist surveyed impacted commu-
nities to verify their concerns, and their review confirmed that not all project-related
grievances were making it into the formal records.


To address this issue, the Bank team hired a consultant to design an SMS system and
web interface that would allow individuals the opportunity to directly input grievances
and concerns. The design of the SMS system and accompanying web interface were




                                                            ANNEX 2: Case Studies                              45
                                                              simple, practical, and easy-to-use, but it was not
                                                              embraced by the Chinese locals, who preferred to
                                                              direct their complaints to local village authorities.
                                                              The Bank estimated that over 95% of grievances
                                                              were ultimately channeled through traditional
                                                              mechanisms versus the SMS system. The chiefs
                                                              recorded these grievances in writing, but there was
                                                              no direct link to the Bank’s SMS system (or vice
                                                              versa) that allowed for a comprehensive view of
                                                              the concerns of the local communities.


L–R: World Bank TTL    Lessons Learned
Fei Deng, resettled
person, Mr. Tang,      The team identified the need to assess existing grievance systems and incorporate
director of Hubei      these systems into the Bank-designed structure, to ensure all grievances are logged,
Yiba Highway Project
Construction,          tracked and responded to. A shared database and Memorandum of Understanding with
in charge of
resettlement
                       the local village authorities could be one option to ensure a clearer picture of local
                       citizens’ concerns in real time. The database would include all grievances received
                       by the chiefs as well as grievances channeled through the SMS and web. Training
                       villagers to manage a centralized database and implementing regular performance
                       reports on all grievances received could significantly improve the effectiveness and
                       credibility of both systems.


                       EXCERPT FROM PAD
                       “Complaints are dealt with in up to four stages:
                       •	 Stage 1: The DP’s may present their grievances either orally or in writing to the
                          village committee or local resettlement office. If oral, a written record must be made
                          and a clear response given within two weeks. If it is a serious matter, it must be
                          reported to a higher level resettlement office and a reply received within two weeks.
                       •	 Stage 2: If the complainant is not satisfied with the outcome of Stage 1, they may
                          appeal to the higher level resettlement office within one month after receiving the
                          Stage 1 reply. The county or district level resettlement office must reply within
                          three weeks to this appeal.
                       •	 Stage 3: If the complainant is not satisfied with the district or county resettlement
                          office response they
                       •	 may appeal to the regional resettlement office within one month of receiving the
                          Stage 2 response. The resettlement office shall respond within one month.
                       •	 Stage 4: If the matter is still not satisfactorily resolved the complainant may appeal
                          to civil court within 15 days of receiving the response from the resettlement office.




         46                      Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
As mentioned above, the ‘Safeguards Compliance Monitoring System’ will be piloted
as part of this project. It will allow for workers, residents and farmers to access project
information as well as file grievances and concerns related to project actions, specifically
issues related to resettlement, environment, or worker rights, using the text messaging
feature on their cell phones, or through the internet—via e-mail or web-based form.
Complaints can be filed anonymously or with contact information in order to receive
a follow-up message. These complaints, which will be received by the Bank, the client,
and an independent monitor, will be logged and addressed appropriately and in a
timely manner.”


The chart below indicates the grievance process and includes both the local tradi-
tional systems (i.e. village leaders) as well as the Bank-designed SMS system that
routs complaints directly to the resettlement monitor in the implementing agency:


                                      Follow up with         If resolved
                                     World Bank Office

  Management Level                         If not resolved


                                       Follow up with    If resolved
                                    Resettlement Monitor

                                           If not resolved


                                     Formal Complaint to    Complaint sent to     Client,
                                    Resettlement Monitor                       World Bank
                                         (via SCMS)      If resolved  Notify and Independent
                                                                                 Monitor
                                           If not resolved
  Project Level

                                           Project       If resolved
                                    Resettlement Monitor

  Province Level                           If not resolved


                                                             If resolved
                                       District Leader

  District Level                           If not resolved
                     Major Issues




                                            Local            If resolved
                                     Resettlement Office

                                           If not resolved
                                                             If resolved
                Complainant             Local Leader

                                             Inform
  Local Level




                                                                    ANNEX 2: Case Studies      47
48   Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Chad Local Development Program Support Project 2

Overview
The first phase of this CDD project focused on               Project Details:
establishing a decentralized, community-based                Second phase of community-based development program

approach to local development, including ensuring            to improve access to infrastructure and basic social services.
                                                             Bank committed $25 million of $77.25 million countrywide
support from stakeholders and government offi-
                                                             project. Local communities submit plans for micro-projects
cials. Once that was achieved, the second phase
                                                             (i.e., schools, health clinics) that are managed and monitored
of the project was developed, and it was agreed
                                                             by local committees. Some micro infrastructure projects may
that it would focus on sub-projects in rural areas
                                                             impact land holdings or assets, triggering OP 4.12 and the
across the country. Chad is a fragile state with             GRM requirement.
severe poverty, ethnic diversity, and a history of
conflicts and elite capture/corruption.                      •	   Approval: March 18, 2011		
                                                             •	   TTL: Soulemane Fofana
                                                             •	   Categorization: B
The GRM
Since individual projects were not defined at the
                                                            GRM Rationale
time of project approval, a Resettlement Policy             Triggers OP 4.12.
Framework (RPF) was developed to guide future
projects. The GRM section in the PAD is fairly
general, and states that grievance redress may be an informal consensus process, a
formal process, or a court case. The PAD does not include guidance on what a GRM
should look like in the event site-specific RAPs are required. The Bank team, however,
has flushed out a general approach to developing project-specific GRMs.


Projects will rely on existing traditional structures in the villages to handle grievances.
The villages form committees (procurement committee, management committee) to
oversee their respective sub-project. These committees are the first point of uptake.
If they cannot resolve issues, grievances are escalated to the village chiefs. Although
not described in the project documents, there is a grievance redress hierarchy: local
committees, chiefs/elders, regional project implementation team, and a central team
in the government ministry. There are no standard procedures, monitoring or tracking
but the Bank team has emphasized quick redress at the local level to avoid conflict




                                                            ANNEX 2: Case Studies                        49
     escalation. The Bank team has also encouraged greater use of local citizens versus
     government employees to manage grievances in order to reduce corruption. There is
     an outreach campaign, open meetings, public announcements, and public contracts to
     educate citizens of the process and reduce conflicts. As of early 2013, implementation
     was just getting underway and Bank staff was not aware of any complaints. No data
     was available to check this view.


     Lessons Learned
     The project is still in its early stages, so lessons are preliminary. This project rightly
     identifies the need to work with existing local systems for grievance redress, given the
     operating environment in Chad. The emphasis on on-the-ground resolution and simple
     systems is appropriate. Building a complicated GRM system in this instance would
     likely not be used, given that the projects will impact rural citizens who likely have
     limited/no electricity and may be illiterate. Working directly with the local committees
     is likely the best option for strengthening capacity to manage issues. This could include
     walking through the GRM Evaluation tool, which is a short checklist of questions to
     get clients thinking about ways to strengthen their existing systems. Similarly, putting
     in place timelines for responses and a basic monitoring and evaluation system (run
     by the villages) could improve outcomes for users in a “light-touch” manner.




50             Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Uganda Electricity Sector Development Project

Overview
The right of way and substation construction               Project Details:
requires land acquisition, affecting 13,596 persons.       $120 million IDA credit (total project cost $153.2 million) to

1,152 persons will be resettled. As of early 2013,         improve reliability and access to electricity in southwestern
                                                           Uganda through construction of a 137km transmission line
the project was still in the bidding process, and
                                                           and related substations.
no land acquisition or construction had begun.
Thus, the GRM was not up and running but is
                                                           •	   Approval: June 30, 2011				
fairly well-defined in the project documents.
                                                           •	   TTL: Somin Mukherji
                                                           •	   Categorization: A

The GRM
                                                           GRM Rationale
The proposed GRM uses existing systems and struc-
                                                           Project triggers OP 4.12.
tures and has three levels of redress. The Village
Grievance Committees (with representatives of
project-affected communities) are the first point of
contact and seek to resolve complaints using cus-
tomary rules. Where the village committee cannot resolve the complaint, complaints
are referred to the District Land Tribunal. Where the Land Tribunals cannot solve the
dispute, the aggrieved party is free to evoke their constitutional right to file a case
with the court system. The courts take a long time to process cases so it is expected
that most issues will get resolved at lower levels. A project-level Resettlement Unit,
reporting to the implementing agency (Uganda Electricity Transmission Company,
or UETCL), coordinates RAP implementation, including complaints processing,
convening Village Grievance Committees, and resolving complaints that the Village
Committee is unable to. Some service standards are specified. UETCL has experience
with complex projects and grievances (Bujugali dam) and will hire a consultant to
help manage the GRM.


The RAP identifies that the second level of the proposed GRM structure is weak, since
there is a lack of capacity in the Land Tribunals, and complainants must finance their
own travel, meals, and allowance for tribunal members. The Bank team is emphasizing




                                                         ANNEX 2: Case Studies                         51
     the Village Grievance Committees to resolve issues, with Resettlement Unit tasked
     with addressing unresolved complaints. The Finance Ministry, not the implementing
     agency, will do monthly reporting and external monitoring, and these reports will be
     shared with the World Bank in their entirety.


     Lessons Learned
     This project emphasizes on-the-ground resolution of issues, includes at least one
     level of escalation, and includes processes to ensure complaint-handling is predict-
     able and transparent. Furthermore, it appears that complaints will be tracked in a
     central database that is monitored by an independent entity—a key component that
     often is missing. Importantly, the Bank will receive the monthly monitoring reports
     which will allow for faster support to the client and early responses to developing
     risks. Suggested areas for improvement could include (i) ensuring anonymous
     complaints can be filed; and (ii) having the client evaluate the effectiveness of the
     Village Grievance Committees to identify potential weaknesses. Finally, given a
     project of this size, grievance procedures should be written down in a manual and
     shared publicly with local communities.




52             Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
Zanzibar Urban Services Project (Tanzania)

Overview
As of early 2013, civil works had not yet com-             Project Details:
menced and key GRM elements (i.e., database,               $38 million IDA credit to improve access to urban services in
focal points, Resettlement Coordination Unit) had          Zanzibar and conserve physical cultural heritage by provision of

not yet been put in place.                                 storm water drainage, sanitation services; and construction of
                                                           a sea wall and promenade. Although no physical resettlement
                                                           is anticipated, the project involves some land acquisition and
GRM Structure                                              temporary dislocation during construction.
Project-affected persons (PAPs) are notified about
the grievance mechanism and their legal rights to          •	 Approval: February 24, 2011
file complaints with the courts (i.e., handed a letter     •	 TTL: Andre Bald

of notification that is verbally explained to those        •	 Categorization: A

who cannot read by a trusted intermediary). PAPs
                                                           GRM Rationale
may file complaints with either local community
                                                           Triggers OP 4.12.
leaders (e.g., Shehas) or with the community
liaison and grievance redress officer appointed
by the project’s Resettlement Coordination Unit
(RCU). The liaison and grievance officer is responsible for receiving, recording, and
processing of complaints. Local leaders who receive complaints must channel them
to the officer within three days. PAPs may file grievances with community leaders at
anytime. In addition, twice a month the officer informs the PAPs in a timely manner
of the time and location he will be stationed (on site), and where the PAPs can lodge
their grievances.


If the dispute cannot be resolved within fourteen (14) days, it will be referred to
the Regional Manager of the project resettlement coordination unit (RCU) where
amicable resolution will be sought between the RCU and the PAP within another
established period of twenty-one (21) days. However, if the dispute is not resolved,
the aggrieved party is free to take the matter to a Primary Court of Law as their final
resort. Compensation will be paid upon resolution of the grievance or dispute. The




                                                          ANNEX 2: Case Studies                          53
     grievance team must keep a database of all grievance claims as well as the period if
     took to resolve the disputes which will be kept on record by the RCU.


     Lessons Learned
     While there is no implementation experience as of early 2013, this appears to be a
     well-designed, fairly “light-touch” grievance redress mechanism, consistent with the
     scale and scope of the project. It relies on local existing structures and keeps redress
     close to the PAPs, which is good practice. Timelines and processes are well-defined,
     along with appropriate escalation for more serious grievances. The design anticipates
     a centralized database of all grievances and requires monitoring. Some details remain
     unclear: whether anonymous grievances can be filed, whether all grievances are
     acknowledged in writing, the composition of the Resettlement Coordinating Unit,
     and how triage/prioritization of grievances occurs.


                                                                                 Primary Court




              Resettlement Coordination Unit (RCU)
                                                         3
        21                                              Days
       Days

                        Grievance Redressal Officer                   Shehia-sheha

                 14
                Days

                                                               PAP’s Complaint




54             Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
NamTheun 2 Hydroelectric Project (Lao PDR)

GRM Structure
A three-step grievance process was developed for               Project Details
the project. Complainants first raised complaints to           $20 million IDA grant to support construction of 1,070 MW
Village Grievance Committees (VGC) which sought                hydropower facility, management of environmental and
resolution through dialogue and discussion. If the             social impacts, and monitoring and evaluation arrangements
issue could not be resolved at the VGC, complain-
ants could raise their grievance with District Griev-          •	    Project Approval: March 31, 2005 (closed)
ance Committees (DGC) which were comprised                     •	    TTL: Ingo Wiederhofer
of the public District Justice Department, supple-
mented by representatives of village and women                 GRM Rationale
organizations. DGCs were required to respond to                The project required resettlement of approximately 6,300
                                                               people in 15 villages, triggering OP 4.12.
complaints within 15 days. If complainants were
not satisfied with outcomes of the DGC, they could


Steps in the Grievance Process Regarding Issues of Compensation and Resettlement

                   PAP not satisfied with Compensation or the Process


                   Appeal to the Village Grievance Committee of Elders


                                       Examination
                                                                PAP satisfied – settled
                                  PAP still not satisfied


           Appeal to Project Grievance Committee and Court at the District Level


  NamTheun 2            Advice                              Advice          Resettlement
                                       Examination
 Power Company                                                             Management Unit

                                                                PAP satisfied – settled

                                  PAP still not satisfied


                                     Provincial Court




                                                              ANNEX 2: Case Studies                         55
     appeal to the Provincial Court as a last resort. The project engaged a local NGO to
     act as an adviser and counsel to affected persons to navigate the grievance process.
     In addition to internal monitoring, an Independent Monitoring Agency was tasked
     with reviewing and reporting on grievance cases and their resolution.


     Implementation Issues
     Reliance on local grievance systems: The project relies largely on the local governmental
     dispute resolution processes, augmented with village and women organization repre-
     sentatives and supported by the project sponsor. The final report of the International
     Advisory Group (IAG, reporting to the World Bank President) found that the local
     institutions handled the complaints well if occasionally slowly. The IAG questioned
     whether reliance on local grievance structures would have worked as well if the
     government had been the direct project sponsor), an issue that may require attention
     with the handover of the Downstream Program (which has given rise to numerous
     complaints) from the Nam Theun Power Company to the Provincial Government.




56             Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects
