                                                           90391




         Evaluating
           a Grievance Redress
                   Mechanism




Note to User: This is a checklist of questions that can be used to help
evaluate an existing grievance redress mechanism. The questions should
be used to guide a discussion between World Bank staff and the client
with the goal of identifying areas that are working well and areas that
need improvement.
                                                                                            Evaluating a GRM




                                                Questions to Consider
                                                         Design Stage

    Why did you include a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) in your project?
    Where/how did you locate the GRM?
    How did you determine it would be effective?
    Was the GRM designed with participation from the communities it is intended to serve?

                                                    Implementation Stage

    1. Organizational Commitment

                            Do the project’s management and staff
                            recognize and value the GRM process as a
                            means of improving public administration
                            and enhancing accountability and
                            transparency?
                            Is grievance redress integrated into the
                            project’s core activities?
                            Is grievance redress integrated into staff job
                            descriptions and responsibilities?
                            Is it appropriately resourced and monitored?

    2. Principles

    2.1 Legitimacy          Does the GRM operate independently of
                            interested parties?
                            Is the GRM widely-perceived as
                            independent?

    2.2 Accessibility       Is the GRM accessible to all stakeholders,
                            irrespective of their remoteness, language,
                            education or income level?
                            Are procedures to file grievances and
                            seek action easily understood by project
                            beneficiaries?
                            Can grievances be filed anonymously?
                            Are there a range of contact options?
                            Is the GRM appropriately advertised and
                            communicated to project-affected people?




2
Evaluating a GRM




                                          Questions to Consider
                                        Implementation Stage (continued)

 2.3 Predictability   Is the GRM responsive to the needs of all
                      complainants?
                      Does the GRM offer a clear procedure with
                      time frames for each stage and clarity on the
                      types of results it can (and cannot) deliver?

 2.4 Fairness         Are grievances treated confidentially,
                      assessed impartially, and handled
                      transparently?

 2.5 Rights           Are the GRM’s outcomes consistent with
     Compatibility    applicable national and international
                      standards?
                      Does it restrict access to other redress
                      mechanisms?

 2.6 Transparency     Are the GRM’s procedures and outcomes
                      transparent enough to meet the public
                      interest concerns at stake?

 2.7 Capability       Do GRM officials have the necessary
                      technical, human and financial resources,
                      means and powers to investigate
                      grievances?

 3. Staff

                      Are there dedicated and trained staff
                      available to handle the GRM?
                      Are they given learning opportunities and do
                      they receive any systematic reviews of their
                      performance?

 4. Processes

 4.1 Uptake           Do multiple uptake channels exist?

 4.2 Sorting and      Is there a system to categorize, assign
     processing       priority, and route grievances to the
                      appropriate entity?




                                                                           3
                                                                                 Evaluating a GRM




                                                 Questions to Consider
                                              Implementation Stage (continued)

    4.3 Acknowledgement     Are complaints acknowledged in writing?
        and 	follow-up      Does the acknowledgement outline the GRM
                            process, provide contact details and indicate
                            how long it is likely to take to resolve the
                            grievance?
                            Are there clear timetables that are publicly
                            available?

    4.4 Verification,       Is the merit of each grievance judged
        investigation and   objectively against clearly defined
        action              standards?
                            Are investigators neutral or do they have a
                            stake in the outcome?
                            Is action taken on every grievance?

    4.5 Monitoring and      Is there a process to track grievances and
        Evaluation          assess progress being made to resolve
                            grievances?
                            Are there indicators to measure grievance
                            monitoring and resolution?
                            If there is data being collected, is this data
                            used to make policy and/or process changes
                            to minimize similar grievances in the future?

    4.6 Feedback            Does a user survey exist to get feedback on
                            the credibility of the process?
                            Is such feedback publicly available?
                            Is there right to appeal? If yes, are GRM
                            users informed about this right?

    4.7. Analysis           Is there a process to analyze the
                            effectiveness of the GRM?
                            Is there a timeframe?




4
