                                                              90422 v2




Kyrgyz Republic:
Diagnostic Review of
Consumer Protection and
Financial Literacy
  Volume II: Comparison with Good Practices




                                                           May, 2014
Financial and Private Sector Development Vice-Presidency
Europe and Central Asia Region
Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection Service Line
Washington, DC
This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World
Bank or the governments they represent.
Acknowledgments                                                     Comparison with Good Practices



                                 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Diagnostic Study was produced by a team comprising Johanna Jaeger (Mission Leader and
Financial Sector Specialist), Siegfried Zottel (co-Mission Leader and Financial Sector Specialist),
Mairam Usupova (World Bank Senior Financial Sector Specialist), Sarah Reynolds (Banking
Sector Consultant), Ilka Funke (Microfinance Sector Consultant), and Adetola Adenuga (Financial
Analyst). Technical guidance was provided by Samuel Munzele Maimbo (Lead Financial Sector
Specialist, ECSF2, and Task Team leader), with oversight provided by Douglas Pearce (Acting
Service Line Manager, FFIMS) and Paloma Casero (Sector Manager, ECSF1).
Peer review comments were provided by Nataliya Mylenko (Senior Financial Sector Specialist)
and Cedric Mousset (Lead Financial Sector Specialist).
The team expresses its appreciation to the Kyrgyz authorities for their cooperation during the
preparation of the Review. The project team would like to thank all those who so generously
contributed to the final report.
The Review was prepared as part of the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO)
Trust Fund on “Financial Sector Development”.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | iii
Table of Content                                                                            Comparison with Good Practices


                                                  KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

                                 Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and
                                               Financial Literacy

                                  Volume II – Comparison with Good Practices


ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ........................................................................................... 5
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector ..............................................................................................1
Section A. Consumer Protection Institutions .....................................................................................1
Section B. Disclosure and Sales Practices ........................................................................................16
Section C. Customer Account Handling and Maintenance ..............................................................38
Section D. Privacy and Data Protection ...........................................................................................61
Section E. Dispute Resolution Mechanisms .....................................................................................76
Section F. Privacy and Data Protection ............................................................................................83
Section G. Consumer Empowerment ............................................................................................... 89
Section H. Competition and Consumer Protection ...........................................................................91
II. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions ....................................................................95
Section A. Consumer Protection Institutions ...................................................................................95
Section B. Disclosure and Practices ............................................................................................... 101
Section C. Customer Account Handling and Maintenance ............................................................110
Section D. Privacy and Data Protection .........................................................................................117
Section E. Dispute Resolution Mechanism ....................................................................................120
Section F. Consumer Empowerment .............................................................................................. 122
Annex A: Financial Education........................................................................................................125

Table of Boxes

Box 1. Focus group methodology ...................................................................................................126
Box 2. Findings of focus group discussions ...................................................................................127




                Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | iv
                   ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AFI           Alliance for Financial Inclusion
AMFI          Association of Microfinance Institutions
CCMD          Coordination Council for Microfinance Development
CPFL          Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
EU            European Union
GDP           Gross Domestic Product
IAIS          International Association of Insurance Supervisors
IFC           International Finance Cooperation
IOSCO         International Organization of Securities Commissions
IRG           International Resources Group
KfW           Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau (English Translation)
MFO           Microfinance Organization
MoU           Memorandum of Understanding
MTO           Money Transfer Operators
NBKR          National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic
NGO           Non-governmental organization
OECD          Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
RCT           Randomized Control Trial
UNDP          United Nations Development Program
WB            World Bank




        Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 5
          I.      Good Practices: Banking Sector
                 Section A. Consumer Protection Institutions

                               A.1. Consumer Protection Regime

Good Practice
The law should provide clear consumer protection rules regarding banking products and services,
and all institutional arrangements should be in place to ensure the thorough, objective, timely and
fair implementation and enforcement of all such rules.
   a. Specific statutory provisions should create an effective regime for the protection of a
      consumer of any banking product or service.
   b. A general consumer agency, a financial supervisory agency or a specialized financial
      consumer agency should be responsible for implementing, overseeing and enforcing
      consumer protection regarding banking products and services, as well as for collecting and
      analyzing data (including inquiries, complaints and disputes).
   c. The designated agency should be funded adequately to enable it to carry out its mandates
      efficiently and effectively.
   d. The work of the designated agency should be carried out with transparency, accountability
      and integrity.
   e. There should be co-ordination and co-operation between the various institutions mandated
      to implement, oversee and enforce consumer protection and financial system regulation
      and supervision.
   f.   The law should also provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for the private sector,
        including voluntary consumer organizations and self-regulatory organizations, in respect
        of consumer protection regarding banking products and services.
I.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                               Comparison with Good Practices


 Description
 a. A very significant amount of work has either recently been completed or is currently in process
 for the establishment of the legal and regulatory framework in a variety of important areas. These
 include a series of regulations on risk management of various kinds, rules on lending processes
 and disclosures, draft legislation on credit reporting, draft legislation covering remittances and
 electronic payments, amendments of foreclosure processes, changes in administrative penalties,
 and others. NBKR, as well as the other stakeholders and participants in these processes, should be
 commended for their attention to these important issues and the substantial effort contributed.
 Nonetheless, progress has in some important areas been fragmented and piecemeal, with rules for
 consumer protection inserted into various normative acts that deal primarily with other subjects
 and a lack of procedural regulation to keep up with new substantive rules. This piecemeal
 approach, as well as the sheer quantity of recently issued and pending legislation, results in a
 voluminous and somewhat fragmented framework that may lead to gaps in coverage and create
 difficulties for both financial institutions and consumers in understanding and application of the
 rules.
 A draft Banking Code currently in development takes a unified approach and offers an important
 opportunity to address both institutional authority and substantive consumer protection rules and
 to bring more order and coherence to the legal framework. The draft Code directly establishes
 some broad requirements for bank conduct in relation to clients and authorizes NBKR to issue
 regulation containing further detail in a variety of areas, strengthening and clarifying the NBKR
 mandate in this area. Substantive rules address important issues including disclosures and dispute
 resolution, but need to be further elaborated and clarified in a number of areas (advertising and
 public disclosures, communication with clients, requirements on early repayment of loans,
 restrictions on changes in contract provisions and others). The process of passage of the Code
 and the required process after passage to bring laws and normative acts into compliance with the
 provisions of the new Code will offer an important opportunity for NBKR to bring greater order
 to the normative legal framework. During this process it will be important for some of the many
 existing provisions to be consolidated into a more coherent and compact framework that is easier
 for financial institutions to apply, consumers to understand and NBKR to supervise.
 Failure of laws and regulations to distinguish between individual banking consumers and business
 users of banking services contributes significantly to lack of clarity in provisions and low
 standards of consumer protection throughout the existing legal framework. Legal rules may rely
 on agreement of the parties to set terms and refrain from specifying rights and processes in detail
 in order to preserve the flexibility and autonomy needed by sophisticated corporate banking
 clients, at the same time prescribing substantial reporting and monitoring requirements and
 allowing aggressive enforcement policies to protect banks in relation to what may be large
 exposure on corporate loans. These same rules, however, may provide insufficient protection to
 unsophisticated individuals without the leverage or experience to negotiate contract terms and
 may result in impractical monitoring demands that intrude on individuals’ privacy and unduly
 rapid or harsh collection policies that abuse individual consumers and are not efficient in overall
 debt collection.




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 7
I.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


 b. Regulatory authority and enforcement responsibility for consumer protection in the banking
 sector are not clearly assigned. Banking legislation makes NBKR responsible for protection of
 depositors and creditors, and also specifically for enforcement in relation to its licensees of
 antimonopoly legislation, including rules on unfair competition. The latter assignment is
 sometimes (although not consistently) interpreted as sufficient to provide NBKR with authority in
 the area of consumer protection as well. References to protection of depositors and creditors,
 however, can also be understood to refer to prudential supervision (an interpretation consistent
 with the structure and remaining content of the banking legislation). The lack of a clear legal
 assignment to NBKR of authority and responsibility for protection of all users of banking and
 services raises questions about the scope and extent of NBKR’s authority in this area. It may also
 force NBKR to address issues of bank conduct in relation to clients through prudential
 supervision and competition law tools and concepts that are less clear and efficient than is
 desirable.
 Despite a lack of clarity about its authority in this area, NBKR is de facto the body regulating and
 enforcing in the area of financial consumer protection in relation to banks. NBKR has issued
 regulations addressing a variety of financial consumer protection issues and is now creating a unit
 that will be specifically responsible for these issues and for addressing complaints. A recent
 amendment to regulations on supervision supports its ability to address consumer protection
 issues through the supervision process.
 The State Agency for Antimonopoly Regulation is responsible for enforcement of the general
 consumer protection law, but that law lacks any provisions appropriate for application to financial
 services and the Agency lacks experience and capacity to address banking matters. The Agency
 receives no complaints concerning banks and has never conducted any analysis or enforcement
 activity in the banking or financial sectors. A single staff member in the central office is assigned
 to address all financial markets issues. A primary focus in Agency activity to date has been the
 protection of consumers through oversight and control of tariffs and fees on utilities and
 consumer services – experience that will not transfer well to the banking context. The Agency has
 recently initiated a study of consumer lending by banks to determine whether general consumer
 protection norms are being violated. Although no formal mechanisms for cooperation between
 the Agency and NBKR exist, the Agency plans to organize joint consideration of the results with
 NBKR to obtain its views and discuss whether any action by either body is warranted.
 c.- e. NBKR is now taking steps to form a unit that will be responsible for consumer protection
 issues. The responsibilities of that unit and the procedures for its work, as well as its methods for
 cooperation with other bodies in pursuing consumer protection goals, have all yet to be
 determined. As there has until this time been no organization or entity that is directly responsible
 for consumer protection in banking, and there are no specific procedures in place for this purpose,
 no assessment is made here of the adequacy of financing, transparency of procedures, or
 cooperation among bodies.




             Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 8
I.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                               Comparison with Good Practices



 f. The law on consumer protection contains some general provisions that envision the existence of
 industry associations, social bodies or consumers’ organizations and their participation in general
 consumer protection activities. That law, however, is poorly drafted for application to the
 banking sector and neither that general law nor any other law or regulation assigns those bodies
 any specific role or mandates consultation with them on issues of consumer protection in the
 banking sphere. They likewise do not prohibit such organizations from participating in consumer
 protection activities, although procedural avenues would be limited. There are a few existing
 consumer protection organizations, which on the basis of general principles of law could pursue a
 consumer complaint in relation to banking matters.             Preliminary contacts with those
 organizations, however, indicated that they are not receiving complaints related to banking
 financial matters. A banking association – the Union of Banks of Kyrgyz Republic – represents
 the interests of its members before state bodies and takes part in policy discussion, development
 of programs and training, but has not been directly involved in any consumer protection
 initiatives.
 Recommendation
 a. A high priority should be placed on the use of the unique opportunity to establish good rules
 and standards across all areas of importance to consumers, and bring more coherence to the
 normative legal framework that is presented by current work on the draft Banking Code and the
 work on bringing laws and regulations into compliance with it that will follow its passage. This
 should include the issuance of one or more unified regulations containing complete and coherent
 rules concerning such matters as required information provision and disclosures in a variety of
 contexts to individual banking consumers. Attention should be paid to the ways in which legal
 rules stated in a general manner affect both business clients of banks and individual banking
 consumers and clear distinctions and separate rules used when appropriate.
 b. Efforts to expand and clarify NBKR’s role in banking consumer protection should be continued
 through (i) support for the new NBKR consumer protection unit through the allocation of
 appropriate resources and regulatory and capacity building measures, and (ii) a focus on ensuring
 that the new Banking Code and related laws contain a clear and appropriate NBKR mandate and
 tools in this area. The newly formed consumer protection division within NBKR will need
 resources and support for human capacity building, as well as appropriate regulatory support to
 ensure that it receives needed information and has effective channels for reaction in handling
 complaints. And it is particularly important that the new Banking Code provide not only for
 NBKR ability to regulate further in some specified areas, but also for a clear general mandate for
 protection of consumers and the ability to use regulatory and enforcement tools to achieve this
 end.




             Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 9
I.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


 In light of severe capacity constraints and to avoid conflicts with market conduct regulations
 issued by NBKR, the State Antimonopoly Agency should not separately enforce the provisions of
 the general consumer protection law against financial institutions. A form for the interaction of
 the Agency and NBKR should be defined by regulation or by an agreement or Memorandum of
 Understanding between the bodies. A pattern that might be appropriate at the present time would
 be a more formalized Agency responsibility to produce a periodic report on competition and
 consumer protection issues in the banking sphere for discussion with NBKR and then publication
 and/or delivery to the Government and other state bodies. This would provide for alternate views
 and approaches to be aired and considered and would ensure that information on banking issues
 received by the Antimonopoly Agency in the process of its enforcement of the laws in other areas
 is taken into account by the banking regulator.
 c-e. Immediate priorities for the new consumer protection unit within NBKR, in addition to
 staffing, will have to be the establishment of working procedures, dissemination of contact
 information through banks and other channels, and creation of a reliable flow of information on
 the kinds of problems that banking consumers are encountering and whether those problems are
 appropriately resolved by banks. In order to ensure that necessary flow of information, a reporting
 requirement for banks should be instituted concerning the amounts and types of complaints they
 receive. (See also Section E below.)
 When the new consumer protection division has been staffed and has begun to function, and as it
 establishes its working procedures, an evaluation will need to be made concerning whether the
 resources initially allocated to the unit are adequate to allow it to effectively carry out the tasks
 assigned. Resources should be sufficient to allow the unit not only to take over the task of
 addressing complaints directly received by the NBKR, but also to monitor and respond to
 information on consumer concerns received from banks and to carry out effective coordination
 with consumer bodies, the Union of Banks, and other state bodies involved in banking activities.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 10
I.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices



                                  A.2. Code of Conduct for Banks

 Good Practice
     a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for banks that is devised by all banks
        or the banking association in consultation with the financial supervisory agency and
        consumer associations, if possible. Monitored by a statutory agency or an effective self-
        regulatory agency, this code should be formally adhered to by all sector-specific
        institutions.
     b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be publicized and disseminated to
        the general public.
     c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes of conduct for banks
        on such matters as facilitating the easy switching of consumers’ current accounts and
        establishing a common terminology in the banking industry for the description of banks’
        charges, services and products.
     d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and disseminated.
 Description
     a. There is not currently any code of conduct for banks. The Union of Banks reported that
        there had been some discussion of the possibility of developing such a code several years
        ago, but that this is not an active focus of current activity. The issue may be taken up again
        at a later time.
     b. No code exists to be disseminated.
     c. There are no voluntary codes of conduct for banks at the present time. With respect to
        terminology, the draft Banking Code includes a provision allowing the National Bank to
        issue a glossary of banking terms and to issue explanations on banking terminology.
     d. No codes exist to be disseminated.
 Recommendation
 a.- d. The Union of Banks should revisit the question of development of a basic voluntary code of
 conduct or code of ethical principles with member banks and facilitate the beginning of work on
 such a code. It might be beneficial for work on such a code to be connected with the work the
 Union of Banks is already doing on customer concerns, such as the meetings that have been held
 to discuss the borrower issues that have been the subject of public attention in recent months. A
 voluntary code of conduct might be seen as a responsible and desirable step on the part of banks
 in addressing such concerns.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 11
I.      Good Practices: Banking Sector                               Comparison with Good Practices



 Staff of the new NBKR unit that will address consumer protection issues should take part in the
 work or be closely consulted for their views as a code is developed. Work done in developing a
 code of conduct could also facilitate consideration by NBKR of consumer protection issues and
 its consideration of which minimum rules and standards might need to be included in mandatory
 instructions or legal amendments and which should remain voluntary in nature. Although they do
 not yet have any experience in banking matters, existing consumer protection groups and
 associations, as well as the antimonopoly body, should be encouraged to make suggestions and to
 comment on the draft of the code.
 When a code has been developed, banks observing the voluntary code may wish to reflect its
 provisions in appropriate parts of their contracts or in materials distributed to their customers
 indicating what to expect of the bank. The voluntary code itself could include such a requirement
 or suggestion if desired.



     A.3. Appropriate Allocation between Prudential Supervision and Consumer Protection

 Good Practice
 Whether prudential supervision of banks and consumer protection regarding banking products and
 services are the responsibility of one organization or two institutions, the allocation of resources
 to these functions should be adequate to enable their effective implementation.
 Description
 There has, until recently, been no body or institution specifically responsible for consumer
 protection in relation to banking products and services. NBKR is now creating a unit that will be
 responsible for consumer protection issues and response to consumer complaint. The unit will be
 subordinate to the legal department.
 The specific tasks of the new unit and procedures for its work have not yet been established and it
 is not yet possible to evaluate the adequacy of resources assigned to this purpose. Immediate
 priorities, in addition to staffing, will need to be the establishment of working procedures,
 dissemination of contact information through banks and other channels, and creation of a reliable
 flow of information on the kinds of problems that banking consumers are encountering and
 whether those problems are appropriately resolved by banks.
 Recommendation
 When the new consumer protection division has been staffed and has begun to function, and as it
 establishes its working procedures, an evaluation will need to be made concerning whether the
 resources initially allocated to the unit are adequate to allow it to effectively carry out the tasks
 assigned. Resources should be sufficient to allow the unit not only to take over the task of
 addressing complaints directly received by the NBKR, but also to monitor and respond to
 information on consumer concerns received from banks and to carry out effective coordination
 with consumer bodies, the Union of Banks, and other state bodies involved in banking activities.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 12
I.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                               Comparison with Good Practices



                               A.4. Other Institutional Arrangements

 Good Practice
     a. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution of any dispute regarding a
        consumer protection matter in respect of a banking product or service is affordable, timely
        and professionally delivered.
     b. The media and consumer associations should play an active role in promoting banking
        consumer protection.
 Description
 With respect to requirements imposed upon banks by NBKR regulations, consumers do not
 generally have a right to bring an action in court to force compliance, although they might be able
 to cite those regulations in other contexts, such as in an attempt to prevent bank enforcement of
 contract provisions that violate NBKR requirements.
 In theory, a consumer could bring an action against a bank under the general consumer protection
 law. The law contains a number of provisions designed to encourage such actions, including
 providing 50% of fines awarded to a consumer group that brings a successful action and 30% of
 the fines to a body of local government that takes such cases. (Article 18, point 4) But the
 substantive provisions of the consumer protection law are poorly designed for application to
 banking and financial products, focusing on physical defects in goods, work or services and tying
 periods for the filing of a complaint to the service life of the item or similar benchmarks. This
 would make it difficult for a consumer to pursue an action under the law’s provisions and for a
 court to determine what damages or other remedy might be legally required. Moreover, there is
 no requirement that consumer groups or social organizations provide assistance free of charge,
 and counterparts reported that most of such groups require consumers to pay a fee in order for
 their complaints to be pursued. No consumer organization was found during the diagnostic that
 had, in fact, handled any banking complaint.
 Some judicial decisions of Kyrgyz Republic’s courts are published, but publication is not
 systematic and access is limited, making an independent evaluation of the kinds of cases
 concerning banking consumers that are being heard, their time frames, and their results difficult.
 Counterparts reported that cases concerning disputes between consumers and banks are not
 unknown, but that the vast majority of these are cases in which a consumer seeks to block a
 bank’s ability to take property (usually real estate) used as security for debt. Most counterparts
 indicated that such cases are the only circumstance in which individual consumers would find the
 costs and delays of judicial proceedings worthwhile. Some also indicated that it is uncommon for
 individuals to pursue any such problems through the courts, and that complaint to other
 authorities would be a more traditional approach. Decisions in such cases as do existing were not
 available for review concerning their legal substance and the degree to which they reflect a good
 understanding of banking law and practice on the part of the courts.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 13
I.           Good Practices: Banking Sector                              Comparison with Good Practices


 It appears that the judicial system has limited experience in the resolution of consumer disputes in
 general, and in the resolution of consumer disputes in financial services in particular. A timely
 and professional resolution of an individual dispute may not be available to individuals at an
 affordable price. Alternatives such as simplified small claims procedures, mediation, or quick
 and informal arbitration for an individual complaint do not appear to be available through the
 judicial system at all.
 Note: A full evaluation of the treatment of individual civil disputes by the courts of the Kyrgyz
 Republic is well beyond the scope of this diagnostic review. The discussion here is based on
 information easily available from counterparts in the banking sphere and from public sources. It
 is reasonable to assume that those counterparts would be aware of significant developments in
 this area or a large practice of cases, as they must follow developments and abide by the relevant
 legal rules. However, no meetings were held with representatives of the judicial system during the
 diagnostic and no court statistics were available for review.
 b. Financial issues and banking concerns do not appear to have been a topic of work for the
 existing consumer associations in the Kyrgyz Republic. No consumer association was available
 to meet with the team during the diagnostic and existing associations indicated during preliminary
 contacts that they had not received or dealt with any banking or financial matters.
 Kyrgyz media publications do cover the general subjects of banking and finance, and the National
 Bank awards prizes for the best material on financial topics in a given year. While a significant
 amount of the coverage overall is brief and informational concerning developments in the law,
 recently issued reports, and similar matters, issues of concern to consumers do sometimes receive
 attention. A recent article, for example, advised consumers concerning how to evaluate the
 financial stability of their banks and to ensure that their deposits are insured.1
 Recommendation
 a. On the basis of further inquiry into court handling of consumer matters, consideration may need
 to be given to whether changes are needed in civil procedure arrangements to allow individual
 consumers to use the courts effectively for the redress of their rights. This could include waiver or
 reduction of filing fees for consumer complaints or a “small claims procedure” allowing for a
 simplified process and rapid hearing and decision on the matter. In relation to concerns of
 banking consumers in particular, consideration should continue concerning the role that an
 ombudsman service (either a banking ombudsman or financial services ombudsman) might play
 in assisting individual consumers with complaints and disputes. See also Section E.2, below, on
 that issue.
 In any creation of simplified or less formal procedures for the handling of consumers’ disputes,
 care should be taken that such informal procedures do not produce undue pressure on individual
 consumers to accept compromise resolutions. Nor should the provision of more effective
 processes for dispute resolution be considered a substitute for the necessary creation and
 clarification of consumers’ rights in laws and normative acts. While accessible processes are
 necessary, they cannot be used by consumers to protect rights that they do not have and
 alternative dispute resolution options work best when the underlying law is clear and well
 established.

 1
     See the article at http://www.knews.kg/vopros.


                   Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 14
I.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                               Comparison with Good Practices



                                           A.5. Licensing

 Good Practice
 All banking institutions that provide financial services to consumers should be subject to a
 licensing and regulatory regime to ensure their financial safety and soundness and effective
 delivery of financial services.

 Description
 Banks and other institutions that conduct banking activity are subject to licensing under and
 prudential regulation under the law “On Banks and Banking Activity” and other laws and
 regulations. Licenses are issued by the NBKR, which is authorized to regulate banks to ensure
 the soundness of individual banks and of the financial system as a whole. Responsibility of
 NBKR to ensure the effective delivery of financial services from the point of view of the users of
 those services is considerably less clear under current law, as is its responsibility for consumer
 protection issues. In practice, however, NBKR had included provisions intended to protect the
 rights of bank customers in its regulatory instructions and other documents.
 Recent amendment (adopted in late February 2014) to the NBKR Provision “On Measures
 Applied to Banks and Some Other Financial-Credit Institutions Licensed by the NBKR” has
 specifically authorized NBKR to suspend or limit specific banking activities that a bank is
 otherwise authorized to perform if supervision activity reveals problems with consumer
 protection. This is an important step forward, as it recognized protection of consumers as a
 proper subject for supervision activity and NBKR imposition of measures. Suspension or
 withdrawal of the license as such, however, is not envisioned for consumer protection violations.
 Recommendation
 There is no need for change in the overall licensing regime at this time. It is important, however,
 for NBKR’s responsibility for consumer protection in the banking sphere and its authorities to
 take action to be more clearly expressed in the law and in normative acts (regulations,
 instructions).
 It would be appropriate for NBKR to have additional authorities to respond to consumer
 protection violations, since suspension of a bank’s activities in relation to consumers may be at
 least as injurious to the consumers themselves as it is to a bank that is not primarily focused on
 the consumer market. Immediate consequences to bank consumers of such limitation or
 suspension should also e more clearly defined.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 15
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices

                           Section B. Disclosure and Sales Practices

                                    B.1. Information on Customers

 Good Practice
     a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a bank should gather, file and record
        sufficient information from the consumer to enable the bank to render an appropriate
        product or service to that consumer.
     b. The extent of information the bank gathers regarding a consumer should:
        (i)      be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the product or service either
                  being proposed to or sought by the consumer; and
        (ii)     enable the bank to provide a professional service to the consumer in accordance with
                  that consumer’s capacity

 Description
     a. Rules concerning the management of credit risk define in detail the kinds of information
        to be gathered from a customer seeking credit, and general rules concerning the creation
        and maintenance of banking records contain rules concerning the kinds of information to
        be recorded in relation to customer accounts and the periods for their retention. These
        rules, however, are not designed to ensure that recommendations made to a consumer are
        appropriate to the individual and there are no requirements in banking legislation or rules
        that serve that purpose directly. The narrow selection of products currently offered to
        consumers and the ability of banks to offer individualized terms to borrowers may have
        limited concern about this issue. Most banks do not offer a large number of varying
        products for which an individual consumer would qualify, and so are not called upon to
        recommend among them. At the same time, banks are able to vary the terms of a credit
        offer within a lending program for which an individual does qualify, making it
        unnecessary for the bank to “recommend” another program in order to accommodate
        differing risk or seek higher rates from some individuals.
        Article 3 of the law “On the Protection of Consumers’ Rights” does obligate a seller who
        has been made aware by a consumer of the concrete purposes for a purchased product or
        service to provide the consumer with a product or service that is suitable for those
        purposes. It does not, however, obligate the seller to make inquiries to determine either
        the consumer’s purposes or other information that would affect the suitability of banking
        products for a specific consumer.
     b. (i) & (ii) Information sought from a bank customer seeking credit is quite extensive, as is
        the information that is required to be recorded in the credit dossier of any customer that
        receives credit. Although rules concerning its collection are designed to limit a bank’s
        credit risk rather than to ensure that the product is appropriate to the consumer, the
        information would be sufficient to allow a bank employee to make an appropriate
        recommendation for the individual and to comprehend the consumer’s capacity. There are
        no rules concerning information to be gathered concerning other banking products and
        services.


               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 16
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 a. & b. Bank employees should be obligated to use the information gathered from bank customers
 seeking credit not only to evaluate the credit risk to the bank, but also to determine whether the
 product offered meets the stated needs or purposes of the consumer and to make a notation in the
 credit dossier (record of the credit application) concerning any recommendation of a specific
 product that is made. It may be appropriate to require that bank employees make some limited
 inquiries in relation to savings products as well, to determine the planned use for savings and the
 period when they are likely to be needed in order to advise the consumer concerning a choice
 among available products. A rule concerning this requirement could be included in the existing
 normative legal acts on credit risk and on work with deposits, but should ideally be included also
 in a more comprehensive normative legal act concerning protection of banking consumers that
 could be issued under Chapter 2 of the draft Banking Code after its passage.
 As more consumer offerings develop in the market, banks should avoid the use of compensation
 schemes that skew employee incentives toward the sale of more complex or costly products and
 NBKR may wish to consider limitations on such incentive schemes. In any case, the required
 notation of any bank employee recommendation and its basis should be reviewed by banks in
 evaluating employee performance and by NBKR as a part of on-site review – and particularly
 notations in records concerning non-performing loans and other problematic accounts – to
 determine whether inappropriate recommendations have been made.
 A principle reflecting this good practice should be included in any code of conduct developed for
 banks under point A2.
 It is important to note that this good practice should not be interpreted too broadly. It is not good
 practice for bank employees to be instructed or required to collect or record personal identifying
 information on all individuals who seek information about bank products and services before
 providing that information to them. This can discourage consumers from seeking full information
 and from comparison shopping for banking products, dampening competition in banking services
 and increasing the likelihood that consumers will receive important information at a stage that is
 too late for it to be useful to them. Similarly, the information asked for should not go beyond that
 necessary to determine which of several available products may be best for the consumer’s needs
 and whether the consumer has the needed financial capacity, especially at preliminary stages. No
 personal information should be recorded on potential customers of banks who choose not to make
 an application for a product or service after receiving basic information on bank offerings. Overly
 intrusive practices during preliminary inquiry discourage use of banking services and may delay
 development of an inclusive financial system.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 17
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


                                         B.2. Affordability

 Good Practice
     a. When a bank makes a recommendation regarding a product or service to a consumer, the
        product or service it offers to that consumer should be in line with the need of the
        consumer.
     b. The consumer should be given a range of options to choose from to meet his or her
        requirements.
     c. Sufficient information on the product or service should be provided to the consumer to
        enable him or her to select the most suitable and affordable product or service.
     d. When offering a new credit product or service significantly increasing the amount of debt
        assumed by the consumer, the consumer’s credit worthiness should be properly assessed.

 Description
 a. There are no rules specifically in the banking sphere that discuss recommendations to
 consumers concerning which products and services they should purchase or require that bank
 employees consider this issue. Existing banking rules focus on the provision of information
 rather than of advice. Article 3 of the law “On Protection of Consumers’ Rights” requires a seller
 of services that has been told the consumer’s purpose to provide a service that is suitable for that
 purpose, but does not obligate sellers to undertake any inquiry. The draft Banking Code (Article
 10) requires in relation to lending that banks generally to take account of the economic interests
 and capacities of clients and pursue a relationship of partnership with client borrowers, but does
 not specifically address advice or recommendations.
 b. Banks are free to determine the products and services they will offer, within the terms of their
 licenses and other legal restrictions and there is no requirement that they offer multiple options to
 consumers. Article 50 of the current Banking Law (point 3) requires that banks inform their
 customers about the paid services that they offer and also about any changes in those services or
 their terms that affect a particular customer, but does not specifically address the question of
 consumer choice among products or services meeting similar needs. With respect to credit
 products, consumers are required to receive a detailed list of information as a part of the
 contracting process and there are some regulations applicable to the content of bank materials
 concerning their products. The information that must be presented to a client at a preliminary
 stage of the process, when the consumer is considering whether to apply for credit, is not
 regulated in detail and the issue of presentation of multiple options to choose from is not
 addressed. The draft Banking Code is similarly vague about the specifics of information
 provision to clients, particularly at early stages. Article 7 requires that a client be provided with
 full disclosure on the conditions of provision of a service before signing a contract and states that
 refusal to provide “exhaustive” information shall not be permitted. But it does not discuss what
 kind of information must be provided at stages prior to contracting nor refer clearly to the
 provision of multiple options.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 18
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 c. With regard to credit, a consumer presented with the information required under regulations
 concerning management of credit risk and the contracting process would certainly have sufficient
 information to choose among credit products, but it is unlikely that any bank could provide this
 level of detail at an early stage in the process. There are no rules concerning the amount of
 information to be provided to a consumer prior to an application for a specific loan. In practice,
 there may be limited choice for consumers within any particular bank due to the limited selection
 of available credit products, but consumers should be provided with adequate information to
 allow them to compare products across banks as well as within banks. There is likewise no
 specific requirement applicable to savings products other than the general requirements of
 Article 50 of the Banking Law. Brochures on savings products obtained from a number of banks
 generally contained enough information to allow consumers to compare and to choose among
 these products.
 d. Rules on the minimum standards for credit risk management require an in depth evaluation of
 the customer’s financial condition and ability to repay as a part of the process of issuance of
 credit, as well as substantial monitoring of an existing borrower’s financial condition during the
 life of the obligation. Banks are specifically instructed to inquire into the proposed borrower’s
 prior borrowing from the bank and from other sources (point 30), and while this is treated
 primarily as an indicator of responsible use of credit and good repayment discipline rather than a
 check on overindebtedness, it would in practice serve both purposes. The instruction does not
 distinguish between issuance of an initial amount of credit and a decision to issue additional credit
 that would increase a customer’s debt.
 Recommendation
 a. Given the low level of financial literacy in the Kyrgyz Republic, it is important that customers
 not only be presented with information, but also advice that is designed to help them make good
 choices. A provision should be added to the draft Banking Code (Article 7 or a separate
 provision) requiring that advice given to customers be designed to meet their needs and to ensure
 that options chosen are affordable, and to require banking employees to undertake sufficient
 inquiry to be able to do this. It would be appropriate for the NBKR to insert such a requirement
 also in instructions concerning the procedures for conduct of specific kinds of banking activities,
 and particularly in the rules concerning the issuance of credit.
 b. – c. The draft Banking Code should be amended before passage to contain a clear requirement
 that consumers, prior to the point that they apply for a specific loan or other banking product,
 have free access to information on bank products and services that is adequate to allow them to
 compare products and make choices. NBKR should be authorized to define the requirements for
 this kind of information disclosure, and such requirements should clearly distinguish between
 information that is required to be immediately available to any consumer who inquires (or freely
 available in bank premises and on the bank website) and the more detailed and personalized
 information that must be provided to a consumer applying for a loan or other product. The
 information should be provided in plain language, in the form of a “key facts” statement
 describing the product or in other format that makes it easy for consumers to understand and
 compare products.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 19
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 d. Existing requirements to undertake a review of the creditworthiness of a borrower are
 sufficient, provided they are applied not only at the time of an initial extension of credit, but also
 at the time of any substantial increase in credit to a consumer. If necessary, an addition or
 amendment to existing rules could be made to clarify this requirement. Given the substantial
 nature of the creditworthiness inquiry prescribed in current requirements and the presence of
 ongoing reporting requirements and other relatively intrusive measures in relation to borrowers, it
 may be appropriate to provide some guidance concerning what kind of an increase would qualify
 as substantial and/or to allow a modified review of information.


                                       B.3. Cooling-off Period

 Good Practice
     a. For financial products or services with a long-term savings component, a bank should
        provide the consumer a cooling-off period of a reasonable number of days (at least 3-5
        business days) immediately following the signing of any agreement between the bank and
        the consumer.
     b. On his or her written notice to the bank during the cooling-off period, the consumer
        should be permitted to cancel or treat the agreement as null and void without penalty to
        the consumer of any kind.
 Description
 a. & b. The NBKR Provision on Minimum Requirements for Credit Risk Management (point 26)
 requires that bank clients be permitted to refuse receipt of credit at any time after the signing of
 the credit contract but before the receipt of funds, without any charge. A bank is permitted,
 however, to charge an application fee (“commission”) in accordance with its established tariffs
 for the consideration of the client’s application, and this fee is not refundable upon the client’s
 refusal of the credit. There is no minimum specified time period within which a consumer has the
 right to refuse the credit and the right of refusal applies only until the consumer has received
 funds. For many types of consumer credit, the receipt of funds is likely to follow quickly upon
 signature of the contract or even to be simultaneous, making this right of rescission of limited
 practical use to most consumers.
 There are no provisions requiring a “cooling-off period” for deposits or other bank products or
 services. With respect to bank deposits, provisions of the Civil Code (Article 752) require that
 individual depositors must receive their deposits back immediately upon request, with payment of
 at least the interest rate applicable to accounts without time conditions (unless the contract
 specifies a higher rate upon early withdrawal). This limits customer risk on such accounts and the
 corresponding need for a required rescission period. On the basis of advertisements and
 informational materials gathered from banks, it appears that some banks are offering “staged”
 interest on time deposits, providing a client who withdraws funds prior to the end of the full
 period but after a certain percentage of it (for example, after more than half of the period has
 passed) with an interest rate that is below the full contract rate but above the minimum.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 20
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 The draft Banking Code contains provisions similar to those in current law and requires that credit
 contracts allow the client to cancel the contract and refuse the loan without penalty at any time
 after the conclusion of the contract but prior to the receipt of the funds. (Article 10, part 2, point
 6) There is no similar provision in the draft in relation to deposits or other banking products or
 services.
 Recommendation
 a. & b. Current provisions allowing clients to refuse a credit without penalty only before funds are
 received do not provide significant protection to individual consumers, as these borrowers are
 very likely to receive funds from their loans almost immediately upon signing the loan
 documents. Consumers should be provided with a minimum of several business days within
 which they may cancel the loan agreement. Banks, however, should be free to determine the
 circumstances in which they will disperse funds within that period. In order to protect banks from
 fraud or undue complication, exercise by a consumer of the right to cancel the contract within the
 rescission period should be limited to circumstances in which the funds remain in the consumer’s
 account or the consumer returns the loan funds in full together with notification to the bank
 concerning the cancellation of the loan.
 It would be appropriate for NBKR to monitor the types and amounts of fees or commissions
 charged for various aspects of the loan application, issuance and closure process to ensure that
 these do not amount to fees for consumer loan cancellation under another name.
 The creation of rules concerning a minimum cooling off period should not be considered a
 substitute for the requirement that banks provide a copy of their standard form contracts to
 customers that specifically request them and that banks provide a “key facts” statement or other
 short document in plain language explaining all of the significant terms of products and account
 types. All three of these requirements are important in protecting consumer rights.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 21
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


                                 B.4. Bundling and Tying Clauses

 Good Practice
     a. As much as possible, banks should avoid bundling services and products and the use of
        tying clauses in contracts that restrict the choice of consumers.
     b. In particular, whenever a borrower is obliged by a bank to purchase any product, including
        an insurance policy, as a pre-condition for receiving a loan from the bank, the borrower
        should be free to choose the provider of the product and this information should be made
        known to the borrower.
 Description
 a. Tying refers to the sale of two or more products or services together as a single product and
 refusal of the seller to separate the products and sell each of them separately. Bundling refers to
 the sale of two or more products or services together as a package when the products can also be
 purchased separately.
 Tying is usually considered a problem where the seller has dominance or significant market
 power in relation to one of the products, making it difficult for customers to obtain it from another
 source that does not require the purchase of the tied product. For important goods and services,
 however – including basic banking services – specialized regulations may prohibit tying by all
 sellers in order to protect consumers and ensure that such goods and services are available at an
 affordable price. In considering a tying case, the relevant question is often the relationship
 between the items that are “tied” and when they should be considered sufficiently unrelated that
 they should be sold separately.
 Bundling of products together – that is, the offer of a combination of products, often at a discount
 compared to the price of separate purchase. – may be a problem if it misleads customers about the
 real prices of the products or retards the development of competition in the market for one of the
 bundled items. In a competitive market, however, offers of bundled products or services can
 provide benefits to consumers in the form of discounts.
 The legal rules related to tying in the Kyrgyz Republic are difficult to determine due to a severe
 lack of clarity in the laws and regulations related to competition issues. The law of the Kyrgyz
 Republic “On Competition” defines “agreement to conclude a contract only on the condition that
 goods are included in which the …consumer has no interest” as an abuse of dominance. (Article
 6, point 6) The law’s definition of dominance, however, is entirely opaque and appears to
 include all enterprises in any market in which market shares are stable and there are barriers to
 entry, any enterprise within a group of five whose market shares exceed those of others in the
 same market, and any enterprise that is found by the enforcement agency to be abusing its
 position in the market (Article 4). By contrast, the NBKR Policy in this area makes the fact of a
 dominant position of a bank itself a violation of the antimonopoly legislation “if it was obtained
 by means of” forcing consumers to conclude contracts containing extraneous or unacceptable
 provisions. (Article 3.3 (b)) There was no indication that the provisions have ever been enforced
 and their degree of internal inconsistency and divergence from common practices in this area
 would make them difficult to apply in any productive manner and raise questions about
 comprehension of the underlying concepts.



            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 22
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Tying of unrelated products and/or services is prohibited generally by Article 17, point 2, of the
 Consumer Protection law. This article has likewise not been enforced in relation to banking
 services.
 b. Some counterparts indicated that the purchase of insurance is not commonly required in
 connection with consumer loans. The common requirement for a security interest in property may
 reduce the banks’ need for insurance on the life and earning capacity of a borrower. Nor was there
 any indication that banks are commonly tying bank services to one another or requiring the
 purchase of other kinds of services as a condition of credit (with the exception of notarial services
 and in some instances appraisal services). It should be noted, however, that neither model loan
 contracts nor full packages of loan documents could be obtained for review. Several counterparts
 commented on the resistance of retail customers to any use of banking products and services at
 all, strong competition among banks for financially stable retail clients, and/or the existence of
 programs designed to encourage non-cash payments and the use of bank accounts of all kinds.
 They viewed these factors as tending to discourage banks from tying practices, particularly in
 relation to card accounts and deposits.
 Recommendation
 a. There is no indication that tying or bundling of differing kinds of banking services or of
 banking services and other products is currently a significant problem in the Kyrgyz Republic. If
 it were, however, it is far from clear that the existing legal provisions could be applied to stop any
 abusive practices. Provisions of NBKR’s Policy and regulations on enforcement of competition
 law in the banking sector (as well as those of the general law on competition) need revision on
 this issue to provide workable definitions of tying violations and clear definitions of the
 conditions under which they are prohibited. It would be appropriate for this to take place in the
 context of a wider review of the NBKR normative acts on competition (and the general
 competition law as well) to add clarity, address gaps, and bring the provisions into line with
 broadly shared concepts in this area.
 b. Insurance purchases in relation to loans have been a particular problem in some other CIS
 jurisdictions, with widespread tying practices, bundling of insurance products with loans in ways
 that obscure the cost of both products, and collusion and kickbacks between banks and their
 “approved” list of insurance providers. With respect to insurance products, it may be appropriate
 for NBKR to prevent problems by the development of appropriate instructions for banks and their
 inclusion in the existing regulations concerning consumer credit.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 23
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


                                     B.5. Preservation of Rights

 Good Practice
 Except where permitted by applicable legislation, in any communication or agreement with a
 consumer, a bank should not exclude or restrict, or seek to exclude or restrict:
     (i) any duty to act with skill, care and diligence toward the consumer in connection with the
         provision by the bank of any financial service or product; or
     (ii) any liability arising from the bank’s failure to exercise its duty to act with skill, care and
         diligence in the provision of any financial service or product to the consumer
 Description
 There is not currently a general provision requiring banks to act with care or diligence in relation
 to customers, nor one that prohibits them from escaping such a requirement through contract or
 by unilateral statement. This is not an unusual circumstance, as the laws of the Kyrgyz Republic
 do not generally rely on broadly worded duties or standards of care that are to be further
 interpreted in practice by courts and other authorities. (This is a trait shared by many of the legal
 systems in the CIS.)
 Article 17 of the general consumer protection law (in point 1) provides that contract provisions
 that limit the rights of consumers or worsen their position in comparison to what is otherwise
 established by legislation are void and unenforceable. In principle, this could be applied to the
 provision of financial services to consumers, and could be used to invalidate contract provisions
 that reduce duties or liabilities directly imposed on banking and financial services providers by
 legislation, including by rules duly issued by NBKR under its legal authority. In order for this
 provision to apply, however, the rights, duties or liabilities in question would need to be clearly
 stated, particularly in areas that would otherwise be governed by civil law rules providing for
 freedom of the parties to determine the content of a contract. Moreover, the rules would have to
 be clearly designed to protect consumers.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 24
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 Where different types of banking clients are not distinguished, this may result in inadequate legal
 protections for individual consumers, as the laws will avoid mandatory provisions in order to
 promote competition among banks and to retain maximum flexibility for the negotiation of
 differing terms as required by more sophisticated business customers with more complex needs.
 NBKR should, as a priority matter, consider the issuance of coherent separate regulations for
 banks concerning the treatment of individual consumers. In the alternative, clearer and more
 detailed sections should be included instructions on various banking activities concerning the
 treatment of individual consumers. Rights, duties, and liabilities defined in such separate
 documents or provisions would provide greater clarity to both banks and their customers and
 would be plainly designed to protect the rights of consumers and so fall within the general
 restriction on limitation of consumer rights discussed above. While this would have the benefit of
 clearly establishing identifiable and enforceable “consumer protection” standards in banking
 legislation, it would raise some additional questions concerning when and if individuals using
 banking services in relation to their small-scale economic activity (who do not fall within the
 definition of a consumer) should be distinguished from larger and more sophisticated business
 clients in banking rules.
 Recommendation
 NBKR should issue separate rules and/or include separate provisions in banking legislation and
 regulatory instructions that more clearly define the rights of individual consumers (as opposed to
 the rights of all banking customers) and the duties of banks toward them in areas that are of
 special concern or importance. This would provide additional protection to consumer and allow
 rules to be differentiated for banking customers with differing sophistication levels. A first
 priority would be to ensure that the draft Banking Code includes appropriate references to
 individual consumers where needed, in particular in Chapter 2 to distinguish instances in which
 consumers may need more protection than business clients. Thereafter, any necessary
 amendment of existing regulations and also the issuance of clearer and more unified instructions
 addressed to the treatment of consumers should take place as a part of the process of bringing
 existing legislation and normative acts into accord with the new Banking Code.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 25
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


                                 B.6. Regulatory Status Disclosure

 Good Practice
 In all of its advertising, whether by print, television, radio or otherwise, a bank should disclose the
 fact that it is a regulated entity and the name and contact details of the regulator.
 Description
 Banks in the Kyrgyz Republic are not required to indicate information about the bodies that
 regulate them and the means by which a consumer can contact those bodies in advertising.
 The NBKR is the primary bank regulator and also the body that produces and is familiar with all
 of the laws and regulations that specifically regulate banking activities. But the NBKR is not
 formally responsible at this time for taking complaints from the public and it does not have a
 response mechanism for such complaints (although it does receive and respond to letters).
 Recommendation
 As the new consumer protection unit in NBKR is formed and begins work, the first priority
 should be provision of clear information by banks to their customers concerning NBKR’s role,
 such as in written materials and as a part of contractual disclosures together with information on
 the bank’s complaints handling procedures. It may thereafter be appropriate to consider a
 requirement that all bank advertising inform the public that banks are regulated by the NBKR and
 how to contact the NBKR. Statements of this kind can be confusing if not clearly made, however,
 particularly in environments with low levels of financial literacy. And overloading of some forms
 of advertising with required information can make the advertisements too complex for consumers
 to understand or retain. In introducing any advertising requirement of this kind, consideration
 should be given to all of the regulations concerning bank advertising and a careful determination
 made of what kinds of advertisements (product, media, and so forth) should be required to contain
 specific kinds of information. Where mandatory content requirements are imposed, care should
 be taken to craft a requirement that is very clear, perhaps including the precise language to be
 used.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 26
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


                                       B.7. Terms and Conditions

 Good Practice
     a. Before a consumer opens a deposit, current (checking) or loan account at a bank, the bank
        should make available to the consumer a written copy of its general terms and conditions,
        as well as all terms and conditions that apply to the account to be opened. Collectively,
        these Terms and Conditions should include:
        (i)      disclosure of details of the bank’s general charges;
        (ii)     a summary of the bank’s complaints procedures;
        (iii) a statement regarding the existence of the office of banking ombudsman or
              equivalent institution and basic information relating to its process and procedures;
        (iv) information about any compensation scheme that the bank is a member of;
        (v)      an outline of the action and remedies which the bank may take in the event of a
                 default by the consumer;
        (vi) the principles-based code of conduct, if any, referred to in A.2 above;
        (vii) information on the methods of computing interest rates paid by or charged to the
              consumer, any relevant non-interest charges or fees related to the product offered to
              the consumer;
        (viii) any service charges to be paid by the consumer, restrictions, if any, on account
               transfers by the consumer, and the procedures for closing an account; and
        (ix) clear rules on the reporting procedures that the consumer should follow in the case
             of unauthorized transactions in general, and stolen cards in particular, as well as the
             bank’s liability in such cases facilitates the reading of every word.
     b. The Terms and Conditions should be written in plain language and in a font size and
        spacing that facilitates the reader’s comprehension.
 Description
 a. (i) – (ix)The Law on Banking (Article 50, point 2) states that banks’ “general conditions for the
 conduct of operations” are to be considered open information and may not be considered a
 commercial or banking secret. Banks are required to provide their general conditions for the
 conduct of operations at the first request of any client, but Article 50 does not require that they be
 provided without request to any client before they enter into a contract with the bank.




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 27
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 There does not appear to be a standard definition of the content of “general conditions for the
 conduct of operations” as a separate document and a search of a number of bank websites did not
 produce documents with that title. Point 3 of the same article of the Law on Banking defines
 banks’ obligations to inform clients concerning changes in banking charges and conditions, with
 an illustrative list of such changes that includes: information on the services provided by the bank;
 information on the costs of those services, including credit; information on the rates and
 conditions for payment of interest on deposits; the procedure and period for the consideration of
 complaints; and other conditions of conduct of banking operations. This obligation, however,
 concerns notification of changes in “conditions of service that affect that concrete client,” and it
 does not appear to be a definition of what must be included in a single general terms and
 conditions document.
 Similar language appears in the draft Banking Code (Article 7), which states that the “general
 conditions for the provision of banking services” are to be considered open information and may
 not be the subject of a commercial or banking secret. Changes in these general conditions for the
 provision of banking services must be published in the press or on the bank website prior to their
 entry into force. The Code does not state when or how the information must be provided to a
 client or to other persons nor define what information qualifies as such general conditions. The
 same article, however, specifically requires NBKR to define the procedure for disclosure of
 information on banking services, so this may be the subject of further regulation after the passage
 of the Code (and should be in order to allow banks to comply with notice requirements).
 There are quite a number of provisions in law and regulatory instructions that require banks to
 provide information on the terms and conditions of specific types of account opened with the
 bank. In general, these requirements relate to information that is to be provided at the time an
 account is opened or contract signed. Many of the provisions refer to information that is to be
 included in the contract, but others require provision of information without specifying the form
 in which it is provided. (For example, point 6 of the NBKR “Instructions on Work with Bank
 Accounts and Deposit Accounts” states that banks must “explain the rules for the completion of
 document forms and the procedure for calculation of earned interest, as well as provide other
 explanations,” but does not specify whether a separate document is to be provided.)
 The law “On Banks and Banking Activity” (Article 50, point 1) requires generally that the
 relationship between the bank and customer be defined by contract, and that the contract define
 the rights, obligations and liabilities of the parties, the conditions and procedures for payment of
 interest on deposits and credits, the rates and tariffs for conduct of banking operations, the period
 of validity of the contract and procedure for amendment, penalties for failure to fulfill the
 conditions of the contract (including for unilateral change in its terms), and other terms and
 conditions as required by law or agreed between the parties. This requirement would appear to
 cover most or all of the information referred to in points (i), (v), (vii) and (viii) in this good
 practice description. If the rights of the client are interpreted to include an explanation of the
 complaints procedure, it may also cover point (ii). As a part of the contract, however, this
 information would not necessarily be separately available as “general conditions.”




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 28
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                     Comparison with Good Practices


 In relation to credit accounts, NBKR regulations on the Minimum Requirements for Management
 of Credit Risk contain extensive requirements for the content of a credit contract and its
 attachments, including separate documents detailing the rights of bank clients and the schedule
 for repayment of the credit specifying all expenses, the dates and amounts of all payments, and
 explanations of any payments to third parties. A variety of additional provisions concerning
 specific rights and obligations of the bank and the client are specifically required to be included in
 the credit contract and related documents. A number of these required provisions have the
 character of mandatory general terms and conditions for credit (e.g. bank obligations to provide a
 statement on payment history within 3 days, requirement to suspend accumulation of penalty
 charges under specific circumstances, and so forth). Taken together, these requirements would
 appear to cover the information referred to in points (i), (v), (vii), and the portion of (viii) related
 to charges.
 Banks are required to maintain a book for complaints and comments in a form defined by the
 regulations on credit risk management. Outside this requirement, banks do not appear to be
 required to have specific kinds of formalized complaints procedures, although the Law on Banks
 and Banking Activity does require that changes in those procedures be notified to clients. (See
 also section E.1 of this review, below.) There is currently no ombudsman or other third party
 dispute resolution system in place in the Kyrgyz Republic about which customers could be
 notified. (See section E.2 of this review, below.) A deposit guarantee system has recently been
 formed and banks are beginning to inform customers about its existence, but there are no legal
 rules requiring customer notifications or defining their content. (On guarantee schemes, see also
 sections B.10 and F.1 of this review.) There are currently no bank codes of conduct about which a
 customer might be informed. (See section A.2, above.) Thus, the information referenced in points
 (ii), (iii), (iv) and (vi) either does not exist or is not required to be provided in detail to consumers.
 b. There are no “plain language” requirements applicable to a bank’s statement of general
 conditions for banking operations. The text of credit contracts and associated contracts concerning
 a security interest in property are required by the applicable regulations to be “clear and
 accessible to the perception and understanding of borrowers.” Credit contracts and all of their
 appendices and attachments must be provided in an identical font size throughout, which may not
 be less than 12. (Points 39 and 54 of the Minimum Requirements for the Management of Credit
 Risk)
 The draft Banking Code would apply similar requirements to all contracts between banks and
 their clients. Article 8 of the draft requires that the text of a contract be “maximally clear and
 accessible to the perception and understanding of clients” and that all of the text of a contract be
 printed in a single font size (although the size is not specified).
 Although requested, no standard contracts or customer information packages for loans or deposit
 accounts were received from banks for review during the diagnostic, making it difficult to
 determine in what form, with what detail, and how clearly the information required by the various
 legal rules is presented in practice.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 29
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices

 Overall, while the existing laws and regulatory instructions do contain provisions intended to
 ensure that bank customers receive required information, the provisions are distributed among
 different laws and regulations, are sometimes repetitive or inconsistent in their language, and vary
 widely in their degree of detail and in the specifics of required form and content from one type of
 account or service to another. Most concern information that must be included in the contract or
 provided when it is signed rather than information that is to be more generally available.

 Individual consumers need to receive clear information on all of the important terms of their
 accounts and on the processes for their dealings with a bank, in a form that they can understand
 and take with them for later reference. But they may be confused and overwhelmed if presented
 with large amounts of documentation or with sets of terms that overlap one another or appear
 inconsistent (such as one set of general or default rules covering on calculation of charges and
 other matters along with a contract containing a statement of the rules applying to a specific loan
 or account).
 Recommendation
 Rules concerning the provision of information to consumers on the terms and conditions applying
 to all basic types of accounts need to be reviewed and revised for clarity, consistency, simplicity
 and effective communication. This review could be undertaken as a part of the necessary process
 of bringing the normative legal acts of the NBKR into accord with the new Banking Code, under
 the NBKR authority to define rules for information disclosure and for contracts that is already
 reflected in the draft Code.
 The review should aim to produce a more coherent set of regulations concerning the information
 that must be provided by banks to individual consumers. The regulation(s) should separate these
 requirements from those that apply to business and corporate banking services to allow for an
 appropriate balance of flexibility and protection (more flexibility and fewer mandatory
 requirements for the varied needs of more sophisticated business borrowers and less flexibility
 and more protection for less sophisticated individuals). They should address both the information
 that must be made freely available by banks (to allow accurate product comparison) and
 information that must be provided to consumers at later stages of the inquiry and contracting
 process. The use of “key fact statements” should be included in the new regulation(s) and taken
 into account in crafting appropriate surrounding rules (see also B.8).




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 30
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


                                       B.8. Key Facts Statement

 Good Practice
     a. A bank should have a summary statement, such as a Key Facts Statement, for each of its
        accounts, types of loans or other products or services and provide these to its customers
        and potential customers.
     b. The summary statement should be written in plain language and summarize in a page or
        two the key terms and conditions of the specific banking product or service.
     c. Prior to a consumer opening any account at, or signing any loan agreement with, the bank,
        the consumer should have delivered a signed statement to the bank to the effect that he or
        she has duly received, read and understood the relevant summary Statement from the
        bank.
     d. Summary statements throughout the banking sector should be written in such a way as to
        allow consumers the possibility of easily comparing products that are being offered by a
        range of banks.
 Description
 a.- d. Banks are not legally required to use “key facts statements” and do not generally appear to
 use documents of this kind.
 As discussed immediately above in section B.7, banks are required by law and regulatory
 instructions to provide consumers with certain information on the terms and conditions that apply
 to bank products and services or to include that information in the contract with the consumer.
 There are a number of separate documents that are required, some of which are intended to assist
 borrowers in understanding the loan process and terms and their own obligations. These include a
 set of reminders (“pamyatka”) for consumers with a set text essentially instructing them to
 consider loans and loan documents carefully and a separate document containing a chart in a
 prescribed form listing the rights and obligations of the borrower and all expenses of the loan.
 In some instances, consumers are specifically required to sign a statement that they have been
 provided with required information, such as at the opening of a deposit account for an individual
 consumer. For loan accounts, consumers are required to sign specific documents indicating that
 they have read and understood them (including the chart), and also to sign every page of the loan
 contract and of all of its attachments and associated documents.
 A significant amount of the information that is legally required to be provided to consumers is
 required to be included in contracts. The specific language or format of the information is
 generally not specified. The NBKR Provision on the Minimum Requirements for the
 Management of Credit Risk require that borrowers be provided with the proposed loan contract
 and allowed to take it with them for study and consultation for a period of not less than one day
 (but no more than three days), but borrowers are not otherwise required to receive any detailed
 information on the terms of a loan at an early stage of their shopping process that would allow
 them to accurately compare products being offered.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 31
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 As discussed in B.7., above, revision of the applicable laws and instructions to more clearly and
 simply define the form and content of information that must be provided and time at which it
 must be available/presented is needed. The goal should be to ensure that consumers have
 sufficient time to review information, that they are able to properly compare the products and
 services offered by banks, and that the information provided is simple, clear, and not
 overwhelming. NBKR should develop new regulations providing more detailed guidance to
 banks on this issue, including a requirement for “key facts statements” or similar standardized
 form of description of account terms in plain language that would ensure that consumers can
 easily understand the important terms of products and services offered. Similarly, regulations
 should clearly define the information that must be freely available from banks and what must be
 provided to consumers upon their inquiry at bank offices, so that consumers are not in the position
 of being informed of important terms only after they are already at the end of the application
 process for accounts and loans. Legal rules specifying a clear and simple form and specific
 content requirements could also be considered in relation to other issues that are of importance to
 consumers, including, in particular, a plain language explanation of the risks inherent in use of a
 home as security for a loan and the conditions and procedures for bank execution on that security
 in the case of default. (See also section C.9.)



                              B.9. Advertising and Sales Materials

 Good Practice
     a. Banks should ensure that their advertising and sales materials and procedures do not
        mislead customers.
     b. All advertising and sales materials of banks should be easily readable and understandable
        by the general public.
     c. Banks should be legally responsible for all statements made in their advertising and sales
        materials (i.e. be subject to the penalties under the law for making any false or misleading
        statements)
 Description
 a. Article 34 of the Law on Banking prohibits advertisement that is not accurate and authorizes
 NBKR to require a bank to correct or withdraw an advertisement or other information about the
 bank, and also to change the name of the bank, if the content of the advertisement or information
 or the name of the bank could cause confusion on the part of depositors or other persons. If a bank
 fails to carry out an NBKR requirement, NBKR may publish information correcting the bank’s
 incorrect information at the expense of the bank.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 32
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 The draft Banking Code contains a general article on the accuracy of advertising (Art. 119) with
 provisions similar to those currently in the Law on Banking prohibiting advertisements or
 distributions that contain information that is not correct and authorizing NBKR to require change
 or withdrawal or to publish a correction at the expense of the bank. The draft Article 119 also
 specifically authorizes NBKR to apply other measures that are at its disposal under the Code to
 banks that publish incorrect information – an improvement over current provisions that suggest
 that the only remedies are correction or withdrawal. The current language of the Article,
 however, refers only to information that is not correct, omitting any reference to information that
 is misleading about the bank or its products and services. This would be a significant narrowing
 of the requirement, potentially depriving NBKR of the ability to address bank advertisements and
 information that are not technically false but are designed to mislead consumers.
 The draft Banking Code also contains specific provisions concerning advertisement of the costs of
 credit (Article 11) that require the statement of both the nominal and effective interest rates and of
 commissions in any material that discusses the cost of credit. This requirement may be more
 confusing than enlightening to consumers, who are likely to have difficulty understanding the
 difference between the nominal and effective rates of interest.
 b. There are no specific “plain language” requirements or rules concerning the clarity and
 simplicity of language in advertisements and sales materials. While the references in the law to
 the possibility that clients or other persons may be misled might conceivably be interpreted to
 include overly complex language that is true in content, the phrasing used in the provision more
 commonly refers to material that deliberately causes the recipient to believe something that is
 untrue rather than to material that is simply too complex and technical to be understood.
 c. Both the current Law on Banking and the draft Banking Code allow the NBKR to undertake
 corrective publication at a bank’s expense if a bank fails to comply with instructions to do so. The
 draft Banking Code authorizes NBKR to use other methods at its disposal as well, and
 specifically allows NBKR to withdraw a bank’s license if it publishes knowingly false
 information or in another manner deliberately misleads clients about its activities. (Article 83, part
 1, point 8) In addition, under Article 360 of the Code of Administrative Violations, publication of
 advertisements that may mislead bank clients or cause them damages (as well as those that
 advertise banking services for which a bank is not licensed) may lead to the imposition of fines on
 officials of the bank of from 1000 to 2000 soms. A draft law amending the Code of
 Administrative Violations in the part concerning banking would increase fines against individual
 bank officials to a range of 10,000 to 20,000 soms and provide for fines on legal entities of from
 50,000 to 100,000 soms. Under the general provisions of the Law on Consumer Protection, a
 consumer has the right to receive accurate information about products and services and a
 consumer who has been misled about a product or service has rights to return or reject it and to
 compensation for damages. It is not clear how these provisions would apply to banking products
 and services, however, and there is not currently any practical and efficient means for their
 enforcement by individual consumers.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 33
I.      Good Practices: Banking Sector                                                              Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 a. The draft Banking Code (Article 119) should be amended to specifically cover advertising or
 other publication or distribution of material that is misleading to consumers, not only that which
 is demonstrably false, and should allow NBKR to issue more detailed requirements concerning
 bank advertising. With respect to the specific rules concerning advertising of the costs of credit
 (Article 11), a less confusing alternative for consumers may be advertisements that state only the
 effective interest rate, calculated according to the NBKR’s formula. Such a statement would need
 to be accompanied by clear language concerning its inclusion of fees and commissions, and it
 would be appropriate for NBKR to work together with banks in developing appropriate
 statements that are clear and accurate.
 b. In addition to prohibiting false or misleading material, Article 119 of the draft Banking Code
 should also require that advertising and sales materials be clear and understandable to consumers
 and allow NBKR to take action to require a bank to change material that uses technical language
 with which consumers are unfamiliar, is unduly complex, or is otherwise unclear for an average
 consumers.
 a. & b. With input from the banks and other interested parties (consumer associations, the
 antimonopoly agency and others) NBKR should develop and adopt an instruction on bank
 advertising that establishes basic requirements specifically for the common types of banking
 products and services. These requirements should take account of the current sophistication of
 consumers in the Kyrgyz Republic, the products offered, and the capacities of the various
 advertising media. Banks should be required to retain copies of all of their advertisements and
 distributed materials and these should be reviewed by NBKR as a part of its supervision of bank
 behavior.
 c. It is important for NBKR to be able to use the full range of measures to correct distribution of
 false, misleading, or unclear material by banks, and these provisions should remain in the
 Banking Code. Fines available against bank officials may also be an effective means to
 encourage accurate statements, and these administrative penalties should be enforced, especially
 where violations are serious or repeated. Currently available fines are only a fraction of the
 average monthly wage in the Kyrgyz Republic,2 however, and are unlikely to be a serious
 deterrent to well-compensated bank officials unless they are increased substantially. 3 Even the
 increased fines under the proposed amendments to the Code of Administrative Violations are
 quite modest, with the largest potential fine against an individual accounting for less than two
 months of the average wage in the country and the largest fine against a bank less than USD 2000
 at current exchange rates.




 2
  According to official statistics, the average monthly wage in the Kyrgyz Republic overall was 11,008 soms as of January 2014. See the figures at
 http://stat.kg/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=123&Itemid=130.
 3
   Fines under the Code of Administrative Violations are expressed as multiples of a standard “accounting figure” or coefficient in order to allow
 them to be adjusted to account for inflation without requiring large-scale amendment of the Code. Thisr “accounting figure” has not been adjusted
 since 2006, when it was delinked from the minimum monthly wage, and is equal to 100 soms. The draft amendments increase the fines against
 bank officials from their current range of 10-20 times the accounting figure to a range of 100-200 times that amount.


                 Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 34
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


                                    B.10. Third-Party Guarantees

 Good Practice
 A bank should not advertise either an actual or future deposit or interest rate payable on a deposit
 as being guaranteed or partially guaranteed unless there is a legally enforceable agreement
 between the bank and a third party who or which has provided such a guarantee. In the event such
 an agreement exists, the advertisement should state:
     (i)   the extent of the guarantee;
     (ii) the name and contact details of the party providing the guarantee; and
     (iii) in the event the party providing the guarantee is in any way connected to the bank, the
           precise nature of that relationship.
 Description
 The only guarantee that is advertised by banks at the present time is the guarantee provided by the
 deposit insurance system, which is discussed in detail in F.1., below. Banks are not yet consistent
 in their notations of the existence of the deposit insurance on advertising materials, with some not
 mentioning it at all, and others providing information on the limits of the guarantee. Contact
 details for the Deposit Protection Agency were not provided by any of the bank materials
 reviewed.
 There are no specific provisions in banking regulations related to the advertising of guarantees
 and the information that must be provided. Although this does not appear to be a significant
 problem at this time, and may therefore not be a particular priority, it would be relatively easy to
 insert rules of this kind in the draft Banking Code (Article 119 on bank advertising) and/or to
 include it in the more coherent regulation on information that must be provided by banks that is
 recommended in Section B.5. However, consideration should be given to whether, given the
 current state of stability in the financial system, the ability to enforce any private guarantees, and
 the low level of financial literacy, the advertising of other kinds of guarantees might be likely to
 cause damaging confusion. It is unlikely that most consumers are able to differentiate between
 the state-backed guarantee scheme and claims of other kinds of guarantee, and they will certainly
 not have the sophistication to consider whether a relationship between the bank and the insurer is
 appropriate. (Indeed, this may be beyond the capacity of consumers even in populations with far
 higher financial literacy levels.) It may be most appropriate to restrict any advertisement of
 guarantees other than those provided by the Deposit Protection Agency for the present.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 35
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 The DPA and NBKR, with the participation of banks and the banks union, should develop
 standard language that can be used in printed bank materials and in other forms of advertisement
 to provide brief and accurate information about the limits of the deposit insurance guarantee and
 contact information for the Agency. See also the recommendations in section F.1.
 Given low levels of financial literacy, low awareness of the relatively new state-sponsored deposit
 guarantee system, and a lack of capacity on the part of NBKR or other bodies to verify the
 adequacy and reliability of private insurance schemes, advertisement of guarantees other than the
 new deposit guarantee system should probably be delayed until a later time. This could be
 accomplished by means of a direct prohibition or by a provision requiring the review and
 approval of any guarantee statement by NBKR prior to its use, including an evaluation of the
 reliability and legal enforceability of the advertised guarantee.

                                 B.10. Professional Competence

 Good Practice
     a. In order to avoid any misrepresentation of fact to a consumer, any bank staff member who
        deals directly with consumers, or who prepares bank advertisements (or other materials of
        the bank for external distribution), or who markets any service or product of the bank
        should be familiar with the legislative, regulatory and code of conduct guidance
        requirements relevant to his or her work, as well as with the details of any product or
        service of the bank which he or she sells or promotes.
     b. Regulators and associations of banks should collaborate to establish and administer
        minimum competency requirements for any bank staff member who: (i) deals directly
        with consumers, (ii) prepares any Key Facts Statement or any advertisement for the bank,
        or (iii) markets the bank’s services and products.
 Description
 a. & b. The law “On Banks and Banking Activity” requires that bank management and senior
 officers, as well as directors on bank boards, meet minimum qualification requirements
 established by the NBKR (Articles 14 & 24) and makes the appointment of bank officers subject
 to the approval of NBKR (Article 25-1).




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 36
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


 Law and regulations do not address the knowledge or qualifications of bank staff members in
 general, or specifically those of bank staff members dealing with the public or those who may be
 involved in specific marketing or advertising activities or the preparation of specific documents
 used in banking operations. NBKR rules On the Minimum Standards for Management of
 Operational Risks by Banks do require banks to have in place policies concerning minimization
 and oversight of operational risks, including risks related to inadequate training of personnel.
 Adequate education and training of staff is recommended as a means to reduce operational risk
 (point 3.1.4) and banks are required to review and oversee the education and continuing training
 of bank staff (point 4.5). Monitoring of operational risks and the measures taken to control them
 must be in place, and recommendations include the use of measures that would be capable of
 signaling a problem with staff training, such as the number of errors in documentation, rates of
 staff turnover, and others (point 3.5). The focus of such monitoring, however, is not to determine
 whether accurate information is being adequately conveyed to consumers in their interactions
 with bank staff or whether bank staff members are following regulations in advertising and
 document preparation. It is rather the avoidance of losses to the bank and the recommended form
 for reporting that is appended to the rules would not encompass instances of misrepresentation to
 consumers unless this resulted in a fine on the bank or other form of loss.
 Banks indicated that they have internal guidelines for the behavior of their staff and for the
 presentation of information in regarding to each of the types of products or services offered. As
 there is little or no specific information on consumer complaints to banks, there is no means to
 determine how often consumers feel that they have been given inaccurate or incomplete
 information about bank products and services. Banks did not report this as a common subject of
 consumer complaint. Most complaints received by NBKR directly are reported to concern credit
 difficulties, and while it is possible that failures of proper explanation or description of the credit
 products contributed to some of these instances it is not clear at this time how often that may have
 been a factor.
 The Union of Banks of Kyrgyz Republic has established a training center that offers training on a
 variety of subjects for staff of banks and non-bank credit institutions. At present the training
 center is described as focusing on the middle and higher echelons of bank staff rather than regular
 bank staff dealing with consumers.
 Recommendation
 First priority at the present time should be given to the establishment of clear institutional
 structures and institutional responsibility for consumer protection in banking, and to the creation
 of a more coherent and complete set of consumer protection rules, including those concerning
 advertising and provisions of information to consumers by bank staff and in bank documents. As
 the new NBKR unit responsible for consumer protection is established and begins its work, it
 should monitor the types and causes of consumer problems and also review information from
 bank supervision processes concerning bank implementation of staff training programs and
 operational risk monitoring in that area. On the basis of this information, it may be appropriate for
 the unit to cooperate with the Union of Banks to design and offer training classes for bank staff on
 newer rules or in areas where consumer complaints or bank reporting indicate that better training
 is needed. Detailed regulatory or association requirements and attestation for minimum
 competency of customer-facing bank staff or staff working with specific documents (advertising,
 key fact statements) should not be a first order priority until clear legal/regulatory standards are in
 place and may not be necessary unless there is indication of a systemic problem with inaccurate
 statements to consumers.

            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 37
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices

               Section C. Customer Account Handling and Maintenance

                                           C.1. Statements

 Good Practice
     a. Unless a bank receives a customer’s prior signed authorization to the contrary, the bank
        should issue, and provide the customer free of charge, a monthly statement of every
        account the bank operates for the customer.
     b. Each such statement should: (i) set out all transactions concerning the account during the
        period covered by the statement; and (ii) provide details of the interest rate(s) applied to
        the account during the period covered by the statement.
     c. Each credit card statement should set out the minimum payment required and the total
        interest cost that will accrue, if the cardholder makes only the required minimum payment.
     d. Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly indicate the amount paid
        during the period covered by the statement, the total outstanding amount still owing, the
        allocation of payment to the principal and interest and, if applicable, the up-to-date accrual
        of taxes paid.
     e. A bank should notify a customer of long periods of inactivity of any account of the
        customer and provide a reasonable final notice in writing to the customer if the funds are
        to be treated as unclaimed money.
     f.   When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such statements should be in an easy-
          to-read and readily understandable format.
 Description
 a. & b. There are no general rules that would require banks to provide periodic statements to
 consumers on all types of accounts. Rules on payment card accounts, which cover both debit card
 accounts and credit cards, do require statements to be provided to clients at least once a month
 containing information on the transactions in the account and the balance. Interest is not
 specifically mentioned in the statement requirement, although if charged or credited it would
 presumably appear as a transaction. (These rules appear in point 5.4 of the Provision on Payment
 Cards, discussed in detail in C.5, below). The rules do not require that the statement be provided
 in any particular form, but the means for its provision must be specified in the contract for the
 account. Existing rules on account handling in general, including deposit accounts, do not appear
 to contain any corresponding requirement for regular statements in relation to deposit accounts.




             Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 38
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 The rules on payment cards do not contain any requirements related to statements for transactions
 using an overdraft, which may be provided by the bank on payment accounts assigned through
 “salary projects” in which salary payments go directly into the account. Separate rules on
 overdraft credit require that the payment for the overdraft and interest on its use be made by the
 bank automatically from funds deposited into the account, in the manner provided by the contract
 with the account holder. The statement should provide clarity on the payments, the application of
 the interest rate to the overdraft, and if repayment of the overdraft over time is permitted (as
 opposed to immediate coverage by the next salary deposit), information on how long it will take
 to cover an existing overdraft and how much in total will have been paid in principal and interest.
 c. There are no detailed rules regulating the content of statements for a credit card account and
 credit cards are not widely used or available in the Kyrgyz Republic at this time. See also C.5.,
 below.
 d. Despite significant attention in recent years to the lending process and the provision of
 adequate information to borrowers, there is no requirement that banks provide individual
 borrowers with periodic statements of account in any form. Borrowers are required to receive a
 detailed schedule of all payments on a consumer loan at the time that the loan contract is signed,
 showing the components of each payment, the date it must be made and the balance that will
 remain on the loan after each payment. Provided that a borrower makes payments as scheduled,
 these documents would serve some of the purposes served by periodic statements, although they
 would not provide timely reminders of payment due or reflect any additional charges or changes
 in the account (such as a penalty for late payment). In relation to “problem” credit that has
 become overdue, banks are required to take measures to work with the borrower. Such measures
 may (but are not required to) include a notice to the borrower that the conditions of the contract
 have been violated and what the possible problems/consequences associated with this may be.
 Notice must also be provided if the bank intends to execute against property provided as security.
 e. General rules on account handling allow a bank to close an account when there are no funds in
 the account and/or there have been no transactions in the account for the period specified in the
 contract. A contract may also specify a minimum amount of funds to be maintained in the
 account and the right of the bank to close the account if the amount of funds falls below the
 minimum. In such instances, the bank must inform the client at least one month in advance of
 any closure of the account. (Point 54 of the NBKR Instructions on Work with Bank Accounts and
 Deposit Accounts)
 f. Because there is no existing practice of provision to individual consumers of detailed paper
 statements on accounts and internet banking is not generally available to individual consumers,
 the provision of “paperless statements” in the form of an electronic copy of such a detailed
 statement provided through email or internet banking connections is not available. Other kinds of
 electronic statements, however, in the form of balance inquiries and recent transaction records
 obtained through bank ATM terminals are available to payment card holders and payment card
 contracts may specify this form of provision of statements. Some banks are also offering SMS
 notification services on accounts, providing notification of transactions.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 39
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices



 Recommendation
 a.-b. Banks must be required to provide customers with periodic statements of account that are
 sufficient for customers to manage their personal finances, monitor account activity, and take
 timely action to correct mistakes or other problems in their accounts. NBKR should monitor the
 provision of statements on payment accounts to ensure that consumers are receiving sufficient
 information in a timely manner and should issue more detailed requirements if necessary.
 Overdraft arrangements should be subject to more detailed statement requirements than simpler
 payment card accounts, requiring clear statements of the interest rate applied, the payments taken
 to cover the overdraft and their division into principal and interest, and (if applicable) the number
 of additional payments that will be required to cover the overdraft and the amount that will be
 paid in interest over the entire period.
 Rules are needed on the provision of statements/account information on deposit (savings)
 accounts to establish minimum reporting requirements. These should be appropriate to the type
 and term of the account, but at a minimum should require a bank to notify a consumer within a
 stated period of the maturity of a time deposit contract concerning the upcoming maturity, the
 consumer’s options, and the fact that money left in the deposit account beyond the date of
 maturity will be subject to the lower “upon demand” interest rate (if this is applicable).
 c. More detailed rule will be needed in regard to statements on credit card accounts when those
 accounts begin to be more available to consumers.
 d. Clearer rules are needed in relation to banks reporting obligations to consumer borrowers with
 respect to loan accounts as well as borrowers rights to receive statements on request. At a
 minimum, consumers should receive notice (a statement) at any time that any additional charge is
 applied to the account or and at any time that the repayment amounts or schedules change (for
 example due to late repayment penalties or to early repayment of part of the loan).
 e. Rules concerning notice on the closure of accounts appear adequate, provided that the required
 notice is clear concerning the actions the consumer may take and the means by which money left
 in an account that is closed may be repaid to the consumer. NBKR should monitor the
 implementation of these kinds of contractual rules to ensure that they do not contain balance or
 activity requirements that are unrealistic for individual consumers, especially when these are
 combined with high fees for account maintenance and/or reopening of closed accounts.
 f. NBKR should monitor the forms of electronic statements to ensure clarity and completeness for
 consumers. This may be especially important in relation to mobile banking services. It may be
 appropriate for NBKR to establish minimum standards for the availability of account information
 for consumers who access their accounts primarily through mobile banking arrangements. There
 should always be a reliable and reasonably rapid means for a mobile banking consumer to obtain
 a paper document reflecting the transactions in their accounts, even if this is not the means used
 for regular statements.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 40
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


            C.2. Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Non-interest Charges

 Good Practice
     a. A customer of a bank should be notified in writing by the bank of any change in:
        (i) The interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of the customer as soon as
            possible; and
        (ii) A non-interest charge on any account of the customer a reasonable period in advance
             of the effective date of the change.
     b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or she should have the right to
        exit the contract without penalty, provided such right is exercised within a reasonable
        period.
     c. The bank should inform the customer of the foregoing right whenever a notice of change
        under paragraph a. is made by the bank.
 Description
     a. Current law is not entirely clear on the nature of notice that must be provided to banking
        clients concerning changes in terms applying to their accounts. Article 50, part 3 of the
        Law on Banks and Banking Activity states that a bank must “explain to its client or send
        in written form each time information concerning changes in the conditions of service
        concerning each concrete client, including: (1) information on the paid services provided
        by the bank; (2) information on the amount of payment for services provided, including
        credit; (3) information on the interest rates and conditions for payment on deposits; (4) the
        procedure and periods for the consideration of client complaints; (5) other conditions for
        the conduct of banking operations. “ It is not clear when or how the option to explain
        changes to a client can take the place of written notice of change, and it does not appear
        that banks, in practice, are sending written notices to clients concerning every change in
        the conditions for the conduct of banking operations that might affect that specific client.
        The draft Banking Code would abandon language concerning written notice, at least as a
        general principle of bank-client relationships. Article 7, part 4 of the draft Code provides
        that changes in the general conditions or the provision of banking services must be
        published in the mass media or on the website of the bank not less than thirty calendar
        days before the change enters into force, and must also be available on information stands
        in the bank’s branches. As an exception to this rule, changes in interest rates and in
        exchange rates must be published “immediately,” presumably through the same means,
        although what qualifies as immediate is not defined in the draft Code. Under this kind of
        notice provision, consumers who do not continually monitor the bank’s web site or the
        press for change announcements or those who do not have access to the Internet or the
        mass media in which the change is announced may not receive any notice of changes
        affecting them until the effects of those changes appear in their accounts.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 41
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


        Unilateral changes in terms and conditions that are directly reflected in the contract with
        the bank are prohibited by general civil law rules on contract and by Article 50, part 4 in
        relation to deposit contracts. Some provisions of law and of regulations, however, do
        envision the possibility for banking contracts themselves to include the possibility for
        variable interest rates. Article 36, part 2 of the law “On Banks and Banking Activity”
        provides that banks may, by agreement with their clients, periodically adjust the interest
        rate on deposits or credits depending upon the economic situation. This must, however, be
        reflected in the contract between the bank and the client. Point 40 of the Provision “On the
        Minimum Requirements for the Management of Credit Risk” likewise prohibits the
        unilateral change of the initial conditions of a credit contract, with the exception of cases
        when this is directly provided for in the credit contract. Point 40 does on to specify that
        this must include the statement of the period for notice to the client and a statement of a
        limited list of the concrete articles and conditions that may be changed and the minimum
        and maximum boundaries for such changes. Although these provisions would authorize
        the use of variable rate loans, bank advertisements and brochures review for the diagnostic
        did not indicate that variable rates are commonly offered.
        Although they were requested both at diagnostic review meetings with banks, copies of
        standard contracts for deposit accounts or loan accounts could not be obtained for review.
        It is therefore not clear whether those contracts may contain provisions on periodic
        adjustment of fees or interest rates on accounts and whether other adjustments may be
        envisioned.
     b. There do not appear to be any rules requiring that a customer be given any particular
        rights to withdraw from a contract in the event of a change in rates or fees that is not
        acceptable to the customer. Since provisions of the contract itself cannot be unilaterally
        changed, such a right would have to apply either to changes in other (general) conditions
        for the provision of banking services that affect the customer in relation to the contract or
        to a change envisioned in a contract with variable rates.
        With respect to credit contracts, customers have a right to pay off the contract early at any
        time without penalty, provided they provide at least 30 days notice to the bank. Such
        consumers would have to receive actual notice of a change a good deal more than 30 days
        in advance if this provision were to protect them from changes that they find unacceptable.
        In practice, however, full early repayment is rarely an option for consumer borrowers, so
        the right of early repayment without penalty is not an effective protection against
        objectionable changes.
     c. As unilateral changes in contract conditions are prohibited and there is no general legal
        right for consumers to withdraw from contracts without penalty if the contract itself
        envisions changes or if other changes affect their accounts, there is no requirement for
        notification to consumers of such a right.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 42
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 Rules on notice of changes affecting consumer accounts are very much in need of clarification.
 Legal rules in this area should require direct notice to consumers of any change in the fees,
 interest rates or other charges that are directly applicable to their accounts. Notice by publication
 is unlikely to be effective and should not be permitted. As a rule, notice of changes should be
 required to be written, and all changes in interest rates on variable rate loans and deposits should
 be notified in writing. Appropriate exceptions may need to made, however, in relation to
 notifications in mobile banking terms or notifications made in areas with limited postal delivery
 services. Such exceptions should, however, to the maximum extent possible provide for actual
 notice directed to the individual consumer (through messaging or other communication, for
 example) rather than constructive notice by general posting or publication. Rules should
 distinguish appropriately between changes directly affecting a consumer account and changes in
 general terms and conditions of service.



                                         C.3. Customer Records

 Good Practice
     a. A bank should maintain up-to-date records in respect of each customer of the bank that
        contain the following:
        (i)       a copy of all documents required to identify the customer and provide the
                  customer’s profile;
        (ii)      the customer’s address, telephone number and all other customer contact details;
        (iii)     any information or document in connection with the customer that has been
                  prepared in compliance with any statute, regulation or code of conduct;
        (iv)      details of all products and services provided by the bank to the customer;
        (v)       a copy of correspondence from the customer to the bank and vice-versa and details
                  of any other information provided to the customer in relation to any product or
                  service offered or provided to the customer;
        (vi)      all documents and applications of the bank completed, signed and submitted to the
                  bank by the customer;
        (vii) a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer in support of an
              application by the customer for the provision of a product or service by the bank;
              and
        (viii) any other relevant information concerning the customer.
     b. A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible period for retaining all such
        records and, throughout this period, the customer should be provided ready access to all
        such records free of charge or for a reasonable fee.




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 43
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Description
 a.& b. Article 60 of the law “On Banks and Banking Activity” requires banks to provide for strict
 account and proper retention of documents used in financial reporting and other required
 reporting, making the head and chief accountant of a bank responsible for this task. Although this
 language might suggest that only a limited number of reporting documents must be retained, the
 list of documents and required periods for their retention issued by the NBKR is extensive. The
 current rules are provided by Decree No. 22/9 of the Board of the NBKR “On the List of Basic
 Documents Created During the Activity of Commercial Banks and Financial-Credit
 Organizations Licensed by the National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic, with Statement of the
 Periods for their Retention” issued in 2004. The instructions for the List state as its purposes not
 only the rational organization of work with documents and provision for their preservation, but
 also the protection of the legal interests of the creditors, depositors and clients of banks and
 financial institutions (point 1.2 of the Appendix to the List).
 The List includes most of the documents that are created and used in the day-to-day operations of
 banks and in the work of their managements, ranging from management plans and predictions to
 records of employee training to customer communication and account records and transactions
 receipts for specific operations. It is organized by type of operation or activity and contains a list
 of documents created during that activity and a period for the retention of each type of document.
 Section 6.3, for example, concerns deposit operations and lists 18 types of documents and their
 retention periods including deposit contracts (10 years), alphabetical lists of personal deposit
 accounts (5 years), correspondence about deposit accounts with their holders (10 years), and the
 bank’s registration book for lost deposit books and bank cards on deposit accounts (15 years).
 The List and its accompanying instructions are not organized so as to group requirements
 concerning the records of a specific customer together, but taken together the listed documents
 would include most or all of the information listed in parts a.(i)-a(viii) of this good practice
 description. Given the differing terms for retention of various types of records concerning a single
 customer’s account, however, and the probability that such records may be archived according to
 their type and period for retention, questions may arise concerning the ease with which a bank
 could compile full information on its dealings with a specific customer. The List and its
 instructions do not contain requirements concerning customer access to bank records.
 With respect to credit, NBKR rules on the “Minimum Requirements for the Management of
 Credit Risk” contain very specific and inclusive instructions concerning the information and
 documents on credit applications in general and on a specific client that must be created and
 maintained. All applications for credit, for example, (whether accepted or rejected) must be
 registered in a journal and retained, along with information on the client, for a period of not less
 than 15 years. (Point 20) A credit dossier on a specific borrower is required to contain all
 documents related to loans to that client beginning with the application and supporting
 information and to include all correspondence with the borrower and notation of every meeting,
 discussion and telephone call related to the credit. (Points 36 and 37). The rules require that a
 credit contract include a provision obligating the bank to provide a borrower within three days of
 a request with information on the receipt of the credit and the borrowers payment discipline for
 presentation by the borrower to any other financial-credit institution (point 42) but do not
 otherwise concern client access to the bank’s records, rights to copies, or the costs that may be
 imposed.



            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 44
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                         Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 a. & b. Although there are extensive rules concerning the retention of bank records, including
 most records related to bank dealings with each individual customer, the rules are not focused on
 the retention of a unified record reflecting all of a bank’s dealings with a specific client and do not
 provide banking customers with clear rights of access to the records in general or to copies of
 those records. Although electronic document creation and record keeping may make the linking
 and retrieval of all records for a specific customer substantially easier than for any records kept on
 paper, archiving and retention rules that do not organize records by customer may complicate
 access to older records. NBKR should impose clear rules on this issue to ensure that consumers
 have appropriate access to their own banking records. A section on the availability of consumer
 banking records and consumers’ access rights (including reasonable charges where appropriate)
 could be included in the more coherent and unified normative legal act on consumer rights that is
 recommended above.



                                    C.4. Paper and Electronic Checks

 Good Practice
     a. The law and code of conduct should provide for clear rules on the issuance and clearing of
        paper checks that include, among other things, rules on:
         (i)      checks drawn on an account that has insufficient funds;
         (ii)     the consequences of issuing a check without sufficient funds;
         (iii)    the duration within which funds of a cleared check should be credited into the
                  customer’s account;
         (iv)     the procedures on countermanding or stopping payment on a check by a customer;
         (v)      charges by a bank on the issuance and clearance of checks;
         (vi)     liability of the parties in the case of check fraud; and
         (vii) error resolution
     a. A customer should be told of the consequences of issuing a paper check without sufficient
        funds at the time the customer opens a checking account.
     b. A bank should provide the customer with clear, easily accessible and understandable
        information regarding electronic checks, as well the cost of using them.
     c. In respect of electronic or credit card checks , a bank should inform each customer in
        particular:
         (i)      how the use of a credit card check differs from the use of a credit card;
         (ii)     of the interest rate that applies and whether this differs from the rate charged for
                  credit card purchases;




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 45
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


        (iii)    when interest is charged and whether there is an interest free period, and if so, for
                 how long;
        (iv)     whether additional fees or charges apply and, if so, on what basis and to what
                 extent; and
        (v)    whether the protection afforded to the customer making a purchase using a credit
               card check differs from that afforded when using a credit card and, if so, the
               specific differences.
     d. Credit card checks should not be sent to a consumer without the consumer’s prior written
        consent.
     e. There should be clear rules on procedures for dealing with authentication, error resolution
        and cases of fraud.
 Description
 a. – f. inclusive Customers are currently offered a limited range of products and services by
 banks, which do not include use of paper or electronic checks or the issuance of credit card
 checks that would allow payments to be drawn by a written check on a credit line. Article 51 of
 the law “On Banks and Banking Activity” does list checks as among the payment instruments that
 banks in the Kyrgyz Republic may use, that article is simply an authorizing provision for the use
 by banks in Kyrgyz Republic of “any system of settlement accepted in international banking
 practice.” It does not appear that expansion of services in this direction is likely and additional
 payment options offered to banking consumers in the short to medium term are likely to be based
 on the expanded use of payment cards and the introduction of mobile banking services. This
 eliminates any immediate need for detailed regulation of the use of checks. If additional services
 begin to be offered more widely by banks, the banking regulator will need to expand rules and
 instructions as required in order to supplement the application of general rules to the new products
 and services. This should not, however, be a priority at this time. The first order priority should
 be improvement of consumer protection regulations in respect to the payment card, deposit, and
 loan accounts that are currently available to consumers and appropriate framework regulation to
 protect consumers as electronic payments services and mobile banking services expand.
 Recommendation
 General rules protecting consumers of banking services, including additional rules recommended
 for adoption in this document, should apply to protect consumers using any paper or electronic
 check services that begin to be offered by banks, as well as to other new forms of banking
 products. If those products become more widely available to consumers, NBKR should monitor
 bank performance and any problems revealed by consumer complaints, and should adopt more
 detailed rules concerning their terms, authentication methods, fraud prevention measures and
 other matters as required by the services offered.




              Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 46
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                     Comparison with Good Practices


                                            C.5. Credit Cards

 Good Practice
     a. There should be legal rules on the issuance of credit cards and related customer disclosure
        requirements.
     b. Banks, as credit card issuers, should ensure that personalized disclosure requirements are
        made in all credit card offers, including the fees and charges (including finance charges),
        credit limit, penalty interest rates and method of calculating the minimum monthly
        payment
     c. Banks should not be permitted to impose charges or fees on pre-approved credit cards that
        have not been accepted by the customer.
     d.    Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment warnings on each monthly
          statement and the total interest costs that will accrue if the cardholder makes only the
          requested minimum payment.
     e. Among other things, the legal rules should also:
          (i)     restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and marketing of credit cards to young
                  adults who have no independent means of income;
          (ii)    require reasonable notice of changes in fees and interest rates increase;
          (iii) prevent the application of new higher penalty interest rates to the entire existing
                balance, including past purchases made at a lower interest rate;
          (iv) limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when consumers exceed their
               credit limits;
          (v)     prohibit a practice called ―double-cycle billing‖ by which card issuers charge
                  interest over two billing cycles rather than one;
          (vi) prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly payments in ways that maximize
               interest charges to consumers; and
          (vii) limit up-front fees charged on sub-prime credit cards issued to individuals with bad
                credit.
     f. There should be clear rules on error resolution, reporting of unauthorized transactions and
        of stolen cards, with the ensuing liability of the customer being made clear to the customer
        prior to his or her acceptance of the credit card.
     g. Banks and issuers should conduct consumer awareness programs on the misuse of credit
          cards, credit card over- indebtedness and prevention of fraud.




                Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 47
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


 Description
 a. Credit cards are not widely used in the Kyrgyz Republic, and are just beginning to be offered to
 individuals. Payment cards, some bearing the logos of international payments systems, are issued
 by a number of banks, but in most cases these operate as debit cards requiring that a client deposit
 money in the account before using the card and limiting purchases to the amount in the account.
 Prepaid cards containing a set amount of credit are also available in some instances. Legal rules
 concerning the use of credit cards are quite limited. The Provision on Bank Payment Cards in the
 Kyrgyz Republic, issued by NBKR, does cover credit cards as well as debit cards attached to an
 account and prepaid cards carrying a specific amount of credit, although its provisions are
 designed more appropriately for the latter two types of account.
 Point 5.4 of the Provision requires that contracts for all kinds of payment cards include the
 following:
         (i)     personal information on the owner of the account sufficient to identify them
                 conclusively;
        (ii)     personal information on the card holder sufficient to conclusively identify them
                 conclusively;
        (iii) the rights, duties and liability of the card holder and of the issuer in relation to
              operations with the card;
        (iv) the types and amounts of commissions to be paid;
        (v)      the period and means for provision of a statement on the movements in the account
                 and the amount remaining in it (with a minimum of at least once a month);
        (vi) basic requirements for maintenance of security by the holder of the card (use of the
             PIN-code, limits, required actions of the holder in the case of loss or theft of the
             card);
        (vii) procedure for informing the issuer concerning loss, theft or use of the card by an
              unauthorized person;
        (viii) liability of the parties in the case of loss, theft or use of the card by an unauthorized
               person;
        (ix) conditions that will result in the blocking or withdrawal of the card by the issuer;
        (x)      risks of the parties in the case of violation of security procedures or of the other
                 conditions of the contract;
         (xi) the procedure for consideration of disputes; the procedure for the termination of the
               contract.
 There are no requirements stated in the Provision concerning the content of the required
 provisions of the contract (with the exception of the once per month minimum for statements).




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 48
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


 f. Point 5.4 of the Provision requires that dispute resolution procedures be included in the
 contract, along with terms on the liabilities and risks of the parties in cases of theft, loss, or fraud.
 In addition, point 3.16 requires that there be a procedure in place for the resolution of issues
 related to mistakes or fraudulent payments identified after the payment has been completed. This
 procedure is not intended to regulate disputes between the card holder and the business that
 accepted the card, which are to be governed by other legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic. Point
 3.18 notes that a card holder may notify the emitting bank concerning a problem and request a
 “chargeback” within the rules applicable to the payments system, but that if such notificat ions are
 made outside the required timeframe, they will not be considered. None of these legal provisions
 regulate the content of dispute resolution rules or set any minimum standards other than to require
 that they be in accord with the rules of the payments system being used.
 b. – e. & g. The Provision does not regulate the content of credit card offers and advertising,
 substance of billing practices, calculation of interest, advertising or provision of credit cards to
 minors, or any of the other issues listed in items b.-e. and of the good practice description. Since
 credit cards have not been available in the Kyrgyz Republic, these issues and abuses have not
 arisen as matters to be regulated. It is possible that a credit card might be treated as accessing a
 credit line extended under the terms of legal rules concerning credit, which would impose some
 specific requirements concerning provision of information to the client about the costs of the
 credit and other matters. But the terms of the existing rules (in the Minimum Requirements for
 Management of Credit Risk) are very poorly designed to apply to a credit card account as
 opposed to a simple loan, so this would not resolve the lack of appropriate legal regulation and
 would cause additional confusion about legal requirements.
 Some of the provisions of the draft law “On the Payments System” would apply to the use of
 credit cards, including Article 15’s definitions of the point at which payments can no longer be
 repudiated by the sender or emitting bank and the point at which the payments become final.
 Recommendation
 NBKR will need to develop and issue appropriate regulatory instructions governing the
 advertising, issuance and use of credit cards and the requirements for bank billing, notification
 and dispute resolution practices. To avoid confusion, rules concerning credit cards should be
 separated from those that apply to prepaid cards and debit cards, to allow the rules to clearly
 address concerns that arise from the fact that use of a credit card carries different risks and
 complications for consumers (interest charges, over-indebtedness risk) and also for banks. Basic
 rules designed to protect consumers using credit cards are important and should be in place before
 bank offers of credit to consumers through credit card agreements become common. However,
 their development and passage should not take priority over consumer protection rules related to
 the kinds of accounts and services that are currently being widely used by consumers.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 49
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                     Comparison with Good Practices


                           C.6. Internet Banking and Mobile Phone Banking

 Good Practice
     a. The provision of internet banking and mobile phone banking (m-banking) should be
        supported by a sound legal and regulatory framework.
     b. Regulators should ensure that banks or financial service providers providing internet and
        m-banking have in place a security program that ensures:
          (i)     data privacy, confidentiality and data integrity;
          (ii)    authentication, identification of counterparties and access control;
          (iii) non-repudiation of transactions;
          (iv) a business continuity plan; and
          (v)     the provision of sufficient notice when services are not available.
     c. Banks should also implement an oversight program to monitor third-party control
        conditions and performance, especially when agents are used for carrying out m-banking.
     d. A customer should be informed by the bank whether fees or charges apply for internet or
        m-banking and, if so, on what basis and how much.
     e. There should be clear rules on the procedures for error resolution and fraud.
     f.   Authorities should encourage banks and service providers to undertake measures to
          increase consumer awareness regarding internet and m-banking transactions.
 Description
 a. – f. generally Internet banking services are not widely available to consumers in the Kyrgyz
 Republic, although a few banks have begun to offer internet banking services for business and
 high-income individual clients. Most other forms of mobile banking are not yet available at all.
 There is, however, very strong interest in the development of mobile phone banking as a means to
 provide services to the large mass of currently unbanked consumers. The mobile phone networks
 have wide coverage and voice and text services are reported to be affordable and widely used,
 making this a potentially promising direction for rapid expansion of access to banking services.
 Although the legal and regulatory frameworks are not yet well developed, work on this is in
 process.
 The draft law “On the Payments System in the Kyrgyz Republic” contains basic provisions
 concerning internet and mobile phone banking, as well as any other form of electronic banking.
 The draft law requires that contracts for such services include the conditions and procedures for:
 receipt of information concerning account balances and deposits into the account; receipt of a
 record of recent transactions; payments from the account into other accounts (both in the same
 bank and at other banks); receipt of cash from and deposit of cash into the account; change in
 personal identification code; money transfers; any other operations that can be performed and do
 not violate applicable rules. (Article 14, point 1)




                Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 50
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Contracts must include provisions requiring mandatory registration of the client within the bank
 and identification of the client using connected information within the bank’s mobile banking
 system. The client’s account number may not be directly transmitted in notifications made
 through mobile banking and banks must provide for the safety and confidentiality of information,
 including through the use of multi-level identification codes for the client, such as differing codes
 for different types of transaction or notice and confirmation codes at each stage of a transaction.
 (Article 14, part 2)
 The draft law also contains rules defining the point at which various kinds of payments can no
 longer be repudiated by the sender and the point at which a payment is considered to have been
 completed. (Article 15)
 b. Specific requirements for security programs to be used in internet and mobile banking
 operations, business continuity plans, or notice concerning service interruptions are not addressed
 by rules available for review for this diagnostic.
 c. The draft Law on the Payments System generally makes banks responsible to clients for
 conduct of operations by bank agents, creating an incentive for banks to monitor performance of
 agents and payments systems with which they contract. It does not specify the means by which
 such monitoring is to take place. The Law also emphasizes the role of NBKR in regulation,
 monitoring and oversight of the payments system.
 d. The provisions of the draft law do not specifically require that consumers be informed
 concerning whether fees apply for the use of internet or mobile banking payments (with the
 exception of money transfers). General provisions on required terms of contracts should apply to
 require this, but it may be appropriate for normative legal rules supplementing the law to provide
 clarity on this issue. The issue could also be dealt with in the regulation on disclosure of
 information to consumers that is discussed in B.7.
 e. The draft law “On the Payments System” requires that the rules of a payments system include a
 separate procedure for investigation of instances when a payment is recognized as mistaken or
 fraudulent after at has become final and return of the money. The rules for resolution of disputes
 concerning such payments must be established in the contract between the client and the bank,
 and also in the procedures for the work of the corresponding payments system. The draft law
 does not, however, contain any limitations or requirements concerning the content of those rules
 designed to protect consumers using the services. (Article 15, part 7) The law places general
 responsibility on the client for their correct use of the system and completion of payment
 documents and instructions, and envisions that this will be governed by other normative legal
 acts. (Article 16, part 1)




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 51
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                       Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 A first priority at the present time should be improvement of consumer protection in relation to
 the types of accounts and services that are currently offered to consumers in the Kyrgyz Republic.
 However, it is clear that the types of services are beginning to expand, and also that mobile
 banking services in particular are likely to be an important part of plans to increase the access of
 Kyrgyz citizens to banking services. The NBKR should begin now to develop rules and
 instructions regulating the provision of these services to consumers and standards for data
 protection and other relevant requirements. Given the difficulties experienced by the banking
 system in recent years and the correspondingly low levels of consumer trust in banking services,
 it will be quite important for effective consumer protection standards on mobile banking to be in
 place as those services are rolled out to the population. Significant consumer difficulties with
 mobile banking services could frustrate plans to make mobile banking a strong component of
 systemic development and expansion of financial inclusion.



                            C.7. Electronic Fund Transfers and Remittances

 Good Practice
     a. There should be clear rules on the rights, liabilities and responsibilities of the parties
        involved in any electronic fund transfer.
     b. Banks should provide information to consumers on prices and service features of
        electronic fund transfers and remittances in easily accessible and understandable forms.
        As far as possible, this information should include:
          (i)     the total price (e.g. fees for the sender and the receiver, foreign exchange rates and
                  other costs);
          (ii)    the time it will take the funds to reach the receiver;
          (iii) the locations of the access points for sender and receiver; and
          (iv) the terms and conditions of electronic fund transfer services that apply to the
               customer.
     c. To ensure transparency, it should be made clear to the sender if the price or other aspects
        of the service vary according to different circumstances, and the bank should disclose this
        information without imposing any requirements on the consumer.
     d. A bank that sends or receives an electronic fund transfer or remittance should document
        all essential information regarding the transfer and make this available to the customer
        who sends or receives the transfer or remittance without charge and on demand.
     e. There should be clear, publicly available and easily applicable procedures in cases of
        errors and frauds in respect of electronic fund transfers and remittances
     f.   A customer should be informed of the terms and condition of the use of credit/debit cards
          outside the country including the foreign transaction fees and foreign exchange rates that
          may be applicable.



                Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 52
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


 Description
 There is a significant market for the transmission of remittances from the Kyrgyz Republic’s large
 migrant labor population, and money transfers are one of the most commonly used banking
 services. In addition, consumers can make payments for utilities and other services through
 money transfers directly to the service provider through banks, post offices, and a number of
 payments system operators who operate “cash in” terminals that accept cash for such payments.
 The market appears to be quite competitive, with services available through a number of money
 transfer systems. Banks often offer their customers a choice among a number of transfer systems
 with differing costs and conditions.
 Counterparts generally agreed that problems and complaints concerning both remittances and
 payments transfers are not a common occurrence. At the same time, NBKR has expressed a
 desire to increase its oversight over payment flows and the payments system in general, for the
 purposes of combatting money laundering and also for the protection of consumers. In connection
 with this, payments system operators and participants also expressed concern, both about the
 possibility that new rules require more bank involvement in payments systems and may increase
 costs and damage existing networks and about the rules that should apply concerning liability in
 the case of mistakes or frauds.
 a. Rules on money transfers are currently provided by the Rules for the Conduct of Money
 Transfers Through the System for Money Transfers in the Kyrgyz Republic, issued by NBKR.
 The rules cover a number of aspects of money transfers, including the information to be provided
 to consumers (users of the transfer system), but do not set other minimum standards or govern the
 rights and responsibilities of the parties for purposes of protection of consumers.
 b. Point 3.4 (1) of the Rules requires an operator of a payment system to “provide for the
 transparency of the system for money transfers, to provide the sender and recipient with the
 opportunity to receive information on the services prior to their use (including commissions,
 speed of completion of the money transfer, exchange rate and so on) and to provide for adequate
 protection of the consumer.” Subpoint (3) of the same point requires an operator to have in place
 a “rational, predictable and non-discriminatory” set of rules and regulations. The purpose of these
 regulations, however, is to be “above all, the prevention of money laundering and the financing of
 terrorism.” Operators are to meet the requirements of the “know your client” principles of FATF
 for this purpose.
 Participants in the payment system that carry out the individual transfers are generally required to
 inform the sender and/or recipient about the rules for transfers, provide all necessary
 documentation, verify their identities, and ensure that they correctly provide the information
 required. (Point 4.5) Participants are specifically required to inform the sender of a transfer
 about:
        (i)     the sum that will be paid to the recipient;
        (ii)    the sum of commissions that must be paid by the sender and/or recipient;
        (iii) the exchange rate;
        (iv) the date and time that the money will be available to the recipient;
        (v)     the place where the money will be available to the recipient;
        (vi) other information necessary to the sender.


              Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 53
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


 Participants are required to identify a recipient and check all of the stated parameters and to refuse
 to issue money if all parameters are not met. They are required to keep records identifying the
 sender and receiver of transfers, with all other information, including the purpose of the transfer.
 (Point 4.9)
 A draft law “On the Payments System in the Kyrgyz Republic” that is now in the process of
 passage contains some general provisions on money transfers. Under Article 5 of the draft law
 bank-participants in the money transfer system are generally required to inform the sender and
 recipient about the rules for the money transfer, to provide the necessary documents, and to verify
 the identity of the sender and/or recipient and ensure that that they correspond to the requisite
 information for the transfer. The bank is specifically required to inform the sender of a transfer
 about:
         (i)     the sum that will be paid to the recipient;
         (ii)    the fees to be paid by the sender and/or recipient;
         (iii) the exchange rate;
         (iv) the date and time that the money will be available to the recipient; and
         (v)     the place(s) where the money can be received.
 c. – d. Neither the existing Rules nor the provisions of the draft law specifically require banks
 (participants in the transfer system) to review all of the different types of transfers and their costs
 with a sender prior to their use of the system. Although records are required to be kept, neither
 document addresses the question of when and how documentation is to be provided to a sender or
 recipient and whether a charge may be made for this.
 e. Rules must be in place to resolve problems of mistake or fraud that are discovered after a
 payment has become final, but the draft law does not contain any substantive requirements for the
 content of such rules.
 f. Rules concerning money transfers do not deal with issues related to the use of credit cards
 abroad and this issue would be more appropriately dealt with within the rules governing the use of
 credit cards. Credit cards are not in wide use in the Kyrgyz Republic and the existing rules
 regarding bank payment cards do not address this issue.
 Recommendation
 The NBKR should, in connection with the passage of the draft law on the payments system and
 with the participation of those providing payments services, consider the issuance of rules
 containing minimum standards for consumer protection in relation to money transfers. These
 rules should more clearly define the information that must be made available to consumers prior
 to use of the service, the form and content of records and of documents (receipts) that must be
 provided to senders and recipients, and clear rules concerning the minimum protections for
 consumers (senders and recipients) in the case of mistake or fraud.




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 54
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


                                          C.8. Debt Recovery

 Good Practice
     a. A bank, agent of a bank and any third party should be prohibited from employing any
        abusive debt collection practice against any customer of the bank, including the use of any
        false statement, any unfair practice or the giving of false credit information to others.
     b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a bank, the person who can collect any
        such debt and the manner in which that debt can be collected should be indicated to the
        customer of the bank when the credit agreement giving rise to the debt is entered into
        between the bank and the customer.
     c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a bank customer’s debt without
        informing that party of the debt collector’s right to do so; and the type of information that
        the debt collector is seeking.
     d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is allowed by law, the borrower
        should be:
        (i)     notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable number of days;
        (ii) informed that the borrower remains obligated on the debt; and
        provided with information as to where to make payment, as well as the purchaser’s or
        transferee’s contact information.
 Description
 a.- d. There are no legal or regulatory provisions specifically defining or restricting abusive debt
 collection practices. According to information provided by counterparts during the diagnostic
 review, third party debt collection and sale of the debts of individual borrowers to others are not
 currently practiced in Kyrgyz Republic. They are not, however, specifically prohibited by law and
 general provisions on credit (which do not distinguish between corporate and consumer
 borrowing) contain references to sale of debt as means for banks to achieve repayment. (Point 77
 of the Minimum Requirements for the Management of Credit Risk) In general, banks take
 responsibility for collecting their own debts and do so through their internal legal departments.
 Banks are discouraged by normative legal acts from issuing unsecured debt (see, e.g. point 61 of
 the Minimum Requirements for the Management of Credit Risk) and most consumer debt is
 secured against property. Credit cards are not generally available to consumers and banks do not
 carry the large pools of unsecured consumer credit debt that have commonly been the subject of
 abusive behavior on the part of debt collection companies in other jurisdictions. In the case of
 continued nonpayment, bank recourse is generally to begin foreclosure processes against the
 secured property. Consistent with these market characteristics, foreclosure and its avoidance are
 at the center of recent discussions about individuals’ credit difficulties. Foreclosure is discussed
 in Section C.9.




              Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 55
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 a. Although there are no separate rules applicable specifically to debt collection by banks or to
 debt collection in general, the making of false statements about a debtor or distribution of false
 credit information to third parties could well fall under legal rules prohibiting libel or slander.
 There are no specific rules restricting bank employees from making false statements to customers
 in an attempt to collect a debt, although in general the making of false statements would violate a
 bank’s obligation to observe principles of honesty, transparency, fairness and partnership in
 relation to clients that are envisioned in Article 3, part 1 of the draft Banking Code as well as
 Article 10, part 1 of the draft Code specifically in relation to credit.
 b. Contracts are not required to include information on who may collect debt on behalf of banks
 or the limits of their behavior. Credit contracts that involve a security in property are required to
 include, in the contract creating the security interest, provisions describing the procedures by
 which the bank may execute against the secured property and a minimum notice is required
 concerning the bank’s intention to foreclose. Normative acts recommend, but do not require, that
 contracts using forms of security other than moveable property or real estate contain specific
 provisions describing the procedures and facilitating direct enforcement against the security, but
 these forms of security are not generally used in consumer borrowing (e.g. security against short-
 term government bonds under point 57 of the Minimum Requirements for the Management of
 Credit Risk).
 c. Legal provisions concerning bank secrecy would generally prevent banks or their agents from
 revealing banking information on clients to third parties. Exceptions may be provided by contract,
 such as in relation to a guarantee that might be provided by an employer for employee overdrafts
 within the framework of a “salary project” with a bank (providing for payment of salaries through
 payment card accounts and the provision of specific services to card holders). Possible
 publication of information in the press concerning a borrower is envisioned in the rules on credit
 risk management, although this would need to be envisioned in the credit contract. (Point 76 of
 the Minimum Requirements for the Management of Credit Risk) This is not an appropriate
 provision in relation to individual consumers.
 d. There are no legal rules concerning notifications to consumers regarding sale of their debt to a
 third party. As discussed above, banks do not generally sell consumer debt but rather take steps
 to foreclose on the property that serves as security for the debt.
 Recommendation
 On the basis of the limited information available during the diagnostic review, systematic abuses
 by third party debt collectors and/or debt collection staff of banks did not appear to be a pressing
 problem at this time. NBKR, and also consumer protection bodies and organizations, should
 remain alert to indications that abusive behavior is, or is becoming, a problem. This should
 include attention to this issue by the new unit at NBKR that will be responsible for consumer
 protection issues, which should make note of whether abusive or improper actions in debt
 collection are reflected in the complaints they receive.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 56
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Acceptable conduct and permissible debt collection tactics in relation to individual consumers
 should be addressed separately from conduct related to business borrowing. (Rules should likely
 extend to individual entrepreneurs as well.) It would be appropriate for NBKR to include some
 general provisions in the consumer protection rules recommended above prohibiting abusive
 conduct in the process of attempts to collect debts and restricting the use of methods such as
 publication of information on the debtor’s failure to repay. If NBKR receives information
 through the consumer protection unit indicating that specific abuses are occurring, it should take
 immediate steps to address those abuses in the instructions and in its bank supervision activities if
 necessary.
 To the extent that any abusive behavior is occurring on an informal basis rather than through
 formal debt collection activity or is being committed by non-bank third parties, other authorities
 (police, public prosecutors, local government bodies) may need to be involved and rules
 preventing such abuses may need to be embodied in the Code of Administrative Violations and/or
 the Criminal Code so that they can be properly enforced.


                       C.9. Foreclosure of mortgaged or charged property

 Good Practice
     a. In the event that a bank exercises its right to foreclose on a property that serves as
        collateral for a loan, the bank should inform the consumer in writing in advance of the
        procedures involved, and the process to be employed by the bank to foreclose on the
        property it holds as collateral and the consequences thereof to the consumer.
     b. At the same time, the bank should inform the consumer of the legal remedies and options
        available to him or her in respect of the foreclosure process.
     c. If applicable, the bank should draw the consumer’s attention to the fact that the bank has a
        legal right to recover the balance of the debt due in the event the proceeds from the sale of
        the foreclosed property are not sufficient to fully discharge the outstanding amount.
        In the event the mortgage contract or charge agreement permits the bank to enforce the
        contract without court assistance, the bank should ensure that it employs professional and
        legal means to enforce the contract, including regarding the sale of the property.
 Description
 All counterparts reported that consumer credit in the Kyrgyz Republic is commonly available
 only as secured credit and that the most commonly used security by far is a security interest in
 real estate – usually an apartment or house that serves as the home of the borrower and/or
 members of his /her family. Security interests in personal real estate are also a common form of
 security for small loans to individuals intended to fund income earning activities. Inability of the
 borrower to pay the loan can result in serious consequences for the residents and social tensions
 may arise if this occurs on a larger scale due to unusual economic hardship or other events.
 Reports concerning the loss of debtors’ homes as a result of di fficult circumstances have
 contributed to recent expressions of public concern about bank lending practices. Appropriate
 regulation in this area is particular important and particularly sensitive at this time.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 57
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 A number of laws contain rules on the establishment and use of security interests in property,
 including the Civil Code and the Law on Security Interests. NBKR Provision on Minimum
 Requirements for the Management of Credit Risk contains instructions to banks on the use of
 security interests in lending, including a number of recently added provisions. But many of the
 rules are very general in content or are designed to be applicable to all forms of security in
 property and they may not always be appropriate for security in real estate that serves as the home
 of the borrower. Examples include requirements that the lender have a specific plan for control
 over the condition of the property and conduct regular inspections.
 a. NBKR rules on the management of credit require lenders to actively work with borrowers when
 problems arise with repayment. Banks are instructed to send a notification to borrowers when
 problems arise with repayment, informing them about the possible consequences of their failure
 to repay (which would include foreclosure), and to conduct negotiation with the borrower and
 provide assistance in improving the possibilities for repayment. At the same time, the bank is
 also instructed to take one or more measures to ensure the return of the debt in the quickest
 possible period, the first of which listed is execution against property serving as security for the
 loan. (Points 75-77) Moreover, banks are encouraged to include in contracts a right of the bank to
 begin execution against the property securing a loan prior to the expiration of the period for loan
 payment. (point 78)
 If a bank does decide to begin proceedings to foreclose on the property, it is required to send a
 notice to the borrower, which must include a proposal that the outstanding obligation be paid and
 allow a timeframe for this of not less than 15 days (Article 57 of the Law on Security Interests).
 Recent amendments to the rules require that the accumulation of penalties under a loan contract
 with an individual (including an individual entrepreneur) must stop 15 days after that notice is
 sent. (Point 78-1 of the rules on credit risk management).
 b. The Law on Security Interests defines the required content of a notice of intent to foreclose,
 which include information on the contract and the security interest granted and a statement of the
 obligations that have not been met and a demand for payment of outstanding amounts with a
 stated time period for compliance of not less than 15 days, among other information. There is no
 requirement that the notice contain an explanation of the debtor’s rights in relation to the
 foreclosure process. The NBKR rules on management of credit risk recommend to banks (but do
 not require) that they provide a client with the possibility to independently locate a buyer for real
 estate that is the subject of the security interest during a period of one or more moths following
 the expiration of the period for repayment of the debt that is stated in the required notice.
 (Point 59)
 c. Unless it is otherwise provided in the contract between the borrower and the lender, a lender
 does have the right to seek further repayment from the borrower if the sale of the property that
 was the subject of the security interest does not cover the entire amount of the debt. (Law on
 Security Interests, Article 60, part 6.) There is no requirement that the notice to the debtor
 concerning the intent to foreclose contain any note of this fact.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 58
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


 d. A lender cannot enforce against secured property without any assistance at all, but in general
 the law does envision both a court process for foreclosure and sale and a non-court process for
 foreclosure and sale. The non-court process involves the review of the documents concerning the
 debt and the security interest by a notary and issuance by the notary of an order for execution
 against the property. The type of execution process is to be established by the contract between
 the parties, and for real estate the agreement to a non-court procedure for execution requires
 notarization at the time it is concluded. Once an agreement on the means for execution is
 properly reached and recorded, however, the means may not be changed by either of the parties
 unilaterally.
 Some counterparts indicated that the use of this type of non-court proceeding in relation to the
 homes of borrowers was one source of some of the recent social tension around debt problems. A
 change in the law now requires that property that serves as the sole residence of a debtor, as well
 as certain property with cultural value, may be sold in foreclosure only through a court
 proceeding.
 Banks report that in practice foreclosure on real estate presents significant problems, due to the
 length of the legal processes involved and in some cases to the absence of interested buyers and to
 legal complications concerning the eviction of the prior owner or of tenants with lease rights. For
 this reason, banks state that they make every attempt to avoid foreclosure proceedings, often
 spending months attempting to reschedule debt, find alternative means for repayment or even
 offering partial debt forgiveness.
 No information was available during the diagnostic on the prevalence of foreclosures as a means
 of debt repayment (or of voluntary sales in anticipation of foreclosure) or on consumer
 perceptions of the process.
 Discussion with some banks also suggested that although customers must go through a significant
 number of formalities before being able to establish a security interest in real estate, they may still
 not fully understand the potential consequences of the agreement or the process by which the
 bank will seek to enforce it if necessary. It may be appropriate for a clear and simple statement to
 be developed that would be suitable for provision to borrowers as a part of pre-contractual
 disclosure of terms.
 Recommendation
 NBKR should, with input from banks, develop a clear and simple statement of basic information
 in plain language that makes clear to a consumer the meaning and risks of a security interest
 (mortgage) in property, the process for execution on the property if the debt is not paid, and the
 consumer’s rights during that process. Banks should be required to provide this statement to
 consumers considering any loan that will be secured against real estate and also to include a copy
 of the statement in the notice to a borrower that foreclosure on the property is immanent.
 NBKR should review the provisions of the Provision on Minimum Standards for the Management
 of Credit Risk and consider the creation of a separate section with provisions on the rules and
 processes for execution against the home of an individual borrower, including a moderated
 emphasis on immediate steps to ensure debt repayment and appropriate rules concerning
 oversight and inspection of the property. This could be a part of the broader review of normative
 acts and creation of coherent provisions distinguishing consumer rights and protections
 (protection of individual borrowers) from the rights of business borrowers, as recommended
 above.

            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 59
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices




                                   C.10. Bankruptcy of Individuals

 Good Practice
     a. A bank should inform its individual customers in a timely manner and in writing on what
        basis the bank will seek to render a customer bankrupt, the steps it will take in this respect
        and the consequences of any individual’s bankruptcy.
     b. Every individual customer should be given adequate notice and information by his or her
        bank to enable the customer to avoid bankruptcy.
     c. Either directly or through its association of banks, every bank should make counseling
        services available to customers who are bankrupt or likely to become bankrupt.
     d. The law should enable an individual to:
         (i)    declare his or her intention to present a debtor’s petition for a declaration of
                bankruptcy;
         (ii) propose a debt agreement;
         (iii) propose a personal bankruptcy agreement; or
         (iv) enter into voluntary bankruptcy.
        Any institution acting as the bankruptcy office or trustee responsible for the administration
        and regulation of the personal bankruptcy system should provide adequate information to
        consumers on their options to deal with their own debt and rehabilitation process in the
        event of bankruptcy.
 Description
 a. – e. Kyrgyz law does not provide for bankruptcy proceedings in relation to private individuals
 and banks cannot therefore make a creditor’s petition for bankruptcy against an individual
 consumer who is in debt to the bank.
 Kyrgyz law does provide for bankruptcy proceedings in relation to individual entrepreneurs,
 however, and in relation to these individuals it does not always distinguish clearly between their
 business and personal debts. In relation to the presentation of claims during the bankruptcy
 process, rules clearly distinguish between debts related to the business activities and those that are
 not. Creditors with claims not related to an individual entrepreneur’s business activities may
 choose whether to present the claims within the bankruptcy process and accept the resulting
 payment, or to retain their claims against the individual as a private person and pursue them
 outside (and after) the bankruptcy process. In defining who qualifies as “creditors,” however, and
 in rules concerning the filing of a creditor’s petition, the law does not distinguish between the
 personal and business creditors of an individual entrepreneur, which could leave open the
 possibility that a personal creditor of an individual entrepreneur could make a creditor’s petition
 on the basis of unpaid consumer debt.




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 60
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 In practice, most individuals appear to be able to obtain significant amounts of consumer credit
 only against a security interest in real estate. In limited circumstances, security may be in
 moveable property (in an automobile in relation to a car purchase for example) or through
 guarantee by third parties, but counterparts indicated that this is rare. In the event of failure to
 pay, the bank’s recourse is generally to foreclose on the property serving as security. There was
 no indication that banks are using the complex and potentially lengthy bankruptcy process to seek
 consumer debt repayment from individual entrepreneurs.
 Recommendation
 Introduction of personal bankruptcy provisions at this time is not recommended. A law on
 individual bankruptcy would not improve protection of individual debtors at this time, would be
 unlikely to be understood by consumers, and could be subject to abuse.
 If not clarified by rules outside the bankruptcy laws, steps should be taken to clarify legal
 questions concerning which creditors may bring a petition to have an individual entrepreneur
 declared bankrupt. If status as an individual entrepreneur does, in practice, expose an individual
 to significantly greater or differing risks in relation to consumer debts than that faced by other
 consumers, banks and other lenders should be required to have clear policies in place in this
 regard and to include appropriate information when lending to any individual entrepreneur as a
 consumer through consumer lending programs.


                         Section D. Privacy and Data Protection

                  D.1. Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information

 Good Practice
     a. The banking transactions of any bank customer should be kept confidential by his or her
        bank.
     b. The law should require a bank to ensure that it protects the confidentiality and security of
        the personal data of its customers against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security
        or integrity of such information, as well as against unauthorized access.
 Description
 Current Law
 Confidentiality issues are currently governed by the Law of 2002 “On Banking Secrets,” as
 amended. That law defines a banking secret as information on the accounts (deposits) of clients
 or their transactions that has become known to the bank in the course of serving them, as well as
 information about the client, about the clients of other banks, or any other information that was
 entrusted to or became known to the bank in the process of its relations with a client.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 61
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 The law forbids revelation of a banking secret to third parties. Revelation under the law
 specifically includes the provision to such parties of the ability to obtain such information by
 means of “allowing, failing to prevent, or creating the possibility of [revelation] as a result of
 violation of the procedure for the storage of such information.” A bank, its client, the National
 Bank, and the state body responsible for anti-money-laundering enforcement are not considered
 third parties for these purposes. Use of banking information by persons performing audit,
 accounting, legal or other consulting services is not considered revelation of a banking secret,
 provided the information is necessary for the work and the persons are obligated not to reveal it.
 A bank may reveal information in court in relation to a dispute with a client and may provide
 information to heirs (successors) of a client on the basis of adequate documentation confirming
 their rights. A bank may also provide information to other parties on the basis of a properly issued
 court order. Banks are to provide information to the state body responsible for anti-money
 laundering enforcement on the basis of the relevant law and to the tax authorities, although the
 formulation of this provision leaves it unclear whether the latter requires a court order.
 Banks are specifically permitted to exchange information between themselves for the purposes of
 their own protection and to secure repayment of credits. No consent of the client is required by
 the bank secrecy law for such exchange, nor is a procedure for the exchange defined by the law,
 but legal protections on personal data require client permission for banks to share some of the
 personal information necessary for a credit history with others.
 The Criminal Code of the Kyrgyz Republic (Art. 193) provides for penalties for illegal receipt of
 banking secrets that include public apology and damage reimbursement, fines, or up to two years
 in prison, but these are available only if the means by which the information was received was
 itself illegal (such as theft of documents, bribery or threat, hacking or tapping of communications
 and so on). If the crime involved a shift in ownership of assets against the legal owner’s will, the
 penalty increases, allowing up to five years imprisonment. Those who reveal banking secrets are
 subject to penalties ranging from fines to up to three years in prison, or up to five years if large
 damages or shift in ownership of assets were involved (Article 194). Standards for proof of guilt
 and causation in criminal cases, including issues of intent, may make these provisions difficult to
 apply to any but extreme cases of deliberate actions which can be shown to have resulted in
 serious losses to specific clients. NBKR could forward materials from its own bank supervision
 activities to the appropriate authorities for prosecution, but cannot enforce the criminal provisions
 directly.
 There are no administrative penalties within the ability of NBKR to impose that directly concern
 treatment of customer information. If a revelation of customer information or treatment of that
 information is a violation of banking legislation, Article 359 of the Code of Administrative
 Violations could be applied to impose fines on bank officials of from 1000 to 2000 soms. Draft
 legislation would increase the range of fines on individual bank officials to 10,000 to 50,000 soms
 and allow for fines on legal entities (such as banks) of from 50,000 to 100,000 soms. But
 application of this provision would require the behavior involved to be a clear violation of
 banking legislation.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 62
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


 Draft Banking Code
 The draft Banking Code contains a full chapter (Chapter 20) on bank secrecy, and defines a bank
 secret as any information that was provided to the bank by a client or that was developed by the
 bank or that arose in any other way in connection with the relationship between the bank and the
 client during the conduct of any banking activity. Pre-contractual relations between the bank and
 the client are specifically included in this definition. Only information that is public or that is in a
 consolidated form that does not allow identification of the client is excepted, along with certain
 information about persons directly connected with the bank itself.
 Under the provisions of the draft Banking Code, a bank may reveal banking secrets without the
 consent of the client to a court, to bodies responsible for anti-money laundering enforcement, to
 tax bodies within the limits of tax legislation, to the deposit insurance agency, to the state body
 responsible for regulation of securities markets within the limits of its supervisory authority, and
 to the heirs (legal successors) of the client or to a notary conducting process in relation to a
 deceased depositor. No court order or client permission is required for these types of information
 sharing.
 A bank is also obligated to reveal information containing banking secrets to the National Bank.
 The National Bank has the right to reveal banking secrets to the Government of the Kyrgyz
 Republic for the purposes of protection of state interests, and may also reveal such information to
 the banking supervision bodies of other states.
 Employees of the bank may have access to banking secrets to the extent necessary for their work
 activity. Persons providing services to the bank in connection with its banking activities are also
 permitted access if this is required for the given service, as are persons preparing consolidated
 accounts.
 Banks are permitted to provide information about a client in court, if this is required in connection
 with a dispute between the bank and the client. Either the bank or the client would, in this case,
 have the right to petition for a closed hearing.
 The Code requires the bank to provide for the protection and confidentiality of the information
 that is made available to bank employees, contractors, and auditors, although the means by which
 this is to be accomplished is not specified. A general article requires that all persons who have
 received information constituting a banking secret through any means to provide for its proper
 protection and confidentiality. This is to be accomplished by means of the adoption of “adequate
 organizational, legal, and technical measures.” Unlike the current law “On Bank Secrets,” the
 draft Code does not specifically state that failing to prevent access to information or creation of
 the possibility for improper access through failure to follow proper procedures is a violation of the
 law. This may result in a narrowing of protection, effectively limiting violations to cases where
 actual revelation of information can be shown and making it difficult for NBKR to take measures
 if supervision shows lax information security practices on the part of banks.
 There is no provision in the relevant articles of the draft Code allowing NBKR to define
 minimum standards for information protection.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 63
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Under the draft Code, client consent would be required for a bank to provide client information
 for the purposes of formation of a credit history and to exchange such information with other
 banks. It is not clear how this would affect actual practices in this area, as the laws on data
 protection were reported to require such consent now. While this might increase transparency and
 trust between bank and client, there is some indication that credit reporting is poorly understood
 and clients may be unwilling.
 Recommendation
 The draft Banking Code should, before passage, be amended to include failure to take adequate
 precautions that creates the possibility for improper access as a violation of the law, to avoid a
 narrowing of protection and clearly enable NBKR to take action in relation to lax security
 standards at banks before a concrete loss of information occurs. It should also be clear that NBKR
 has the authority to further define the legal rules for protection of customer information as well as
 to define the minimum technical standards and minimum procedural requirements for the
 protection of such information.
 NBKR should use this authority to draft, with input from the banking industry, a new law or
 regulatory document(s) on the confidentiality of customer information that goes further than the
 Code’s definition of what information is considered a banking secret and the requirements for
 requests in circumstances when it may be revealed. To the extent possible given the technology
 currently in use in banks, rules should be formulated governing the minimum technical and
 procedural standards for handling and storage of customer information in daily banking
 operations. These should be drafted with an eye both to preventing unauthorized access to
 banking secrets and to having clear records concerning which authorized users have accessed that
 information so as to improve enforcement ability. Such a detailed regulatory instruction would
 also provide NBKR with the substance and detail needed to review bank practices in this area
 during inspections and to impose appropriate corrective measures where necessary.
 Appropriate administrative sanctions should be available to be imposed by NBKR for violations
 of secrecy alone and/or violations of the required processes for information protection (without
 the need for a criminal trial and requirements to show intent and specific losses of information or
 damages). The Code of Administrative Violations should be amended, if necessary, to provide
 clear authority in this regard, or NBKR should use the existing provisions to enforce rules on
 protection of information.
 NBKR should monitor security of customer information and be attentive to any indication that
 there are problems in this area. Concerns about security of information and the possibility that it
 will be improperly shared with state bodies or with private parties or groups with predatory intent
 have been cited in neighboring jurisdictions as primary reasons for the avoidance of the banking
 system.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 64
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


                                 D.2. Sharing Customer’s Information

 Good Practice
     a. A bank should inform its customer in writing:
        (i)      of any third-party dealing for which the bank is obliged to share information
                 regarding any account of the customer, such as any legal enquiry by a credit bureau;
                 and
        (ii)     as to how it will use and share the customer’s personal information.
     b. Without the customer’s prior written consent, a bank should not sell or share account or
        personal information regarding a customer of the bank to or with any party not affiliated
        with the bank for the purpose of telemarketing or direct mail marketing.
     c. The law should allow a customer of a bank to stop or – opt out‖ of the sharing by the bank
        of certain information regarding the customer and, prior to any such sharing of
        information for the first time, every bank should be required to inform each of its
        customers in writing of his or her rights in this respect.
     d. The law should prohibit the disclosure by a third party of any banking-specific
        information regarding a customer of a bank.
 Description
 a. Legal obligations concerning the abilities of banks to share client information with third parties
 relate almost exclusively to required revelation to state bodies. The current law allows, but does
 not require, banks to share information with each other for the purpose of credit return and
 commercial banks, as well as many credit unions and microfinance organizations, are members of
 the credit bureau that has been formed on the basis of this right. The law On Bank Secrets does
 not specifically require banks to obtain client permission or to reveal the sharing of information
 with the credit bureau to their clients, but legal rules on data protection are interpreted to require
 client permission to share the personal data required to maintain a credit history, so clients are in
 practice apprised of this information sharing. Some banks reported that they provide information
 on the credit bureau and the rights of those with credit histories at the bureau to their clients.
 b. Neither current law and regulations nor proposed measures address the possibility that banks in
 the Kyrgyz Republic might share customer information with third parties for advertising or other
 purposes not specifically envisioned by law and regulation. Banks are permitted to reveal
 customer information to third parties only on the basis of written customer consent. In theory it
 would be possible for banks to include a provision in contracts allowing the release of customer
 information to third parties for such purposes. Although they were requested, no bank contracts
 could be obtained for this diagnostic. In conversations with banks and other counterparts,
 however, there was no indication that banks are currently using specific customer information
 even to market their own additional services.
 c. No ability to “opt out” of information sharing is envisioned by law or regulations as they
 address only instances in which the bank is obligated to provide information. The only exception
 to this is the provision of information to a credit bureau, which under the draft Banking Code
 would require the written consent of the consumer.



               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 65
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 d. Third parties who receive information constituting a banking secret through their official
 positions or work duties are also obligated to protect it. The current law on Bank Secrets and the
 draft Banking Code both specifically extend secrecy obligations to all person who have access to
 the information as a result of their profession, position, or activities in providing services to a
 bank. The criminal provisions concerning revelation of banking secrets (Article 194 of the
 Criminal Code) that are discussed in section D.1. would also cover all persons to whom the
 information was entrusted or who have access to such information as a result of their work or
 their official position.
 Recommendation
 On the basis of the limited information available during the diagnostic review, there does not
 appear to be a pressing need for substantial change in the law in this area. If consumers are not
 receiving an explanation of the legal rules concerning bank secrets and the exceptions to those
 rules as a part of banks general terms and conditions or other written information provided when
 opening an account, the rules concerning information to be provided to consumers at that time
 should be amended to require that this take place. Such a requirement could be envisioned in a
 new normative document issued by NBKR on treatment of customer information, as discussed in
 D.1.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 66
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices




                                   A.2. Code of Conduct for Banks

 Good Practice
 The law should provide for:
     (i) the specific rules and procedures concerning the release to any government authority of
         the records of any customer of a bank;
     (ii) rules on what the government authority may and may not do with any such records;
     (iii) the exceptions, if any, that apply to these rules and procedures; and
     (iv) the penalties for the bank and any government authority for any breach of these rules and
         procedures.
 Description
 (i) Permitted disclosures of information to state bodies are currently governed by Article 10 of the
 law “On Bank Secrets.” That Article requires information to be provided on the basis of a
 properly issued court order. It also requires information to be provided to state bodies in
 connection with prevention of money launder and financing of terrorism and for the purposes of
 oversight of tax payment. The article does not clearly indicate whether these provisions are
 separate or cumulative, leaving it unclear whether provision of information for tax enforcement
 and anti-money-laundering purposes require a court order. Article 5 of the same law removes
 anti-money-laundering authorities from the definition of a “third party” under the law altogether,
 which would seem to remove any restriction on the provision of information to those bodies, as
 the law restricts revelation of information only to such “third parties.” This would suggest that
 the provisions are separate, and that information is also to be provided to tax authorities without a
 court order, but it would be preferable if the legal provisions were clearer. The law does not
 contain information on the procedure for sharing information with those bodies.
 The draft Banking Code allows broader sharing of information with state or official bodies,
 including courts, anti-money laundering bodies, tax bodies within the limits of tax legislation, the
 deposit insurance agency, the state body responsible for regulation of securities markets within
 the limits of its supervisory authority, and to a notary conducting process in relation to a deceased
 depositor (as well as directly to the heirs or successors). No court order or client permission is
 required for these types of information sharing.
 The Code does contain requirements concerning the content of any request for information from
 the listed state bodies, including identification of the person requesting the information,
 identification of the client and the amount of information requested, and the purpose and legal
 grounds for the request. As currently written, however, these are simply a list of attributes to be
 met by the request letter. The Code does not contain rules concerning what bank officials may
 decide upon the release of client information according to such a request, whether a request may
 be refused and how, when clients should be advised of a request, and so forth.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 67
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 In addition to other obligations to provide information, the draft Code obligates banks to provide
 information to the NBKR, which has the right (but not the duty) to provide information to the
 Government of the Kyrgyz Republic for purposes of the protection of state interests and to the
 central banks or other supervisory bodies of other states. It does not provide a procedure or any
 limitations in respect to NKBR’s sharing of information in these instances.
 All other provision of information to state bodies requires a court order.
 (ii) Neither current law nor the draft Code contain specific restrictions on what each of the state
 agencies permitted to receive client information may and may not do with the information. Those
 bodies are, however, required to protect the information and individuals may be subjected to
 penalties for revealing it.
 (iii) Current law provides exceptions from the rule requiring court orders for the anti-money-
 laundering authorities and the tax authorities, without specifying any process for receipt by those
 bodies of client information. The draft Banking Code is clear regarding the authorities that may
 receive information without a court order and does not contain any exceptions from its provisions
 on the required content of a request for information.
 (iv) Both the current law and the draft Banking Code state a general right of those injured by a
 violation of bank secrecy law to compensation for damages in accordance with the legislation of
 the Kyrgyz Republic. In practice, however, it would likely be difficult to meet proof requirements
 for causation except in egregious cases.
 Both also refer to liability of those who have violated the law to punishment in accordance with
 the applicable legislation. Those who reveal banking secrets illegally are subject to criminal
 penalties ranging from fines to up to three years in prison, or up to five years if large damages or
 shift in ownership of assets were involved (Art. 194 of the Criminal Code). These provisions
 would not likely be applied, however, to mistakes in procedure or minor failures to follow
 required process, as these would not meet standards for guilt in the commission of a criminal act.
 Although Article 193 of the Criminal Code provides penalties for the illegal receipt of banking
 secrets, that article applies only to receipt of the information by illegal means, such as theft or
 bribery, and so would not necessarily apply to failure to follow legally required procedures. In
 principle, a bank official involved in improper release of information in violation of NBKR rules
 could be subjected to a fine of from 1000 to 2000 soms under the Code of Administrative
 Violations for violation of banking legislation. Draft amendments to that Code would increase
 the potential fine for violations of banking legislation to a range of from 10,000 to 50,000 soms
 on bank officials and add a potential fine of from 50,000 to 100,000 soms on the bank or other
 legal entity involved.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 68
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 The creation of one or more new regulatory document(s) on the protection of customer
 information is recommended in Section D.1. (above). It is important that the rules currently in the
 draft Code do not become simply a list of required points in a letter that will always guarantee
 release of information, the new regulations (revised law on bank secrecy or other document)
 should include more detailed rules concerning the processes for bank response to requests from
 various state bodies for client information. Information to be reflected should include the identity
 of bank officials with the right to make a decision to reveal client information, procedure in case
 of bank objection to the request, and other required information. A role for NBKR in advising
 banks on the legality of such requests would be desirable and NBKR should, at a minimum
 require retention of such requests and their review during supervision activities.
 The rules should also provide clarity concerning whether a bank must, may, or may not inform
 the customer in any of the instances in which it is required to provide information to state bodies.
 While it is clear that in some cases (for example, a criminal investigation) confidentiality might
 be called for, it would add clarity for the law or regulations to specify when the customer should
 receive notice of a request for information. Inclusion of the customer’s information in an NBKR
 inspection, for example, should clearly not require notice, nor should report of a customer’s
 accounts to the deposit insurance agency. However, if the release is in relation to a court
 decision, or in relation to an execution order from a court concerning debt, or to a standard tax
 audit, those are events about which a customer should have received notice, and the bank should
 inform the customer that information has been requested and is being provided. This would allow
 the customer to take appropriate action if they have not received proper notice of the underlying
 events or if they believe that the request has been made on false grounds.
 As discussed in D.1., less serious and more easily administrable penalties for violations of rules in
 this area should be available to allow NBKR to impose penalties on banks and bank officials for
 inappropriate releases of customer information.
 NBKR should also monitor the numbers of such requests that are received by banks from courts
 and enforcement authorities and the reasons commonly given. If the data gives rise to concern
 that the procedures are being abused, it may be necessary for NBKR and the enforcement
 authorities involved to consider whether changes in the number or position of officials authorized
 to make requests to banks or other changes in the rules are required.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 69
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


                                         D.3. Credit Reporting

 Good Practice
     a. Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight, with sufficient enforcement
        authority.
     b. The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely and sufficient data. The system
        should also maintain rigorous standards of security and reliability.
     c. The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit reporting system should be: (i)
        clear, predictable, non-discriminatory, proportionate and supportive of consumer rights;
        and (ii) supported by effective judicial or extrajudicial dispute resolution mechanisms.
     d. In facilitating cross-border transfer of credit data, the credit reporting system should
        provide appropriate levels of protection.
     e. Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include the right of the consumer
        (i)       to consent to information-sharing based upon the knowledge of the institution’s
                  information-sharing practices;
        (ii)      to access his or her credit report free of charge (at least once a year), subject to
                  proper identification;
        (iii)     to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-than-optimal
                  conditions/prices due to credit report information;
        (iv)      to be informed about all inquiries within a period of time, such as six months;
        (v)       to correct factually incorrect information or to have it deleted and to mark (flag)
                  information that is in dispute;
        (vi)      to reasonable retention periods of credit history, for instance two years for positive
                  information and 5-7 years for negative information; and
        (vii)      to have information kept confidential and with sufficient security measures in place
                  to prevent unauthorized access, misuse of data, or loss or destruction of data.
        The credit registries, regulators and associations of banks should undertake campaigns to
        inform and educate the public on the rights of consumers in the above respects, as well as
        the consequences of a negative personal credit history.
 Description
 a. Credit reporting is currently accomplished through a single credit bureau, founded in 2003, that
 is run as a non-profit organization providing reporting services to more than 100 participating
 lenders. Participants may choose to be members of the organization and participate in its
 management (currently 37 in total) or may simply conclude a contractual agreement for exchange
 of information. Nearly all of the banks currently operating in the Kyrgyz Republic are full
 members of the bureau.




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 70
I.      Good Practices: Banking Sector                                                               Comparison with Good Practices


 In addition to the credit bureau, a credit registry is currently being established through the NBKR.
 The credit registry is designed to allow banks and other lenders to receive information on other
 loans that a borrower may have. Banks require this information in order to meet recently passed
 prudential rules requiring additional reserves in relation to parallel loans (where the borrower is
 already indebted on another loan). Although the credit registry is not intended as a credit rating
 bureau, it does allow banks to perform a check on the accurate reporting of debt by an applicant
 for credit. Provision of information to the credit registry is mandatory.
 The existing credit bureau operates on the basis of contract with the participants concerning the
 information and services to be provided. There is no detailed regulation of credit reporting in law
 or regulation and the content of the contracts was defined by the members of the non-profit
 organization. NBKR is a member of the organization, but is not legally responsible for oversight
 of its activity. Consent of both the borrower and of the participating lenders is required for the
 bureau to operate. There has been a sharp increase in the number of contracts with the bureau on
 the part of lenders, and bureau management believes this is primarily due to the new rules on
 parallel loans.
 A draft law regulating credit reporting was adopted by the parliament in November 2013, but the
 law was returned by the President in January 2014 with a number of objections, including the
 absence of any identified state body responsible for the licensing and oversight of credit reporting
 activities. NBKR would be the logical body to take on this role, but it has expressed concern
 about capacity to perform the licensing, regulatory, and supervisory functions envisioned in the
 law.
 b. These issues are not currently regulated by mandatory legal rules. Technical standards are set
 by the private credit bureau. A technical note prepared by the World Bank highlighted concerns
 about operational flaws in the database that may affect quality and integrity, as well as limitations
 in the currently used software and the lack of any off-site backup. Quality of lender records and
 technical standards for participation have presented problems for some lenders and bureau
 management reported that a few lenders have had to be excluded from the system after attempting
 to participate because they have been unable to meet requirements concerning the form and
 accuracy of reports. The credit bureau works with participants to assist them in meeting the
 requirements for participation, but is not always able to resolve problems.
 Some counterparts expressed concern about the lack of inclusion of all lending, and particularly
 microcredit, in the credit bureau database and its effect on the accuracy of credit reports. The size
 of the microcredit sector is very significant, with more than 500,000 recipients of credit in 2013
 receiving a total of more than 27 billion soms.4 Technical issues will need to be resolved before
 participation in credit reporting can be extended to include the smallest lenders.
 c. There is currently no legal and regulatory framework governing credit reporting activities or
 providing for any form of third party dispute resolution. There are internal rules concerning
 participation in the credit bureau, as well as a code of ethics for participants developed with the
 participation of the IFC, that provide rules for reporting and conduct of bureau participants. The
 credit bureau does provide for rights to correct errors and offers assistance to subjects of credit
 histories in resolving problems, but it does not take responsibility for resolving disputes between a
 reporting entity and a subject.
 4
  The state statistics agency reported a total amount of microlending in 2013 of 27,534,000,000 soms. Only 10.8% of that lending was for
 consumer needs, with the largest shares going to agricultural development (52%) and to projects in trade and public catering (23%). Figures at
 http://stat.kg/images/stories/microcredit%20news.pdf.


                 Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 71
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices

 d. There are no legal rules specifying standards of security for international transfers of
 information. Evaluation of the adequacy of the standards currently used in practice is beyond the
 scope of this diagnostic review.
 e. Consumer protections in credit reporting are at present governed primarily by the internal
 operating procedures and the code of ethics of the existing credit bureau. The draft law on credit
 histories that is currently being developed contains some rules establishing the basic rights of the
 subject of a credit report but the draft law does not prescribe the specific procedures to be used by
 credit bureaus.
         (i) The credit bureau currently requires participants to obtain the consent of subjects of
 credit information before reporting information on them to the credit bureau. Consent of each
 reporting participant is also required, and the type and permitted uses of information about a
 subject that is shared by a participant may vary according to the contract with that participant.
 A form for obtaining client consent to credit reporting is provided by the bureau as an appendix to
 its code of ethics, although its use is not obligatory. Although the form itself is not lengthy, the
 language of the form is rather complex, relying on abbreviations and containing long sentences
 full of dependent clauses and parentheticals. It is unlikely that most individual consumers would
 find the form easy to read and understand. Although the form begins by listing standard
 information for credit reporting (e.g. personal identifying data and information on credit provided
 and the history of its repayment), the form goes on to authorize a bank or other lender to share
 any other information that has become known to the lender in the process of consideration,
 issuance and payment of credit. NBKR rules on the management of credit require lenders to
 gather and record a wide variety of information on individual borrowers, including on their
 personal reputations, earnings history, and other matters. The rules also recommend, and in some
 cases require, that information be gathered on members of the borrowers family and that the
 borrower be required to make periodic reports to the lender on their financial status and other
 matters that might impact their repayment of the credit. All such information, as well as the
 content of every communication and conversation with the borrower, is to be recorded in the
 borrower’s credit dossier. A blanket approval for a lender to share any and all information that
 has become known to it during the life of the credit relationship authorizes the sharing of a very
 large amount of personal information.
 The recommended form for obtaining consent for credit reporting does not contain any
 explanations of the rights of a subject of a credit history, but rather refers the borrower to the
 website of the credit bureau to obtain more information.
 The draft law on credit histories would require client consent for access by a potential lender or
 any other party to the credit history as well as for reporting of information on the client to credit
 bureaus. Reporting of credit information by lenders, however, is mandatory subject to the consent
 of the individual borrower and does not require the lender to agree to provide the information or
 allow the lender to limit its volume or use. A number of state bodies (e.g. tax authorities, the
 registry of immoveable property) are also required to provide information to credit bureaus,
 within legal limits.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 72
I.      Good Practices: Banking Sector                                                                Comparison with Good Practices


 (ii) Current credit bureau rules allow the subject of a credit history to review the history free of
 charge, which can be done either at the credit bureau itself on a computer monitor and also at
 some banks. A subject that would like a printed copy of the credit history must pay a 50 som fee,
 and will receive a copy that is stamped and can be submitted to a lender or other party. The credit
 bureau’s website also indicates a possibility to obtain a copy of the credit report through the post
 for a fee of 300 soms for individuals. The bureau is currently setting up its capacity for access to
 credit history over the internet, but this service will require the payment of a fee. 5 In addition to
 internet services, the bureau plans to offer SMS services by which a subject of a credit history can
 be notified of changes in the credit history by SMS. Where an error in a credit history has been
 noted and steps taken to correct it, the subject will receive corrected copies of the credit history
 free of charge for each instance of correction and corrected copies will be provided free of charge
 to any entity that received the incorrect version.
 The draft law provides for the subject of a credit history to receive a copy of the history free of
 charge once per year. It does not address the means by which this must be provided.
 (iii) & (iv) NBKR rules on the minimum requirements for management of credit risk require
 bank staff to include in their own written conclusion on a denied credit application a justification
 and all of the reasons for the denial of credit. The procedure for informing a client of the decision
 on the denial, however, is to be determined by the bank and there is no stated requirement
 concerning the level of detail that must be provided in explaining the decision or whether the role
 of a credit history must be mentioned. The draft law on credit histories does not govern
 information that must be provided by a lender to an applicant on denial of credit, but does require
 that the subject of a credit history have the right to information on who has received the credit
 history and for what purpose.
 (v) The credit bureau currently allows subjects of credit histories to request correction of any
 inaccurate information in the credit history. A subject may make the request in person at the
 credit bureau’s office or may submit a request for correction by post. A request sent by post must
 be notarized. Although the credit bureau states that it will assist in the investigation and correction
 of such problems, it emphasizes that its contracts with the providers of credit information allow
 the information provider to decide concerning all disputes or complaints about the information
 provided, so the credit bureau does not have any ability to exclude or correct information on its
 own (with the exception of technical or other errors on the part of the bureau itself). It was
 indicated during the diagnostic that subjects may be advised to apply first to the lender for
 information on the report or correction of the error and thereafter to the credit bureau, although a
 requirement for this preliminary step is not reflected in the credit bureau’s own information on the
 error correction process. If an error is corrected, the subject of the report has the right to a free
 copy of the corrected report and to have corrected reports sent to anyone who received the report
 containing the error.
 (vi) The draft law proposed a five-year period for the retention of credit information. Comments
 of the credit bureau and members on the current draft suggest that on the basis of experience in
 the operation of the bureau, this period is too short. They propose a retention period of 10 years
 for positive information and 7 years for negative information.
 5
  Information on the Ishenim website indicates a fee of 100 soms per month for an individual to have unlimited online access to their credit history.
 Online access will also offer the option to access and print out a copy of the credit history without maintaining regular access, with a fee of 50
 soms for a single print. SMS services are included in the subscription fee for unlimited online access, with an additional monthly charge of 30
 soms for more than 5 messages per month. See the service description at http://www.ishenim.kg/files/doc/onlinecib/onlinecib.pdf.




                 Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 73
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices

 (vii) Both current practice of the credit bureau and the provisions of draft legislation treat credit
 history information as confidential and require the measures be in place at the credit bureau and in
 relation to users of the information in order to preserve confidentiality. The draft law does not
 define the minimum standards in this regard.
 f. Some public education efforts have been undertaken by the credit bureau itself and in
 cooperation with members to raise awareness of the existence of the credit bureau, its functions,
 and the benefits of a good credit record. The credit bureau has prepared brochures that it
 distributes at its own offices and through banks. Bureau management reported, however, that
 these measures had not been very effective to date and that studies show only about 10% of the
 population is aware of and understands the function of the credit bureau. Studies also indicated a
 significant negative perception of the idea of the credit bureau among individuals, with many
 viewing it as a sort of “black list” of borrowers that would cause injury without providing any
 benefits. Credit bureau management is seeking new ways to convey the functions and benefits of
 credit reporting to the population.
 Recommendation
 Passage of the law on credit histories will be required to allow the creation of enforceable legal
 standards in the credit reporting industry, including standards for the protection of consumers who
 are the subjects of credit history reporting. A determination will need to be made concerning the
 appropriate entity to perform the licensing, regulatory and supervisory tasks required. NBKR, as
 the regulator for most lenders and a member of the existing credit bureau, appears to be the state
 body best placed to perform these functions. Additional resources should be provided to NBKR
 if necessary for the fulfillment of these tasks. The new unit responsible for consumer protection
 within NBKR should participate in the work, in particular in the creation of appropriate
 regulations concerning consumer protection issues.
 If possible during the remaining work on the draft law, consideration should be given to division
 of provisions of the law where appropriate to distinguish between rules applicable to reports
 concerning business entities and those applicable to reports on individual persons. This would
 allow, for example, for the definitions of entities providing information and of what constitutes a
 reportable transaction to be expanded for business entities to cover a broader range of types of
 debt (such as those related to leasing or other business agreements with a debt component)
 without creating confusion or overbroad reporting in relation to the kinds of transactions used by
 individual consumers.
 Work should begin on appropriate regulations to supplement the provisions of the law. In
 particular, a regulation (or other normative act) should be drafted and passed containing a clear
 set of rules for the protection of the subjects of credit histories, including separate rules for the
 protection of individual consumers where necessary




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 74
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices

 These should specify the procedures and conditions for access to credit histories, correction of
 information, and other similar matters. Rules concerning access to a copy of a credit history
 should provide a practical means for consumers without Internet access and without the ability to
 visit the offices of the credit bureau to obtain their credit histories for review (including once per
 year without charge). Rules concerning the quality of information provided to the credit bureau
 by lenders and concerning correction of errors in credit histories should, at a minimum, ensure
 that a credit bureau has some responsibility to exclude information in a consumer’s credit history
 if its investigation shows that the data received appears unreliable (for example there were
 problems in its transmission that corrupted information), or if the lender does not authenticate the
 information appropriately when requested or fails to respond to inquiry. Without this
 responsibility, it may be too easy for lenders to simply refuse or fail to respond to consumer
 requests for correction. It may also be appropriate to consider a requirement that credit bureaus
 indicate to a recipient of a credit history if specific information in the history has been challenged
 by an individual consumer as incorrect.
 Consumers should be required to receive clear, simple information on the credit bureau and on the
 ability to review their credit histories and to correct errors at the time that they are asked to sign
 permission for credit reporting and/or access to their credit records by lenders. The permission
 form itself should be required to be written in plain language that is easy for an average consumer
 to read and understand. If necessary, a unified form could be defined by regulations. The
 requirements for the form and for the receipt of information on credit reporting should be
 reflected in the regulations on credit reporting, as well as in any broader regulation of NBKR
 covering the disclosure of information to banking consumers (recommended above).
 Financial education programs should include, where appropriate, information on credit reporting
 and both the positive and negative roles of credit histories.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 75
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices

                            Section E. Dispute Resolution Mechanisms


                                      E.1. Code of Conduct for Banks

 Good Practice
 Internal Complaints Procedure
     a. Every bank should have in place a written complaints procedure and a designated contact
        point for the proper handling of any complaint from a customer, with a summary of this
        procedure forming part of the bank’s Terms and Conditions referred to in B.7 above and
        an indication in the same Terms and Conditions of how a consumer can easily obtain the
        complete statement of the procedure.
     b. Within a short period of time following the date a bank receives a complaint, it should:
          (i)      acknowledge in writing to the customer/complainant the fact of its receipt of the
                   complaint; and
          (ii)     provide the complainant with the name of one or more individuals appointed by the
                   bank to deal with the complaint until either the complaint is resolved or cannot be
                   processed further within the bank.
     c. The bank should provide the complainant with a regular written update on the progress of
        the investigation of the complaint at reasonable intervals of time.
     d. Within a few business days of its completion of the investigation of the complaint, the
        bank should inform the customer/complainant in writing of the outcome of the
        investigation and, where applicable, explain the terms of any offer or settlement being
        made to the customer/complainant.
     e. The bank should also inform the customer/complainant of the availability of the services
        of a financial ombuds service or other form of alternative dispute resolution.
     f. When a bank receives a verbal complaint, it should offer the customer/complainant the
        opportunity to have the complaint treated by the bank as a written complaint in accordance
        with the above. A bank should not require, however, that a complaint be in writing.
     g. A bank should maintain an up-to-date record of all complaints it has received and the
        action it has taken in dealing with them.
     h. The record should contain the details of the complainant, the nature of the complaint, a
        copy of the bank's response(s), a copy of all other relevant correspondence or records, the
        action taken to resolve the complaint and whether resolution was achieved and, if so, on
        what basis.
     i.   The bank should make these records available for review by the banking supervisor or
          regulator when requested.




                 Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 76
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Description
 a. Legal and regulatory provisions do not prescribe specific procedures for banks to follow in the
 resolution of consumer complaints. Provisions concerning complaint resolution are contained in
 several laws and regulations, but these do not form a coherent whole.
 Banks are required by rules on the management of credit risk to have a book in which customers
 may enter complaints and receive responses. The form for the book is prescribed in an appendix
 to those rules. (Point 24 of the Minimum Requirements for the Management of Credit Risk).
 Although the requirement is contained in rules related to credit, complaints recorded in the book
 are not limited to credit issues and in fact banks report that most complaints noted in the book
 concern minor customer service matters such as the length of lines at service windows in the
 bank. This may in part be due to the fact that the book is a public document and confidentiality of
 the complaint and its response are not provided for. In any case, the space in the book to record a
 complaint is limited and it is certainly not a means for consumers to resolve serious or detailed
 concerns about their dealings with the bank.
 Article 50 of the law “On Banks and Banking” requires customers to be informed concerning
 changes that affect their accounts, including changes in the bank’s procedures for handling
 consumer complaints. Although this provision implies that the customer would have been
 informed of the procedures initially, there do not appear to be clear rules requiring the bank to do
 so or prescribing the form in which it must do so.
 Some banks reported that other rules concerning the conduct of bank business affect the handling
 of customer complaints, including rules requiring that a response be made within a specific period
 of time. If applicable, these rules were not provided for review.
 Banks interviewed for the diagnostic review all reported that they have clear and specific internal
 procedures in place for reviewing and responding to customer complaints. The degree to which
 these procedures are communicated to customers, however, and the degree to which a customer
 could insist upon their observance was not clear in all cases.
 b. – d. The very formal, multi-step written complaint and notification procedures described in
 these points of the good practice description are not required by any applicable rules and do not
 appear to be a part of common bank complaint resolution practices. Although banks do have
 written complaint procedures, these were usually described as considerably less formal,
 particularly at the early stages of the process.
 e. No banking or financial services ombudsman or other alternative dispute resolution option
 exists.
 f. All banks interviewed allowed customers to make complaints orally as well as in writing and
 some indicated that oral complaint to a bank staff member is usually the first recourse of a
 customer. There do not appear to be any mandatory rules requiring that such complaints receive a
 written response, but at least one bank indicated that it provides such a written response unless the
 issue is immediately resolved in the bank with the customer.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 77
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 g.-h. Banks are required by the general rules concerning maintenance of bank records to keep a
 wide variety of written records concerning their activites and operations. Rules concerning those
 records are organized by type of banking activity or service rather than by customer or
 relationship, but in most categories of banking activity, a bank is required to keep records of
 correspondence with a client concerning many issues related to all types of accounts, which
 would in most cases be likely to include correspondence between the bank and client related to
 any complaint in the relevant area. The complaint book that is required by the rules on credit risk
 management must be kept for 15 years. There is no requirement for record keeping and
 maintenance that deals specifically with complaints (other than the requirement concerning the
 complaint book) or requires them to be maintained in a separate manner or with specific
 documents or notations.
 Special rules apply to records concerning credit. Rules on the minimization of credit risk
 specifically require that a bank keep an extensive dossier on each borrower, up to and including
 notations on all meetings, inquiries and telephone conversations with the borrower. This would
 certainly include records of any complaint of the borrower in relation to the credit and its
 repayment.
 Although banks are not required to keep records of complaints in a specific manner, the general
 NBKR rules On the Minimum Requirements for the Management of Risk require banks that
 banks take steps to address reputational risks to the bank. As a part of such steps, banks are
 required to have repots periodically made to the board of directors containing information on
 potential risks to the reputation of the bank. The report must include information on the
 complaints of clients, a legal analysis of any court cases that are in process or are threatened, and
 information on any other source of risk of the loss of reputation by the bank. (Point 11.4.3 of the
 Provision).
 Banks are also required to take active measures and exercise oversight to reduce the likelihood of
 reputational injury. (Point 11.4.4.) Although not specifically required, the Provision indicates that
 such reduction of risk may be achieved by means of methods such as careful review of press
 releases and advertisements, adoption of a code of conduct for bank employees, and the conduct
 of training. The same provision, however, also suggests that reduction of reputational risk may be
 achieved by restriction of the types of information provided by banks to clients (except for what is
 required by legislation) and restriction of the information that is provided about the bank itself
 (with exception of information required by legislation). (Point 11.4.4, sub-points d. and e.) Such
 advice (which is questionable in its likely effect) emphasizes the fact that the focus of the rules is
 on the protection of the banks themselves and not on the protection of bank clients.
 i. Banks are not required to report complaint statistics, summary information on complaint
 contents, or information on complaint resolution to NBKR. Documents concerning complaints
 that are required in other contexts, such as the periodic reports to the board of directors on
 reputation risk, the complaints book, and required records in credit dossiers, would be available to
 NBKR during on-site inspections and staff of the inspection services indicated that they do review
 the complaints book and also documentation concerning complaints about which they have
 become aware. Off site inspection staff, in evaluating a complaint that has been received by the
 NBKR, may require that the bank in question provide all documents and information related to
 the subject of the complaint, including any records of the bank’s own response.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 78
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 NBKR should issue a single, coherent set of instructions regarding the handling and recording of
 customer complaints by banks to replace the fragmented and widely disbursed provisions
 currently in force. This could be done either as a separate set of rules concerning customer
 complaints or as a component part of a larger set of instructions governing other matters in
 relation to the protection of individual banking consumers. Given the level of financial
 sophistication of consumers, the simplicity of some of the banking products offered, and
 indications from some counterparts that there may be social constraints on the use of formal
 complaint mechanisms, care should be taken that the instructions ensure the proper handling and
 recording of complaints received by telephone and in person at the bank. Banks should be
 required to keep a record of all such complaints and their resolutions, and rules should be in place
 concerning when a written record must also be provided to the customer.
 The instructions will need to include a clear definition of what constitutes a “complaint” for these
 purposes – since there may be little to distinguish between a complaint and an inquiry and some
 “complaints” may be resolved by an explanation to customer. For example, a bank might be
 required to record all inquiries concerning the accuracy of interest calculations, or about the level
 of fees charged, or about delayed, missing or inaccurate transactions in accounts, whether or not
 these are characterized by the customer as “complaints.” This would have the advantage of
 providing more accurate information about customer problems (including problems that are based
 on a misunderstanding rather than any bank error or misconduct) and could assist banks, the
 NBKR, and other interested parties in devising better materials and programs to inform and
 educate consumers. In order not to overburden banks with reporting requirements, however,
 definitions would need to be clear concerning what must be recorded and reported and the
 methods for doing so should to be simple.
 Banks should also be required by the rules to have more formal, written procedures for those who
 might wish to use them, including identification of responsible parties, indication of the
 appropriate channel for escalation of a complaint to higher levels in the bank, rules concerning the
 timeframes in which customers must be informed about the results of consideration of the
 complaint, and other pertinent information.
 Regulatory instructions dealing with the information to be provided to consumers (recommended
 above) and/or those concerning consumer complaint handling should require that customers be
 provided with a copy of the rules concerning the handling of complaints and inquiries, as well as
 contact information for the person or department responsible for handling that specific customer’s
 complaints or inquiries. The rules and contact information should also be required to be freely
 available in writing to customers at bank offices.
 Banks should be required to keep records of complaints and their resolution and to report this
 information in an appropriate form to the new unit in NKBR that will be responsible for consumer
 complaint issues. A requirement for individual banks to publish information on complaints, or for
 the NKBR to publish complaint information that can be identified to individual banks, could be
 useful in providing incentives to avoid complaints. However, it may be most appropriate in the
 near term to provide banks with strong incentives to accurately record and report complaints and
 problems and to develop good practices in addressing them rather than to provide any
 disincentive. Generalized information on the numbers and subjects of consumer complaints
 should be published by the NBKR periodically and shared with the Union of Banks of Kyrgyz
 Republic and other interested bodies to facilitate industry solutions to common problems.


            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 79
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices




                           E.2. Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms

 Good Practice
     a. A system should be in place that allows customers of a bank to seek affordable and
        efficient recourse to a third-party banking ombudsman or equivalent institution, in the
        event the complaint of one or more of customers is not resolved in accordance with the
        procedures outlined in E.1 above.
     b. The existence of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution and basic information
        relating to the process and procedures should be made known in every bank’s Terms and
        Conditions referred to in B.7 above.
     c. Upon the request of any customer of a bank, the bank should make available to the
        customer the details of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution, and its
        applicable processes and procedures, including the binding nature of decisions and the
        mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of decisions.
     d. The banking ombudsman or equivalent institution should be appropriately resourced and
        discharge its function impartially.
        The decision of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution should be binding upon
        the bank against which the complaint has been lodged.

 Description
 a. – e. There is no financial ombudsman or any institution performing similar functions in the
 Kyrgyz Republic.
 Responsibility for the enforcement of the general law on consumer protection rules on the basis of
 specific complaints and own-initiative investigations currently rests with the State Antimonopoly
 Agency, which is responsible for enforcement of competition and consumer protection legislation.
 There is some doubt, however, concerning whether its authority in this area extends to the
 banking sphere, since the clear assignment of responsible for competition law enforcement
 regarding banks to the NBKR has been interpreted to include the assignment of responsibility for
 consumer protection as well. The State Antimonopoly Agency lacks any experience or expertise
 in banking matters, has received no complaints about banking matters, and faces significant
 resource constraints. Even if that body were to take up specific consumer issues in the banking
 sphere, it is unlikely that this would result in a resolution of an individual consumer’s concerns, as
 its enforcement methods are focused on the issuance of corrective orders and imposition of fines
 and penalties rather than solution of individual problems.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 80
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices



 Although NBKR does not currently have direct responsibility for taking consumer complaints or
 resolving disputes, it reports that it does in practice organize meetings between consumers who
 have sent complaints to NBKR and the bank in question. In large part, these have been
 complaints concerning a bank’s unwillingness to restructure, or forgive, a debt that was legally
 contracted but that the consumer is not able to pay. NBKR’s efforts in this direction are
 understandable in light of the social and political tensions that have arisen around this issue, and
 in the absence of any other avenue for resolution the facilitation by NBKR of individual
 settlement or restructuring arrangements may be preferable to a more widespread refusal of
 debtors to honor their obligations. In the longer term, however, it will not be appropriate for
 NBKR, as the primary bank regulator, to be directly involved in negotiating discretionary
 concessions for individual customers with banks. A new unit responsible for consumer protection
 is now being formed within NBKR, but it is not currently intended that this unit serve as a
 permanent dispute resolution forum for individual consumer disputes.
 Overall, consumers lack any direct channels to quickly and effectively resolve disputes with
 banks that are not resolved by the banks’ own initial complaint procedures. The creation of a
 body or institution with the power to undertake the rapid resolution of such matters is highly
 desirable, but it may present institutional and resource challenges. A working group has been
 considering the possibility of an ombudsman’s service, either in the area of banking services or in
 relation to financial services more broadly, but significant progress has not yet been made. Some
 counterparts questioned the willingness of banks and the capacity of government to finance the
 service, and others expressed concerns about an absence of any substantial number of “everyday”
 consumer complaints for the ombudsman to resolve.
 Consideration of an ombudsman structure in the current environment also raises questions about
 the role of the ombudsman in the resolution of problems that do not involve improper behavior on
 the part of banks – and in particular in the negotiation of debt restructuring or forgiveness for
 individual consumers. Ombudsman models that involve binding authority as against banks create
 concern if it is expected that the ombudsman will be addressing large numbers of cases in which
 the main issue is a request by an individual debtor for discretionary relief from a bank. In order
 for all stakeholders to find an ombudsman model acceptable it may be necessary to define some
 limits to the ombudsman’s authority to impose solutions that fall outside what is legally required.
 This will be a delicate task, however, as laws and regulations are not well developed in a number
 of areas and the ombudsman may experience difficulty in defining the limits of legal behavior. If
 the ombudsman is not going to serve in the role of a debt counselor and mediator/arbitrator for
 consumers experiencing problems in paying legally binding debt, then it may be necessary to
 establish this kind of service elsewhere.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 81
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices



 Recommendation
 a. – e. The working group considering the question of the establishment of a banking or financial
 services ombudsman should move forward with its work, concentrating initially on the question
 of what role it would be beneficial for the ombudsman’s office to play and allowing more specific
 questions of structure, funding and details of authority to be resolved on that basis. If an
 ombudsman is not found to be acceptable, other models that could be considered include a dispute
 resolution board with participation of both consumer representatives and representatives of the
 industry, or other configurations. Mechanisms should be in place requiring reporting and
 communication between the ombudsman or other institution for dispute resolution and the other
 bodies that play important roles in the banking sphere (NBKR, consumer organizations, the banks
 union) to ensure that information on complaints and problems is shared and that action can be
 taken by those bodies on a broader scale if required.
 Creation of a dispute resolution body, while highly desirable, should not be viewed as a substitute
 for the continued development of laws and regulations protecting consumers. In the absence of
 sufficiently developed consumer protection standards, an ombudsman may be unable to assist
 consumers (if bound by existing law) or may be perceived as biased or arbitrary in decision
 making (if not so bound).



                   E.3. Publication of Information on Consumer Complaints

 Good Practice
     a. Statistics and data of customer complaints, including those related to a breach of any code
        of conduct of the banking industry should be periodically compiled and published by the
        ombudsman, financial supervisory authority or consumer protection agency.
     b. Regulatory agencies should publish statistics and data and analyses related to their
        activities in respect of consumer protection regarding banking products and services so as,
        among other things, to reduce the sources of systemic consumer complaints and disputes.
     c. Banking industry associations should also analyze the complaint statistics and data and
        propose measures to avoid the recurrence of systemic consumer complaints.

 Description
 a. There is currently no body that serves as the primary or central recipient of consumer
 complaints in the banking sector and banks themselves are not required to report information and
 statistics on consumer complaints. NBKR does receive some complaints, primarily from
 consumers who are in difficulty in relation to debt obligations. Other possible recipients (the state
 antimonopoly agency, consumer associations) indicated that they do not receive complaints
 concerning banking matters. NBKR publishes a brief yearly complaints statement.
 b. & c. There is currently little or no enforcement activity in relation to consumer protection in
 banking and financial services, so there are no statistics or data for regulatory agencies to report
 or for the banking association to analyze.



            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 82
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 A requirement for the collection and publication of the relevant statistics and information should
 be included in the duties of the new unit of NBKR that will be responsible for consumer
 protection activities. The publication requirement could be met by the issuance of a self-standing
 report or by the inclusion of an appropriate statement or section in other NBKR reports. The
 information should be available and easy to locate on the NBKR website.
 Banks should be required to keep records of complaints and their resolution and to report on this
 periodically to NBKR, as discussed above in section E.1. A requirement that banks publish
 information on complaints might be useful in providing incentives to avoid them, but it may be
 more appropriate in the short term to provide banks with strong incentives to accurately record
 and report complaints and problems and to develop good practices in addressing them rather than
 to provide a potential disincentive. Any requirement for publication of complaints that identifies
 the banks involved could be instituted at a later time.



                            Section F. Privacy and Data Protection


                                         F.1. Depositor Protection

 Good Practice
     a. The law should ensure that the regulator or supervisor can take necessary measures to
        protect depositors when a bank is unable to meet its obligations including the return of
        deposits.
     b. If there is a law on deposit insurance, it should state clearly:
         (i)      the insurer;
         (ii)     the classes of those depositors who are insured;
         (iii)    the extent of insurance coverage;
         (iv)     the holder of all funds for payout purposes;
         (v)      the contributor(s) to this fund;
         (vi)     each event that will trigger a payout from this fund to any class of those insured;
         (vii) the mechanisms to ensure timely payout to depositors who are insured.
     c. On an on-going basis, the deposit insurer should directly or through insured banks or the
        association of insured commercial banks, if any, promote public awareness of the deposit
        insurance system, as well as how the system works, including its benefits and limitations.
     d. Public awareness should, among other things, educate the public on the financial
        instruments and institutions covered by deposit insurance, the coverage and limits of
        deposit insurance and the reimbursement process.




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 83
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


     e. The deposit insurer should work closely with member banks and other safety-net
        participants to ensure consistency in the information provided to consumers and to
        maximize public awareness on an ongoing basis.
     f. The deposit insurer should receive or conduct a regular evaluation of the effectiveness of
        its public awareness program or activities.

 Description
 a. The Kyrgyz Republic passed a law on deposit insurance in 2008, but it took some time for the
 creation of the Deposit Insurance Agency (DPA) to be completed (its current Statute was adopted
 by the Government in 2011) and the Agency is still at a relatively early stage of its development
 and operations.
 b. (i)-(vii) The Law on the Protection of Bank Deposits provides for the DPA to insure the
 deposits of individual persons in banks up to a limit of 100,000 soms. There are a number of
 exceptions, including deposits of insiders and affiliated persons of the bank and of their close
 relatives that are taken on a privileged basis, deposits of persons who have been foreign
 consultants or auditors for the bank within the last three years, and funds deposited by an
 individual on behalf of a legal entity.
 The law also contains a specific exception for deposits by individual persons who carryout
 entrepreneurial (income earning) activity without having registered a legal entity for this purpose,
 if the deposits are connected with that activity. This exception is likely to be difficult to
 administer and to unfairly distinguish between individual banking consumers, as there is very
 often no real distinction between the personal (family) funds of an individual engaged in small
 scale economic activities and the funds that are used for those activities. The DPA reported that a
 draft that would extend coverage to the deposits of individual entrepreneurs is being developed
 but that an analysis will need to be done first to determine whether the DPA would be able to
 cover those deposits and at what level of contribution.
 100% of the initial funding was provided by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, with a
 target ratio for sources of funds of 76% government and 24% banks. Banks make quarterly
 contributions to the Fund that are currently set at 0.2% of the deposit base of the bank. The DPA
 holds and invests the Fund, with income on the investments going to defray the operating costs of
 the DPA and increase the Fund itself. If necessary, the Board of Directors of the Fund may
 increase rate for fund contributions by banks (to a limit of twice the initial rate or 0.4% of the
 deposit base), to seek a one-time emergency contribution from banks (to a limit of 50% of the
 prior year’s contribution), to borrow funds on the commercial market with a Government
 guarantee, or to seek a loan from the Government. Grant funds may also be used for this purpose.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 84
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Under current law, payment of deposit insurance is triggered when a deposit covered by the
 guarantee is not paid in accordance with contractual terms due to a court decision recognizing a
 bank as insolvent or mandating its liquidation. Payment on guaranteed deposits must begin not
 later than 60 days after the triggering event (or 120 days if the DPA extends this period), and is to
 be made through agent banks assigned by the DPA or by any other effective means. However,
 should there be a dispute about the triggering event that is being considered by the courts, no
 payout will begin until the exhaustion of all legal options and the issuance of a final court
 decision that is not subject to any appeal (Article 7, point 3 of the Law on Protection of Deposits).
 This provision could subject depositors to long delays while court disputes drag on, depriving the
 guarantee of much of its value. Under the draft Banking Code, the withdrawal of a bank’s license
 by the NBKR (which would not be subject to court appeal according to that draft) would trigger
 deposit insurance payouts.
 There has not yet been any instance in which the DPA has been called upon to make payments
 under the deposit guarantee and its ability to return deposits in a timely way remains untested.
 The failure of Asia Universal Bank in 2010 could have resulted in such a demand, and would also
 have tested the DPA’s ability to obtain emergency funding through Government loan or guarantee
 during a difficult period, as the Fund was not sufficient to cover insured deposits. Because AUB
 was a systemic bank, however, NBKR took a decision to restructure, transferring deposits to a
 bridge bank. At present, the DPA is seeking grant or loan assistance to enable it to establish
 automated processes that would allow it to respond in a timely fashion to an insured event.
 c.-f. The DPA maintains a website with information for consumers as well as a social media
 presence through Facebook and other avenues, and maintains a hot line that can be called for
 information. It has undertaken a variety of activities designed to publicize the deposit guarantee
 program and educate consumers about its availability and conditions, including seminars and
 roundtables and the placement of print, radio and video advertisements and information. The
 DPA cooperates with banks in providing information to depositors, including through the
 provision of booklets describing the Fund. However, in a selection of descriptive brochures
 concerning deposit products obtained from banks, treatment of the Fund varied considerably, with
 some containing no information at all, some showing the symbol indicating membership without
 any explanation, and some providing a short text stating the monetary limit of the guarantee. No
 materials provided information on where to get further details, nor did any state any restrictions –
 including the restriction on insurance of deposits of individual entrepreneurs.
 In 2012, the DPA conducted an awareness study that found only about 23-25% of the population
 were aware of the existence of the Fund. That study also found that television and video forms
 were the most effective in raising awareness levels. The DPA also participated in several studies
 concerning remittances in which 20-25% of labor migrants indicated that they were aware of the
 existence of the guarantee on deposits.
 Recommendation
 a. – b. Exclusion of the deposits of individual entrepreneurs from the deposit guarantee is likely to
 create administrative complications, and may unfairly disadvantage small farmers, traders, and
 craftspeople and discourage them from using the banking system. Steps toward eliminating this
 exception from the guarantee scheme should continue as quickly as is reasonably possible.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 85
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 The provision in the law allowing a delay in the payment of compensation while court disputes
 concerning the guarantee event are resolved subjects depositors to long potential delays and
 should be eliminated, and to the extent that court decisions concerning troubled banks are not
 issued promptly and reliably, a different trigger for the guarantee chosen (such as the withdrawal
 of license as proposed by the draft Banking Code). If depositors are likely to suffer an inability to
 access their funds in circumstances prior to the withdrawal of a banking license (for example,
 during suspension of a license or of the ability to conduct particular operations), consideration
 may need to be given to extension of the guarantee to these circumstances as well, and provision
 in the law for an appropriate accounting if normal functioning of the bank is reestablished.
 It should be noted that limitation of the deposit guarantee scheme to instances of bank failure
 (withdrawal of license) provides a strong guarantee to consumers only if there are quick and
 effective mechanisms of redress for consumers whose banks fail to return their deposits in other
 circumstances (either because the bank is beginning to experience difficulties or for other
 reasons). This underlines the importance of effective dispute resolution mechanisms for banking
 consumers.
 c. – f. Efforts to raise consumer awareness of the deposit guarantee should continue. In order to
 ensure that consumers correctly understand the limit of the deposit guarantee, statement of that
 limit should be required on any material that shows the symbol of the Fund or mentions the
 guarantee. It would be appropriate for the DPA, in consultation with NBKR and the banks that
 participate in the Fund, to develop a short, standard text that members could include on written
 materials advertising deposit products, as well as a text or document to be provided to consumers
 when they make inquires or are concluding a contract for a deposit product.



                                           F.2. Insolvency

 Good Practice
     a. Depositors should enjoy higher priority than other unsecured creditors in the liquidation
        process of a bank.
     b. The law dealing with the insolvency of banks should provide for expeditious, cost
        effective and equitable provisions to enable the maximum timely refund of deposits to
        depositors.

 Description
 a. In the event of the liquidation of a bank, the Law on the Conservatorship, Liquidation, and
 Bankruptcy of Banks defines the priority for payment of creditors claims (Article 51). Claims of
 individual depositors not related to the bank have a higher priority than those of other unsecured
 creditors, and are subordinate only to amounts payable on judgments for personal injury and to
 wages and pensions owed to employees of the bank for up to three months prior to liquidation.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 86
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 The current law divides the claims of individual depositors into two priority levels: the first
 covering claims on deposits up to a limit of 25,000 Kyrgyz som per individual depositor, and the
 next covering claims on deposits of individuals that are related both to principal and interest, with
 no stated limit. This is essentially a form of deposit insurance – providing for the claims up to the
 25,000 som limit to be satisfied first and on an equal basis for all depositors, and then the
 remaining claims on deposits to be subject to satisfaction proportional to the size of the claim (if
 funds are not sufficient). This priority order was created in 2004, prior to the creation of a deposit
 insurance scheme in Kyrgyz Republic.
 The draft Banking Code (Art. 189) would make a number of changes in the priority order for
 payment of claims. Some of the claims of individual depositors remain in the third tier, after
 judgments for personal injury and amounts due to bank employees (not limited to three months
 but as defined by the Labor Code). However, in the draft Code, individual depositor’s claims in
 this third tier are limited to the amount covered by deposit insurance. Moreover, the right of claim
 on those amounts passes to the deposit insurance agency once they are paid and the agency’s
 claims remain in the third priority tier, so that the Agency must be completely repaid before any
 other claims against the bank are satisfied. All other claims of individual depositors that are not
 covered by deposit insurance are moved into the sixth priority and are subordinate both to the
 repayment of any monies provided by the Government for the recapitalization of the bank (fourth
 priority) and to payment of the bank’s debts to budgetary or extra-budgetary state funds (fifth
 priority). Even if there are funds available beyond the insured amounts, provision of such monies
 seems likely to be a common occurrence in relation to a bank that has been on the edge of
 solvency for some time, as does the existence of significant debts for taxes and other budgetary
 payments. So these provisions, in practice, are likely to prevent depositors from recovering more
 than the limit of insurance in most, if not all, cases. It should be noted in this respect that
 although the 100,000 soms limit of the deposit insurance guarantee is larger than the 25,000 soms
 that are currently in the law on bank insolvency, that sum represents less than a year’s average
 wages in the Kyrgyz Republic.
 b. A state agency created in 1996 is responsible for conducting the special administration and
 rehabilitation or liquidation of banks (Agency of the Kyrgyz Republic for Reorganization of
 Banks and Debt Restructuring or "DEBRA"). NBKR transferred the administration of the affairs
 of 5 bankrupt banks to DEBRA in 1998, and since that time a number of additional banks have
 been placed under administration, most recently Asia Universal Bank in 2010. Seven banks
 remain under administration at the present time, with some liquidation processes nearing a 15th
 year without a final resolution and closure.
 DEBRA’s progress reports indicate a number of problems contributing to these delays. Collection
 of debt owed to some banks is complicated by inability to efficiently collect debt from
 nationalized or reorganized corporate debtors and lengthy legal disputes concerning execution
 against property that may have multiple claimants, have changed ownership, and/or be subject to
 arrest in connection with other criminal or civil proceedings. Collection of debt from low income
 individual borrowers in depressed areas and from those affected by political unrest several years
 ago may not be feasible in either economic or political terms. Final completion of some
 liquidation processes has been prevented by refusal of agreement from either national authorities
 or creditors committees whose members continue to hope for additional repayment at a later time
 and are unwilling to extinguish unpaid claims by completing the bankruptcy process.



            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 87
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 While a detailed analysis of the circumstances of individual bank liquidations is well beyond the
 scope of this diagnostic, it seems clear that the current arrangements are not yet providing timely
 repayment to individual depositors or expeditious final resolutions of bankruptcy proceedings.
 Individual depositors in some of the earliest banks taken under administration continue to have
 unpaid claims and the ongoing process may contribute to social tension by failing to provide
 certainty. Even if these earliest banks are excluded from consideration (as having become
 insolvent prior to the effect of the law on bank insolvency and, indeed, most of the other
 legislation that currently applies to the banking system), delay is significant. Claims of individual
 depositors against Asia Universal Bank, for example, were reported fully paid out in 2013 – three
 years after the bank was declared insolvent. (This includes both the 3rd tier claims for deposits up
 to 25,000 som and the 4th tier claims for principal and interest on all deposits of individuals.)
 Recommendation
 a. Current law on bank insolvency does provide a higher priority to individual depositors than to
 other unsecured creditors, but the two-tier priority order for individuals is confusing and
 somewhat outdated given the creation of the deposit insurance scheme. The priority order
 proposed in the draft Banking Code, while it takes account of the deposit insurance scheme,
 subordinates all claims for amounts above the insured amount to repayment of the insured
 amounts to the deposit insurance agency and to claims of the government for recapitalization
 funds and for payments owing to the budget and to extra-budgetary funds. This will limit
 individual depositors’ recovery to the insured amount in many cases and prevent any recovery by
 other depositors, including recovery on the deposits of individual entrepreneurs. Full return of
 banking consumers’ funds should have a higher priority than payments to the state. The draft
 Banking Code should be amended before passage to give depositors not related to the bank
 priority over repayment of monies provided to a bank by the Government or back taxes and other
 debts to the state.
 b. The reasons for slow resolution of bank liquidation processes are not solely a matter of the
 bank insolvency law and regulations and involve broader economic, political and social concerns,
 as well as issues of judicial system reliability and efficiency that will take time to resolve. The
 fact of slow resolution, however, and in particular the presence of individual depositors who are
 waiting years on end for satisfaction of their claims, could deprive the banking system of the
 public trust required for it to function. In light of the long term and ongoing nature of some
 existing claims and the recent nature of others, it is of critical importance that visible steps be
 taken to protect individual banking consumers from this kind of harm. In this context, the
 stability and smooth function of the deposit insurance system take on particular importance (see
 F.1, above), as do efforts to publicize its availability.
 In addition to priority measures to strengthen the deposit insurance system and integrate it into
 bank supervision and insolvency processes, stakeholders (DEBRA, NBKR, and other bodies)
 should review the experience to date with bank liquidations with an eye to identifying steps that
 may be taken to streamline the process. Possibilities could include revision of the procedure for
 completion of liquidation to reduce creditor incentives to prolong the process, imposition of time
 limitations on some stages of the process, and/or introduction of procedural mechanisms
 encouraging courts to combine cases concerning multiple claims on property that secures bank
 debt into a single proceeding.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 88
I.      Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices

                             Section G. Consumer Empowerment


                          G.1. Broadly based Financial Capability Program

 Good Practice
       a. A broadly based program of financial education and information should be developed to
          increase the financial capability of the population.
       b. A range of organizations, including those of the government, state agencies and non-
          government organizations, should be involved in developing and implementing the
          financial capability program.
       c. The government should appoint an institution such as the central bank or a financial
          regulator to lead and coordinate the development and implementation of the national
          financial capability program.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.



             G.1. Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media

 Good Practice
     a. A range of initiatives should be undertaken by the relevant ministry or institution to improve
        people's financial capability regarding banking products and services.
     b. The mass media should be encouraged by the relevant ministry or institution to provide
        financial education, information and guidance to the public regarding banking products and
        services.
     c. The government should provide appropriate incentives and encourage collaboration between
        governmental agencies, banking regulators, the banking industry and consumer associations
        in the provision of financial education, information and guidance regarding banking products
        and services.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.




              Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 89
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


                           G.3. Unbiased Information for Consumers

 Good Practice
     a. Regulators and consumer associations should provide, via the internet and printed
        publications, independent information on the key features, benefits and risks –and where
        practicable the costs– of the main types of banking products and services.
     b. The relevant authority or institution should encourage efforts to enable consumers to
        better understand the products and services being offered to consumers by banking
        institutions, such as providing comparative price information and undertaking educational
        campaigns.
     c. The relevant authority or institution should adopt policies that encourage non-
        governmental organizations to provide consumer awareness programs to the public
        regarding banking products and services.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.



                 G.4. Consulting Consumers and the Financial Services Industry

 Good Practice
     a. The relevant authority or institution should consult consumers, banking associations and
        banking institutions to help them develop financial literacy programs that meet banking
        consumers' needs and expectations.
     b. The relevant authority or institution should also undertake consumer testing with a view to
        ensuring that proposed initiatives have their intended outcomes.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 90
I.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


                 G.5. Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives

 Good Practice
     a. The financial literacy of consumers should be measured, amongst other things, by
        broadly-based household surveys and mystery shopping trips that are repeated from time
        to time.
     b. The effectiveness of key financial literacy initiatives should be evaluated by the relevant
        authorities or institutions from time to time.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.


                  Section H. Competition and Consumer Protection

                         H.1. Regulatory Policy and Competition Policy

 Good Practice
 Regulators and competition authorities should be required to consult one another for the purpose
 of ensuring the establishment, application and enforcement of consistent policies regarding the
 regulation of financial services.

 Description
 Responsibility for the enforcement of competition law in the banking sphere is assigned by law
 [citation] to NBKR rather than to the competition authority. A number of counterparts expressed
 the view that this assignment encompasses responsibility for the enforcement of consumer
 protection law as well. (See discussion in A.1. above.)
 The “Policy and Basic Principles of Antimonopoly Regulation, Competition Development, and
 the Protection of Consumers’ Rights on the Market for Banking Services in the Kyrgyz Republic
 [when] Provided by Commercial Banks and other Financial-Credit Institutions Licensed and
 Regulated by the NBKR,” adopted by the NBKR in 2005, contains a set of basic rules (largely
 repeated from the competition law in force at the time), a list of NBKR authorities in their
 enforcement, up to and including withdrawal of a banking license, and a description of NBKR
 enforcement by means of inclusion of antimonopoly concerns into the regular processes for bank
 licensing, regulation and supervision. An NBKR regulation issued in 2007 defines a dominant
 position in relation to banking services.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 91
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 The State Agency for Antimonopoly Regulation of the Kyrgyz Republic reported that it has taken
 no actions and conducted no studies in relation to competition in financial services markets, as
 enforcement in this area is not within the Agency’s competence. Neither have financial services
 markets been the subject of consumer protection enforcement, as the assignment of authority in
 the area is not clear and the Agency has not received complaints on such issues. The Agency
 reported that its primary focus in the consumer protection area to date has been on the protection
 of consumers through oversight and control of dominant entity pricing and of the tariffs and fees
 on important basic services such as utilities and transportation. It does now intend to include such
 issues in its work, however, and has recently begun an inquiry into the contracting practices of
 commercial banks in relation to consumer lending. Resources for any expansion of Agency
 activity into this area are very limited, however, and a single Agency employee (out of a total of
 81 in all Agency offices) is currently assigned responsibility for all financial markets issues.
 As the competition authority is excluded from enforcement of the competition law in relation to
 banking, the issue of inconsistent approaches to competition policy and competition law
 enforcement in the sector has not arisen. The same has been true to date for enforcement of
 consumer protection norms, but the potential for conflict may arise if the State Agency for
 Antimonopoly Policy begins to undertake independent enforcement in the banking sphere.
 Recommendation
 In light of severe capacity constraints and to avoid conflicts with prudential standards and market
 conduct regulations issued by NBKR, the State Antimonopoly Agency should not separately
 enforce the provisions of the competition law in relation to financial institutions. A mechanism
 allowing the Agency to raise competition concerns in relation to financial services should be
 defined, if necessary by a formal agreement or MOU between the bodies. In addition, the NBKR
 will need to have clear channels by which complaints concerning competition law issues (abuse
 by a dominant bank, collusion between banks, use of unfair methods of competition) can be
 submitted for NKBR to address. The new unit that is currently being formed to address consumer
 matters will likely receive any complaints from individuals on these kinds of issues, but channels
 for complaints and reports by other banking customers and by banks themselves concerning
 violations by their competitors should also be clear.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 92
I.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices




                                      H.2. Review of Competition

 Good Practice
 Given the significance of retail banking to the economy as a whole and to the welfare of
 consumers, competition authorities should:
     (i)    monitor competition in retail banking;
     (ii)   conduct, and publish for general consumption, periodic assessments of competition in
            retail banking (such as the range of interest rates across banks for specific products); and
     (iii) make recommendations publicly available on enhancing competition in retail banking.

 Description
 (i) – (iii) There are no such requirements applicable to the antimonopoly body in the Kyrgyz
 Republic, as competition law policy and enforcement are assigned to NBKR exclusively.
 A requirement that the antimonopoly body undertake such analyses periodically could be inserted
 into the relevant law, but that body’s lack of any experience or expertise on banking issues and
 lack of resources in general raise questions about whether the independent production of any in
 depth competition analysis on banking markets is within its current capability or should be a
 priority at the present time.
 This is by no means, however, to suggest that competition issues in retail banking are unimportant
 or that a view on those issues from outside the primary regulator in the industry is not useful.
 NBKR, as the entity currently responsible for the enforcement of competition policy in the
 banking sphere, should be required to undertake the tasks discussed in this good practice and to
 issue periodic reports on the state of competition, which could be either self-standing or included
 as a separate section in other periodic NBKR publications on the banking system. The State
 Agency for Antimonopoly Policy should be invited to participate in the production of this report
 and/or to contribute its views on this issue for discussion and for inclusion in the relevant
 publication. The mechanism for that contribution could be defined within the agreement or MOU
 between the bodies on consumer protection issues that is recommended in A.1. above.
 Recommendation
 NBKR, as the state body responsible for competition policy in the banking sphere, should have
 both the responsibility and authority to broadly promote competition in the banking industry and
 to take competition issues into account in all of its regulatory activity, not only in relation to
 concentration control matters and changes of ownership in banks.
 NBKR should be required to periodically assess the state of competition in retail banking and to
 issue periodic reports on this issue. The State Antimonopoly Agency should be invited to
 contribute to these analyses and reports, including the publication of views that are not in accord
 with those of the NBKR on relevant questions.
 These responsibilities should be reflected clearly in the relevant laws and regulations, as well as
 the statute on the NBKR.




              Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 93
I.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


                  H.3. Impact of Competition Policy on Consumer Protection

 Good Practice
 The competition authority and the regulator should evaluate the impact of competition policies on
 consumer welfare, especially regarding any limitations on customer choice and collusion
 regarding interest and other charges and fees.

 Description
 There is no specific requirement for such evaluations under the competition law or the banking
 laws. Enforcement of the law against collusion – including in the area of bank fees – is the
 responsibility of NBKR. Monitoring of competition levels on banking services markets and of
 indications of possible collusion or restriction of consumer choice due to a lack of competition
 would be an integral part of both enforcement of the competition law on those markets and of the
 performance of the monitoring and reporting functions discussed in H.2., above.

 Recommendation
 See recommendations in H.1 and H.2, above.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 94
              II.         Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit6
                                 Institutions
                           Section A. Consumer Protection Institutions

                                                A.1. Consumer Protection Regime

Good Practice
The law should provide clear consumer protection rules in the area of non-bank credit
institutions, and there should be adequate institutional arrangements to ensure the thorough,
objective, timely and fair implementation and enforcement of all such rules, as well as of
sanctions that effectively deter violations of these rules.
        a. There should be specific statutory provisions, which create an effective regime for the
           protection of consumers of non-bank credit institutions.
        b. There should be a government authority responsible for implementing, overseeing and
           enforcing consumer protection in the area of non-bank credit institutions.
        c. The supervisory authority for non-bank credit institutions should have a register which
           lists the names of non-bank credit institutions.
        d. There should be coordination and cooperation among the various institutions mandated to
           implement, oversee and enforce consumer protection and financial sector regulation and
           supervision.
              The law should provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for the private sector, including
              voluntary consumer associations and self-regulatory organizations, in respect of
              consumer protection in the area of non-bank credit institutions.




6
    These include microfinance organizations and credit unions.
II.        Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 Description
 a. Specific statutory provisions pertaining to consumer protection are in place for non-bank
 financial institutions:
 (i) The Law on Microfinance Organizations (Law on MFOs) was amended in April 2013 to
 include statutory provisions on consumer protection. In addition, regulations regarding
 “minimum requirements for credit risk management” and “for internal control” were put in place
 in for microfinance institutions.
 (ii) For credit unions, the legal framework per se does not include dedicated statutory provisions
 for consumer protection, but a number of provisions are included in the legal framework to
 protect the members and clarify complaint procedures. Furthermore, the regulation on credit risk
 management includes a number of provisions, as will be specified below.
 There is also a general consumer protection law in the country, which applies to goods, services
 and trade. The provisions are general, and none of the three categories explicitly includes
 financial services. In this regard, there is some uncertainty whether the Law on Consumer
 Protection is applicable for financial services.
 b. See Good Practice A.1. of the banking sector assessment for a summary of the overall
 institutional arrangements.
 c. In accordance with the Law on Licensing7 , the legal department of the NBKR is in charge of
 certifying / licensing the credit unions and microfinance organizations, and maintains a register
 with the names of all the registered micro-finance organizations and credit unions.
 d. The NBKR is the only government institution that is carrying out regulation and supervision
 of the microfinance organizations and credit unions. There is appropriate coordination between
 the various units within the NBKR in charge of off-site, on-site and licensing of the sector.
 However, with only 8 staff in off-site supervision, and 16 in on-site supervision, the units are
 understaffed to supervise 430 non-bank credit entities.
 The Anti-Monopoly Agency currently does not actively supervise financial sector related topics.
 It has however recently started to assess standard bank loan documents regarding their
 compliance with provisions stipulated by the Consumer Protection Law and possibly suggest
 changes to the legal framework.
 e. The regulatory framework for microfinance organizations and credit unions does not assign
 any direct role for the sector in the area of consumer protection, but also does not prohibit such a
 function. It provides for the creation of associations to represent the sector8.
 The Law on Consumer Protection9 explicitly provides for a role of consumer associations or
 unions to play a role in establishing standards and addressing consumer complaints.




 7
     Article 1-3 and 17-1.
 8
     Article 6 of Law on MFOs and Article 6 of the Law of Credit Unions.
 9
     Article 58.


                   Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 96
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 It is recommended to clarify in the legal framework that financial services do not fall under the
 Law on Consumer Protection, and that the NBKR is the agency formally in charge of
 supervising market conduct for banks and other financial entities providing banking services.
 The staffing levels in the units in charge of supervising non-bank credit institutions should be
 assessed to determine whether additional staff will be required to adequately supervise the sector.
 The legal and regulatory framework should be evaluated to determine cost-effectiveness of the
 introduced measures and alternative approaches considered where appropriate.



                     A.2. Code of Conduct for Non-Bank Credit Institutions

 Good Practice
      a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for non-bank credit institutions that is
         devised in consultation with the non-bank credit industry and with relevant consumer
         associations, and that is monitored by a statutory agency or an effective self-regulatory
         agency.
      b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be publicized and disseminated to
         the general public.
      c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes on matters specific to
         the industry (credit unions, credit cooperatives, other non-bank credit institutions).
      d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and disseminated.

 Description
      a. Not available.
      b. Not applicable.
      c. The Association of Microfinance Institutions (AMFI) issued an Ethics Code in 2010. The
         Code is mandatory for all members, and accordingly was signed by all 34 members. The
         Code aims at safeguarding the reputation of the members, and establishes as core values
         (i) transparency, (ii) high quality of products and services, (iii) equality for all members
         and clients, and (iv) professionalism at every level. It already provides for fair and
         transparent disclosure requirements, right to early repayment, clarity in language, and
         information on consequences of failure to the obligations assumed under the contract, and
         non-offensive debt collection. While the Code is general in its wording, it has already
         established the majority of measures that were eventually incorporated into the legal
         framework applicable to microfinance institutions.
      d. The Ethics Code of AMFI is published on its Webpage, along with information on the
         SMART Campaign.




             Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 97
II.        Good Practices: Banking Sector                                                         Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 It is recommended to further promote the adoption of the Ethics Code within the microfinance
 sector, and provide more guidance material on what constitutes for example “Respectful attitude
 towards the customer, non-offensive debt collection, and reasonable steps towards ensuring that
 clients have sufficient ability to repay”. Furthermore, standardized loan documents, that are
 written in clear and easily understandable language, as well as model guidelines for credit
 evaluations, internal claims processes etc. could be developed to facilitate and support uptake in
 the industry. Furthermore, AMFI itself could promote greater transparency by including on its
 webpage information on interest rates, explanation of terms and rights, and providing a platform
 for voicing complaints about unethical behavior by member entities.
 A similar code should be developed and implemented by the Association of Credit Unions for its
 members. To support implementation, the Finance Company for Credit Unions could focus on
 providing support to only those entities that have signed the code and adhere to the principles.



                                            A.3. Other Institutional Arrangements

 Good Practice
         a. Whether non-bank credit institutions are supervised by a financial supervisory agency, the
            allocation of resources between financial supervision and consumer protection should be
            adequate to enable their effective implementation.
         b. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution of any dispute regarding a
            consumer protection matter with a non-bank credit institution is affordable, timely and
            professionally delivered.
         c. The supervisory authority for non-bank credit institutions should encourage media and
            consumer associations to play an active role in promoting consumer protection regarding
            non-bank credit institutions.

 Description
         a. Both the on- and off-site units of the NBKR are involved in supervising the adherence to
            consumer protection measures. This mandate is clearly defined in the Law on Credit
            Unions10 , which assigns the NBKR a role in protecting the interest of the credit unions
            members, which are also the clients of the respective entity. For microfinance institutions,
            the legal framework does not formally mandate the inclusion of consumer protection
            provisions in the off- and onsite inspections11, there is currently however a strong focus
            placed by the NBKR on the actual implementation of core consumer protection measures:




 10
      Article 30.1.
 11
      Article 29 of the Law on MFOs puts a strong focus on supervision of AML related measures.


                      Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 98
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


         (i)     The off-site division has until recently received and processed complaints from
                 clients, and assessed the self-reported financial information, such as increasing non-
                 performing loans, that could indicate problems with over-indebtedness of the clients,
                 as well as average reported interest rates. The assessments and received complaints
                 can trigger a request to the on-site inspection department to conduct an on-site visit.
                 The processing of complaints will be spun off into a separate unit inside of the legal
                 department.
         (ii) During the on-site visits, meetings with borrowers are being conducted, including
              borrowers that voiced complaints in the complaints handling book at the individual
              institutions or directly at the NBKR. Furthermore, the adequacy of loan
              documentation and publicly available information is being assessed, and information
              and correctness of interest rate calculation confirmed. The on-site inspection already
              detected a number of problems, which led to the imposition of sanctions and
              eventual withdrawal of licenses.
 The system of on- and off-site supervision was recently revised to reduce the burden of
 supervision and prioritize supervision of the larger entities which hold the majority of assets,
 loans and borrowers. This revision was made necessary due to the scarce resources of the NBKR,
 which only has 16 inspectors and 8 staff for off-site supervision, in charge of supervising 430
 entities.
 Nevertheless, despite the noted scarce resources, the NBKR has been very active in supervising
 and enforcing the legal and regulatory framework for the sector. In 2013, it withdrew 29 licenses
 (9 from credit unions, the rest from non-bank credit institutions). This included failure to comply
 with the regular reporting requirements provided for by the legal framework or for providing
 false information. In 2012, 98 licenses were withdrawn.
      b. Given the small amounts of money involved in micro-credits, most court proceedings will
         be too expensive compared to the actual claim under dispute. It is thus no surprise that
         hardly any complaints are being brought to the level of courts. An out-of court arbitration
         mechanism is not available in Kyrgyz Republic, leaving the clients of microfinance
         organizations and credit unions with the sole option of bringing their unresolved problems
         to the attention of the NBKR.
      c. The NBKR is currently not actively involving sector and consumer associations in efforts
         to enhance transparency in the sector. There is also some indication that the changes in the
         legal and regulatory framework are not sufficiently discussed with stakeholders, and
         implemented without sufficient anticipation for internalizing the required changes.
 Recommendation
 Despite the recent revamping of the on- and off-site supervision system for non-bank financial
 institutions, considerations should be given to increasing the number of staff working in both
 units. This would free them for additional training to understand the peculiarities of the sector,
 and possibly free them to do some “mystery shopping” to confirm adherence t o basic
 transparency provisions.




               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 99
II.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 An out-of court mechanism to resolve complaints should be developed to make dispute resolution
 affordable to its clients. International experience suggests that an ombudsman scheme, if
 correctly implemented and involving a trusted and competent person, can be a viable option.
 The NBKR and other public stakeholders involved in further developing the legal and regulatory
 framework for non-bank credit institutions should improve the consultation process with the
 associations representing the sector.



                         A.4. Licensing of Non-Bank Credit Institutions

 Good Practice
 All financial institutions that extend any type of credit to households should be registered with a
 financial supervisory authority.

 Description
 In line with the Law on Licensing, all microfinance organizations and credit unions are to be
 registered or licensed by the NBKR. The NBKR has the mandate to revoke the license, of which
 it has made repeated use over the last few years. Without the license / permit from the NBKR,
 these entities are not allowed to perform banking services.
 The Law on MFOs also prohibits the use of “national”, “state” or ‘Kyrgyz” in the name of the
 respective organization. This protects the client from a false impression that it is a government
 owned or protected organization.
 There are a growing number of pawnshops, which are not subject to licensing raising consumer
 protection concerns. According to information from stakeholders, pawnshops frequently use
 verbal contracts only, lack transparency in their operations and disclosure towards the client,
 charge high interest rates, and in some cases, use abusive enforcement practices. Given this, the
 Law on Licensing was amended in October 2013 to reinstate the requirement that pawnshops be
 licensed. However, no supervisory agency has yet been assigned, and no procedures and
 regulations pertaining to the licensing process have yet been drafted.
 Recommendation
 The current licensing scheme is not very effective, as it only sets basic requirements for licensing.
 Considerations might be given to introduce a staged licensing regime, with increasing size of
 assets, mandates further qualifications of management (‘fit and proper’ rules), additional
 reporting requirements and more elaborated manuals and policies.
 A government agency in charge of licensing and monitoring the pawnshops should be assigned as
 soon as possible. As the NBKR is the supervisor of all other entities that conduct lending
 services, and has previous experience with supervising the pawnshops, it would be best suited to
 assume such a role.




          Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 100
II.        Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices

                              Section B. Disclosure and Practices


                                        B.1. Information on Customers

 Good Practice
         a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a non-bank credit institution should
            gather, file and record sufficient information from the consumer to enable the institution
            to render an appropriate product or service to that consumer.
         b. The extent of information the non-bank credit institution gathers regarding a consumer
            should:
               (i) be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the product or service either
               being proposed to or sought by the consumer; and
               (ii) enable the institution to provide a professional service to the consumer in
               accordance with that consumer’s capacity.
 Description
 a. The legal and regulatory frameworks for both MFOs and credit unions provide for the
 gathering, filing and recording of information to assess the client’s creditworthiness:
 Article 35-2.3 of the Law on MFOs requires that the solvency of the borrower must be studied.
 This is to include an assessment of income related to economic activity and from family
 members, as well as an assessment of expenditure needs related to all dependents in the
 household. Provisions to this regard are also made in the regulation on credit risk management
 for MFOs12 .
 The Law on Credit Unions does not explicitly include provisions regarding information on
 consumers, but Article 25 of the Law on Credit Unions establishes that the credit union should
 have credit policies in place, that detail credit payment terms and conditions, limits of crediting
 and acceptable forms. The credit policies should be approved by the General Assembly, and be in
 line with requirements stipulated by the legislation. In 2009 (and last amended in 2012), the
 NBKR issued a regulation on minimum requirements for credit risk management in credit unions,
 which also determines minimum standards for loan documentation, and the assessment of the
 borrowers’ creditworthiness. According to Article 5, the latter includes (i) determining whether
 the borrower has a responsible “attitude” toward borrowing, and including his/her previous
 repayment history for loans, (ii) assessment of income and cash flow to repay the loan, and (iii)
 evaluation of collateral, in case this is required.




 12
      Article 23.5.


                  Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 101
II.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


 b. The minimum information requirements mandated for microfinance institutions are overall
 appropriate for assessing the borrower’s solvency and establishing adequate loan sizes. However,
 the focus of the solvency assessment is on historic information on income and expenditure, thus
 only provides a static picture of the repayment capacity of the borrower. This focus on static
 assessments was confirmed by the review of loan files during the mission. It would be better to
 move at least for larger loans (investment loans in particular) towards a cash flow based
 assessment of the client, and determine maturity structures that are in line with the identified cash
 flow. The current products available in the market have almost exclusively monthly repayment
 rates, which do not appear adequate with the cash flow generated e.g. by farmers.
 A focus on cash flow is already included in the regulation on credit risk management for credit
 unions.
 None of the legal frameworks explicitly requires an assessment of the borrower’s capacity to
 repay loans in foreign currency. Currently foreign currency loans are not provided by MFOs and
 credit unions. However, it will be important to include a provision once the first entity has
 received a license to issue such loans stipulating that an assessment of the solvency should factor
 in revenue sources in foreign income.
 Recommendation
 The regulation on credit risk management in MFOs should include a passage stating that, where
 appropriate, a cash flow assessment should be carried out to determine the repayment capacity of
 the borrower, and the appropriate maturity structure.
 The regulatory frameworks for credit unions and MFOs should be amended in time to require an
 assessment of the borrowers revenue stream in foreign currency, if the loan is to be provided in a
 foreign currency. Foreign currency loans to borrowers, who do not have any income in the
 respective currency, should not be allowed. Furthermore, the financial entity should be required
 to discuss with the client possible risks arising from changes in the respective exchange rate.
 It is recommended to assess the quality and quantity of available training for loan officers in the
 country. The available courses should include cash flow analysis.




          Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 102
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


                                          B.2. Affordability

 Good Practice
      a. When a non-bank credit institution makes a recommendation regarding a product or
         service to a consumer, the product or service it offers to that consumer should be in line
         with the need of the consumer.
      b. Sufficient information on the product or service should be provided to the consumer to
         enable him or her to select the most suitable and affordable product or service.
      c. When a non-bank credit institution offers a new credit product or service that significantly
         increases the amount of debt assumed by the consumer, the consumer’s credit worthiness
         should be properly assessed.
 Description
      a. As discussed above, the legal and regulatory frameworks for both credit unions and
         MFOs provide for an assessment of the creditworthiness of the borrower, and the
         determination of appropriate products to offer.
      b. The Law on MFOs stipulates for example in Article 35-2.2 that prior to the finalization of
         the credit contract, the customer should receive a full, clear and exhaustive information on
         credit conditions (including on the full price of the credit product) in one of the official
         languages used in the Kyrgyz Republic based on the client’s choice. The provided data is
         to be unified and systematized to allow comparison of credit products.
      c. For MFOs, the law mandates explicitly a more in-depth assessment of the repayment
         capacity if immovable collateral is provided. This reflects prior experience and
         complaints by borrowers, who had their property taken after experiencing problems
         repaying. The respective provisions are included in Article 35-2.3. No such provision is
         included for credit unions, but the regulations are sufficient to mandate an appropriate
         creditworthiness assessment.
 Recommendation
 See recommendations made under B.1




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 103
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


                                        B.3. Cooling-off Period

 Good Practice
      a. For financial products or services with a long-term savings component, or those subject to
         high-pressure sales contracts, (unless explicitly waived by the consumer in writing), a
         non-bank credit institution should provide the consumer a cooling-off period of a
         reasonable number of days (at least 3-5 business days) immediately following the signing
         of an agreement between the institution and the consumer.
      b. On his or her written notice to the non-bank credit institution during the cooling- off
         period, the consumer should be permitted to cancel or treat the agreement as null and void
         without penalty to the consumer of any kind.
 Description
      a. None of the microfinance institutions currently offer savings products. For loans, Article
         35-2.2 mandates that the borrower should have the right to cancel the credit prior to
         having received the agreed upon loan amount or in the case of leasing, made the first
         payment for the leasing product. The timeframe for the cooling off period is limited to 3
         days, which does not seem to be sufficient for consulting with a lawyer if needed.
         Credit unions: No cooling off period is foreseen for loans provided by credit unions, or for
         savings products. Only 12 credit unions currently have a license to offer savings products
         to their members, and the offered products are basic savings products. With regard to
         loans, the credit union members approve in the General Assembly the products and credit
         policies, and the Credit Committee, which is elected by the members every three years,
         evaluates the credit applications. The members can directly complain to their Board in
         case of problems. By nature, this member-based approach should sufficiently safeguard
         against unfair business practices, thus making the establishment of cooling off periods
         less critical.
      b. For MFOs, the cancelation of a loan prior to disbursement is to be without any costs to the
         borrower. The borrower has the right of early repayment of the loan free of charge, if
         advised 30 days in advance.
         The legal and regulatory framework for credit unions does not include any provisions in
         this regard.
 Recommendation
 The regulation pertaining to cooling off periods for MFOs should be revised. The cooling off
 period could either be extended to 2 weeks in order to reduce the financial burden on the client,
 or a provision included that allows the client to return the loan amount within a brief period after
 loan disbursement without any applicable penalty (other than interest to be paid for the time the
 funds were held).
 For credit unions, cooling off periods should be established over time.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 104
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


                                 B.4. Bundling and Tying Clauses

 Good Practice
      a. As much as possible, non-bank credit institutions should avoid the use of tying clauses in
         contracts that restrict the choice of consumers.
      b. In particular, whenever a borrower is required by a non-bank credit institution to purchase
         any product, including an insurance policy, as a pre-condition for receiving a loan, the
         borrower should be free to choose the provider of the product and this information should
         be made known to the borrower.
      c. Also, whenever a non-bank credit institution contracts with a merchant as a distribution
         channel for its credit contracts, no exclusionary dealings should be permitted.

 Description
 The legal framework in the Republic of Kyrgyz Republic prohibits the bundling of products and
 services.
 Article 17.2. of the Law on Consumer Protection specifies that it is forbidden to condition the
 acquisition of certain goods (works, services) with the purchase of other goods or services. In
 case of violation, the customer can request full reimbursement from the seller.
 Article 35-2.2.4 of the Law on MFOs prohibits that any other commercial obligations are
 included in a credit contract, which are being paid or collected by the microfinance institution.
 This does not apply to services that are needed to conclude the loan, such as fees for notary
 services for collateral registration. The latter have to be made transparent in the loan document.
 There is no indication that MFOs and credit unions offer other non-credit services to their clients.
 Recommendation
 While there is no indication that bundling of products is taking place in microfinance institutions,
 this should be monitored over time.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 105
II.        Good Practices: Banking Sector                                    Comparison with Good Practices


                                            B.5. Key Facts Statement

 Good Practice
         a. Non-bank credit institutions should have a Key Facts Statement for each type of account,
            loan or other products or services.
         b. The Key Facts Statement should be written in plain language, summarizing in a page or
            two the key terms and conditions of the specific financial product or service, and allowing
            consumers the possibility of easily comparing products offered by different institutions.

 Description
         a. he legal and regulatory framework for MFOs mandates full transparency with regard to
            the information on key loan conditionalities13 . This includes amongst others the full
            price of the microcredit in absolute value, a clear separation of the individual cost
            components and applicable nominal and effective interest rates on an annualized basis. It
            also mandates that the loan documentation is to be in the national language or official
            language of choice by the borrower and should be written in a manner than can be
            understood by the borrower14 .
               In addition, the regulation on credit risk management in MFOs specifies that the borrower
               should receive information on the nominal interest rate, the annual effective interest rate,
               the de facto interest to be paid, as well as a separate loan payment schedule. The core
               rights and responsibilities of the client are to be referred to in a separate Annex that has to
               be signed by both borrower and the non bank credit institution loan official, and a
               separate Annex containing the repayment schedule provided. Finally, the loan document
               has to include a memo by the NBKR for the borrower, in which his/her rights and
               obligations are explained. The memo has to be signed by the borrower.
               For credit unions, Article 5 of the regulation on credit risk management mandates that the
               written loan agreement should include the basic terms of the loan (maturity, security and
               interest rate), the rights and obligations of each party, a repayment schedule as well as
               information on sanctions in case of breach of obligations.
         b. The amount of information that has to be provided to the borrower appears
            overwhelming, and is not sufficiently timely to allow comparing of terms and conditions
            between different products and providers. While the mission understands that part of the
            requirements and information to be provided to the borrower serve the purpose of
            educating the borrower about his/her rights and obligations, and to help them understand
            what to look for and be aware of in a loan, the sheer size of requirements for loan
            documents to sign appears onerous and adds considerable costs to the loan process.




 13
      Article 35-12 and 35-2.2.
 14
      Article 35-2.6.


                  Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 106
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 Instead of the numerous information and documentation requirements currently mandated, a one-
 page key fact statement should be introduced for both credit unions and MFOs. The key fact
 statement should provide information on the effective interest rate (annualized and compounded),
 the break-down of the individual cost components (including fees), the repayment schedule, and
 information on available dispute resolution mechanisms.
 To allow comparison of loan products and conditionalities, a key fact statement for all available
 loan products should be publicly available in each branch office for each product, and include
 information on the loan sizes, maturities, interest rates and commissions. The information should
 be easily accessible and visible, and not as currently the practice in separate folders that need to
 be reviewed by the borrower.



                               B.6. Advertising and Sales Materials

 Good Practice
      a. Non-bank credit institutions should ensure that their advertising and sales materials and
         procedures do not mislead customers.
      b. All advertising and sales materials should be easily readable and understandable by the
         general public.
      c. Non-bank credit institutions should be legally responsible for all statements made in
         advertising and sales materials (i.e. be subject to the penalties under the law for making
         any false or misleading statements).

 Description
      a. Article 36 of the Law on MFOs prohibits false or misleading advertising of an entity’s
         activities. In addition, Article 35-2.1 requires that MFOs provide services based on
         principles of honesty and transparency, and Article 35-1.3 stipulates that advertising,
         publication and spreading of data on interest rate should include both nominal and
         effective interest rates. In reality, many MFOs however prefer not to include the interest
         rate information in information provided on the web or post it visibly on the wall.
         There are no provisions pertaining to advertising in credit unions.
         The Law on Consumer Protection does not include provisions on advertising per se, but
         establishes that the seller should provide correct information to the client on the company
         and the product upon demand.
      b. There is no requirement that the advertisements should be easily readable and
         understandable. However, the information in the loan document has to be clear and easily
         understandable in contracts of MFOs.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 107
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


      c. The NBKR has the right to request from the MFO to change or drop the misleading
         advertisement, and – if not complied with –publish a statement in mass media clarifying
         that the information provided is misleading. The NBKR can request the reimbursement of
         these costs from the MFO.
         While the legal and regulatory framework is sufficient for establishing the requirement of
         fair advertisements it falls short in making the financial entity responsible of any
         monetary loss incurred by the clients due to the advertisement.
 Recommendation
 Provisions to call for fair and honest advertisement should be included in the legal and regulatory
 framework for credit unions.
 The legal framework currently does not hold the financial entity accountable for damage done to
 borrowers due to misleading advertisement. This should be added.
 Considerations should also be given to imposing sanctions on non bank credit institutions that do
 not adhere to proper advertisement rules. These should differentiate between first time
 “offenders” and frequent violators of the rules, as well as the magnitude of the misleading
 advertisement.



                                        B.7. General Practices

 Good Practice
 Specific rules on disclosure and sales practices should be included in the non-bank credit
 institutions’ code of conduct and monitored by the relevant supervisory authority.

 Description
 The legal and regulatory framework does not include any provisions for MFOs and credit unions
 to have codes of conducts in place.
 Recommendation
 As discussed under A.2, the NBKR should encourage the sector associations and the sector
 institutions to develop their own codes of conducts, and develop standardized documents and
 minimum product standards.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 108
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices




                               B.8. Disclosure of Financial Situation

 Good Practice
      a. The relevant supervisory authority should publish annual public reports on the
         development, health, strength and penetration of the non-bank credit institutions, either as
         a special report or as part of the disclosure and accountability requirements under the law
         that governs these.
      b. Non-bank credit institutions should be required to disclose their financial information to
         enable the general public to form an opinion regarding the financial viability of the
         institution.
 Description
      a. Article 10.4. of the Law on the NBKR mandates that it should annually publish in the
         mass media the main analytical data included in the annual report and concerning the
         situation in the financial and banking systems of the Republic.
         In accordance with the above passage, the NBKR provides on its webpage information on
         the banking and non-banking sector, which for MFOs and credit unions includes
         information on their loan portfolio (by sector), maturity structure, and interest rates (only
         nominal rates). The information is mostly provided in the form of an excel spreadsheet,
         which for less sophisticated users might be difficult to locate and analyze. In addition, its
         stability report includes sections on the development, soundness and possible risks of
         non-bank credit institutions.
      b. Since April 2013, all three types of MFOs are mandated to have their financial statements
         audited by an external auditor (Article 37.4 Law on MFOs). In addition, Article 22 of the
         Law establishes that microfinance companies should publish their financial accounts on a
         quarterly basis in mass media, and present the full financial accounts on an annual basis.
         Article 19 of the Law on Credit Unions principally requires that external audits be done
         for credit unions, but leaves as option to the credit unions that the Internal Audit
         Committee can also assume this role. The financial statements have to be presented and
         discussed at the General Assembly of the credit union, at which 50% of the members
         have to be represented.
         Finally, the Law on Banks and Banking Services also includes passages that pertain to
         non-bank credit institutions. Article 1-1 provides for audits to be carried out in
         accordance with the international auditing standards, and mandates that the audit report
         and opinion be sent to the NBKR within 10 days of finalization of the audit. It also gives
         the NBKR the right to accept or reject the audit opinion, and to request a re-audit if
         necessary.
         Based on feedback received, there is currently a shortage of qualified auditors who can
         conduct audits for microfinance institutions. Deficiencies in the audits themselves were
         noted, including not using the accounting rules prescribed for by the NBKR and not
         taking the regulatory framework for non-bank credit institutions in account.


           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 109
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 The NBKR should assess the common accounting format applicable for the individual types of
 entities, and adapt it to the level of sophistication and size of individual entities. Considerations
 could also be given to include in the audit report, feedback on general business conduct and
 adherence to disclosure standards.
 As the requirement to have the accounts audited was only recently introduced, a special effort
 should be undertaken to train and certify professional external auditors.
 The NBKR should consider putting in place a requirement to use auditors from a list of pre-
 qualified auditors held at the NBKR.
 Finally, considerations could be given to mandating credit unions to have their financial
 statements posted visibly for their members.



          Section C. Customer Account Handling and Maintenance


                                           C.1. Statements

 Good Practice
      a. Unless a non-bank credit institution receives a customer’s prior signed authorization to
         the contrary, the non-bank credit institution should issue, and provide the customer with, a
         monthly statement regarding every account the non-bank credit institution operates for the
         customer.
      b. Each such statement should: (i) set out all transactions concerning the account during the
         period covered by the statement; and (ii) provide details of the interest rate(s) applied to
         the account during the period covered by the statement.
      c. Each credit card statement should set out the minimum payment required and the total
         interest cost that will accrue, if the cardholder makes only the required minimum
         payment.
      d. Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly indicate the amount paid
         during the period covered by the statement, the total outstanding amount still owing, the
         allocation of payment to the principal and interest and, if applicable, the up-to-date
         accrual of taxes paid.
      e. A non-bank credit institution should notify a customer of long periods of inactivity of any
         account of the customer and provide reasonable final notice in writing to the customer if
         the funds are to be transferred to the government.
      f. When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such statements should be in an easy-
         to-read and readily understandable format.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 110
II.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 Description
 a and b. The legal and regulatory framework does not include a mandatory requirement for
 providing the client with monthly statements on the deposit account balances. None of the
 microfinance companies has yet received a license for taking deposits, so at this stage such a
 provision is not yet needed.
 There is also no explicit requirement for providing the client with a regular statement on loan
 repayments and remaining balances. The borrower receives the full repayment schedule upon
 signing of the loan. The repayment schedule is to include information on principles and interest
 due for each payment. In case of a change in repayment schedule, the borrower is entitled
 according to Article 26 of the regulation on credit risk management to receive a new payment
 schedule.
 For credit unions, Article 22 of the Law on Credit Unions mandates that each member is to be
 provided with a share book, in which all increases and withdrawals of shares are recorded
 together with the date of transaction. The share book is also to record dividend payments.
 Currently, 12 credit unions are licensed to offer deposit services to their client, and the value of
 deposits held by these entities currently ranges around USD 1mln. There is no explicit regulation
 on deposit accounts in the Law on Credit Unions. These activities are covered in the Law on
 Banks and Banking Activity whose provisions on deposits apply to any financial institution
 licensed to take deposits. The Law on Banks and Banking Activity also does not include any
 provisions that stipulate the provision of regular statements on deposit accounts.
 This will likely be addressed in the near future. The draft Banking Code provides for the
 establishment of procedures for handling bank accounts by the NBKR. These would apply to all
 persons/entities providing banking services, thus also be applicable to microfinance companies
 and credit unions, which are licensed to take deposits.
 c. Not applicable. None of the microfinance organizations and credit unions are authorized to
 offer their clients/members credit cards.
 d. Not applicable. The information is provided as part of the repayment schedule included in the
 loan document.
 e. Not applicable. There is no requirement that funds are to be transferred back to the government
 in case of non-activity.
 f. Not applicable. No provisions on paperless statements are included in the legal and regulatory
 framework. As the microfinance organizations and credit unions frequently cater to clients in
 remote rural areas, where internet connectivity is not yet reliable.
 Recommendation
 The regulations should be amended to mandate a written confirmation to the borrower/treasurer
 of the group loan of any payments made. In case of early repayments of the full or partial
 amount, a new payment schedule should be provided to the borrower.
 With regard to savings, the NBKR needs to put in place procedures for the handling of accounts
 for banks and providers of banking services, to make sure that the client has up-to date
 information on his/her balance.


          Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 111
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


                C.2. Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Non-Interest Charges

 Good Practice
      a. A customer of a non-bank credit institution should be notified in writing by the non-bank
         credit institution of any change in:
          (i)     the interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of the customer as soon as
                  possible; and
          (ii)    a non-interest charge on any account of the customer a reasonable period in
                  advance of the effective date of the change.
      b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or she should have the right to
         exit the contract without penalty, provided such right is exercised within a reasonable
         period.
         The non-bank credit institution should inform the customer of the foregoing right
         whenever a notice of change under paragraph a. is made by the institution.
 Description
 a and b. The Law on MFOs states in Article 35-2.13 that the MFO cannot change or add
 unilaterally any credit conditions, if it goes against the rights and obligations of the borrower. The
 written consent of the borrower is required.
 A similar provision is also provided in the draft Banking Code under Article 10.9, which
 stipulates that persons providing banking services shall not have the right on a unilateral basis to
 make amendments or additions to the terms of a loan agreement, if doing so would infringe upon
 the rights and/or increase the responsibilities of the borrower.
 More generally, the Regulation on Pricing Policy as well as the draft Banking Code include
 specific requirements for the financial entity to make any changes in their interest rates publicly
 available. The Regulation on Pricing Policy for example requires in Article 7.10 timely informing
 customers about the conditions of provision of banking services and subsequent amendments and
 additions to the current interest rates and rates of the financial entity.
 For credit unions, Article 16 of the Law on Credit Unions specifies that the Board should prepare
 proposals on the credit, interest, loan and investment policy in line with the established principles
 and norms established. The proposals are to be approved by the General Assembly (Article 14.2).
 Furthermore, the dividend on savings shares is declared annually by the General Assembly.
 c. Not applicable
 Recommendation
 It is recommended to post interest rates and their changes on the wall in each branch to strengthen
 the existing disclosure regime. As is at the moment, there is no minimum requirement as to what
 “making publicly available” is to include.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 112
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


                                        C.3. Customer Records

 Good Practice
      a. A non-bank credit institution should maintain up-to-date records in respect of each
         customer of the non-bank credit institution that contain the following:
         (i)    a copy of all documents required to identify the customer and provide the
                customer’s profile;
         (ii)   the customer’s address, telephone number and all other customer contact details;
         (iii) any information or document in connection with the customer that has been
               prepared in compliance with any statute, regulation or code of conduct;
         (iv) details of all products and services provided by the non-bank credit institution to the
              customer;
         (v)    a copy of all correspondence from the customer to the non-bank credit institution
                and vice-versa and details of any other information provided to the customer in
                relation to any product or service offered or provided to the customer;
         (vi) all documents and applications of the non-bank credit institution completed, signed
              and submitted to the non-bank credit institution by the customer;
         (vii) a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer in support of an
               application by the customer for the provision of a product or service by the non-
               bank credit institution; and
         (viii) any other relevant information concerning the customer.
         A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible period for retaining all such
         records and, throughout this period, the customer should be provided ready free access to
         all such records.
 Description
 a. For lending, the documentation requirements listed under (i)-(viii) are all stipulated by the
 respective regulations on credit risk management for credit unions and MFIs. With regard to
 deposit accounts, the NBKR resolution 41/12 and the regulation on minimum requirements of
 internal controls in MFOs and credit unions covered the documentation requirements for
 depositors
 b. Article 4.2 of the regulation on internal controls in MFIs and credit unions (in order to counter
 the financing of terrorism and legalization of proceeds from crime) requires that all documents
 and records relating to customer identification and establishment of beneficial owner must be
 kept for at least five years. There is no provision that the customer has access to these records for
 verification.
 The Law on Data Protection provides that the consumer has to give consent to the sharing of
 data, and also has a right to access, request correction of errors, and block or have data deleted.
 There is however no enforcement agency specified by law.
 Recommendation
 None.

           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 113
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


                                           C.4. Credit Cards

 Good Practice
      a. There should be clear rules on the issuance of credit cards and related customer disclosure
         requirements.
      b. Non-bank credit institutions, as credit card issuers, should ensure that personalized
         disclosure requirements are made in all credit card offers, including fees and charges
         (including finance charges), credit limit, penalty interest rates and method of calculating
         the minimum monthly payment.
      c. Non-bank credit institutions should not be permitted to impose charges or fees on pre-
         approved credit cards that have not been accepted by the customer.
      d. Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment warnings on each monthly
         statement and the total interest costs that will accrue if the cardholder makes only the
         requested minimum payment.
      e. Among other things, the rules should also:
         (i)    restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and marketing of credit cards to young
                adults (below age of 21) who have no independent means of income;
         (ii)   require reasonable notice of changes in fees and interest rates increase;
         (iii) prevent the application of new higher penalty interest rates to the entire existing
               balance, including past purchases made at a lower interest rate;
         (iv) limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when consumers exceed their
              credit limits;
         (v)    prohibit a practice called ―double-cycle billing‖ by which card issuers charge
                interest over two billing cycles rather than one;
         (vi) prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly payments in ways that maximize
              interest charges to consumers; and
         (vii) limit up-front fees charged on sub-prime credit cards issued to individuals with bad
               credit.
      f. There should be clear rules on error resolution, reporting of unauthorized transactions and
         of stolen cards, with the ensuing liability of the customer being made clear to the
         customer prior to his or her acceptance of the credit card.
      g. Non-bank credit institutions and issuers should conduct consumer awareness programs on
         the misuse of credit cards, credit card over-indebtedness and prevention of fraud.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 114
II.     Good Practices: Banking Sector                                                             Comparison with Good Practices


 Description
 Currently not applicable. Neither MFOs nor credit unions are authorized to issue cards to their
 clients/members.
 Recommendation
 None.



                                                         C.5. Debt Recovery

 Good Practice
      a. All non-bank credit institutions, agents of a non-bank credit institutions and third parties
         should be prohibited from employing any abusive debt collection practice against any
         customer of the non-bank credit institution, including the use of any false statement, any
         unfair practice or the giving of false credit information to others.
      b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a non-bank credit institution, the
         person who can collect any such debt and the manner in which that debt can be collected
         should be indicated to the customer of the non-bank credit institution when the credit
         agreement giving rise to the debt is entered into between the non-bank credit institution
         and the customer.
      c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a non-bank credit institution
         customer’s debt without informing that party of the debt collector’s right to do so; and (ii)
         the type of information that the debt collector is seeking.
      d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is allowed by law, the borrower
         should be:
            (i)     notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable number of days;
           (ii)     informed that the borrower remains obligated on the debt; and
           (iii) provided with information as to where to make payment, as well as the purchaser’s
                 or transferee’s contact information.

 Description
      a. The legal and regulatory framework for both MFOs and credit unions does not include
         any information regarding what constitutes abusive debt collection practices.
      b. As part of the loan documentation, MFOs and credit unions are required to provide the
         borrower with written information on risks associated with, as well as measures and
         sanctions to be taken in the case of default by the borrower15.



 15
   See Article 5.2.5. of regulation on credit risk management for credit unions and for MFOs Art 35-2.9 of the Law on MFOs, as well
 as Article 25 b and 32 of the regulation on credit risk management.


               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 115
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                  Comparison with Good Practices


         There are some provisions on working with overdue loans in the regulation on credit risk
         management for credit unions. Article 7 details that the borrower should be made aware
         of the overdue payments, and that efforts should be made by the credit union to work out
         an action plan with the borrower and inform him of possible consequences of non-
         payment. The Loan officers have to regularly report back to the Credit Committee with
         proposals for further actions.
         Some of the visited financial entities described that they are temporarily taking the
         collateral to their books in case of non-payment by the borrower, and develop a new
         payment schedule with the borrower. This is not foreseen in the legal framework, but
         could be e.g. specified in the loan contract.
      c. There is no specific article or regulation in the legal and regulatory framework for both
         MFOs and credit unions that do cover this. However, the Law on Banking Secrecy
         stipulates that any information, which has been entrusted or disclosed to a bank or
         financial entities within the business relationship between a bank and a client cannot be
         passed on to third parties. Exceptions are only provided for information to the NBKR, and
         authorized agencies for anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing, as well as
         agencies providing auditing, juridical, bookkeeping and other representative services for a
         financial entity.
      d. Article 10.2.11 of the draft Banking Code also requires that the borrower should be
         granted preferential right to redeem the pledged property under the terms of the
         agreement. Furthermore, Article 10.2.12 stipulates that all residential real estate serving as
         collateral shall be sold exclusively through public auction. This prevents unfair sales
         practices used by some entities that simply foreclosed and sold off the pledged property.
 Recommendation
 The legal and regulatory framework has to be amended to include provisions on enforcement.
 This at a minimum should include (i) provisions on what constitute abusive enforcement
 practices, (ii) provisions pertaining to the provision of information on a borrower’s debt to third
 parties, as well as (iii) requirements to notify the borrower sufficiently in advance of enforcing
 collateral.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 116
II.        Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices

                             Section D. Privacy and Data Protection


                         D.1. Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information

 Good Practice
         a. The financial transactions of any customer of a non-bank credit institution should be kept
            confidential by the institution.
         b. The law should require non-bank credit institutions to ensure that they protect the
            confidentiality and security of personal data of their customers against any anticipated
            threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such information, and against
            unauthorized access.

 Description
         a. Provisions on privacy and data protection are included in the Law on Banking Secrecy, as
            well as the laws on the individual entities (Law on the NBKR, Law on Bank and Banking
            Services, Law on MFOs and the Law on Credit Unions).
               The Law on the NBKR mandates in Article 6 that “operation-specific information
               received from banks and other financial institutions licensed by the NBKR shall not be
               disclosed without the consent of the institutions concerned, except for the cases provided
               for in the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic.” Furthermore, Article 49 prohibits
               employees of the NBKR to “disclose confidential information on the activities of the
               NBKR or any other information which is made known to them in the course of
               discharging their duties with exception for the cases envisaged by the legislation”.
               The Law on Banking Secrecy binds all relevant stakeholders, including banks, financial
               institutions, agents, which include supervisors, government agencies involved in AML
               and auditors to keep the information confidential that they have received on a client of a
               financial entity, and on the entity itself. This also includes the circulation of information
               between banks, if this is for the purpose of protecting their activity, credit recovery and
               other investments.
         b. A financial entity may disclose in the court the information about a client 16 , constituting
            the banking secrecy, in cases and limits, required for protection of its rights and legal
            interests as well as for settling arguments between a bank and a client. On application of a
            bank or its client, the court session may be closed.
 Recommendation
 It would be recommended to introduce minimum standards of keeping information on clients
 safe.




 16
      Article 8.


                   Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 117
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                     Comparison with Good Practices


                                         D.2. Credit Reporting

 Good Practice
      a. Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight, with sufficient enforcement
         authority.
      b. The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely and sufficient data. The system
         should also maintain rigorous standards of security and reliability.
      c. The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit reporting system should be: (i)
         clear, predictable, non-discriminatory, proportionate and supportive of consumer rights;
         and (ii) supported by effective judicial or extrajudicial dispute resolution mechanisms.
      d. Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include the right of the consumer
         (i)     to consent to information-sharing based upon the knowledge of the institution’s
                 information-sharing practices;
         (ii)    to access his or her credit report free of charge (at least once a year), subject to
                 proper identification;
         (iii)   to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-than-optimal
                 conditions/prices due to credit report information;
         (iv)    to be informed about all inquiries within a period of time, such as six months;
         (v)     to correct factually incorrect information or to have it deleted and to mark (flag)
                 information that is in dispute;
         (vi)    to reasonable retention periods of credit history; and
         (vii) to have information kept confidential and with sufficient security measures in place
               to prevent unauthorized access, misuse of data, or loss or destruction of data.
         The credit registers, regulator and associations of non-bank credit institutions should
         undertake campaigns to inform and educate the public on the rights of consumers in the
         above respects, as well as the consequences of a negative personal credit history.

 Description
 There is currently only one credit bureau operational in the country - the Credit Bureau Ishenim.
 Being established in the form of a non-profit organization, it currently has over 100 members,
 including credit unions and MFOs. Its database includes 1.5 million entries, equivalent to 46
 percent of the economically active population.
 There are also advanced considerations in the NBKR to establish a Credit Registry.
 a. No dedicated legal framework for credit bureaus is currently in place. Provisions and
 regulations affecting credit reporting are included in the Law on the National Bank of Kyrgyz
 Republic, the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on Bank Secrecy, Resolution of the Board of
 Governors at the NBKR issued in 2004. In addition other more general laws apply including the
 Law on Access to Information and the Law on Personal Data, 2008. None of these frameworks
 specify an oversight mechanism for credit bureaus.


           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 118
II.   Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices


 A draft Law on Credit Bureaus was presented to Parliament, but eventually got rejected as the
 draft law amongst other issues did not estabish who would be in charge of overseeing activities
 related to Credit Bureaus.
 b. The credit bureau currently maintains individual contracts with the respective member
 institutions detailing the data and information to be shared on a voluntary basis. There is no
 uniform provision in the applicable laws and regulations that clearly define the credit reporting
 activity, obligations of the parties (e.g. service and data providers, users and government agencies
 holding relevant information), data collection, storage and distribution, and the consumer
 protection and oversight framework.
 c. The current legal framework is fragmented, and does not clearly provide for dispute resolution.
 d. According to the Law on Data Protection, the client has to give consent to the sharing of
 information by the financial entity. Without the consent, the financial institution cannot report the
 received information to the credit bureau.
 The Credit Bureau Ishenim give the clients unlimited rights to check their credit report. However,
 the clients have to personally come to the office of the credit bureau to check their reports on the
 available monitors, and if they require a print out have to pay KGS 50 (~1USD). There is
 currently no internet access available to check the credit history online. In 2013, there were 900
 people actively visiting the credit bureau, and for 2014 the head of the credit bureau suggests that
 currently around 30 people have come to the office daily to check their records.
 In case of corrections, the client has to first check in writing with the financial entity and can then
 request correction of the information with the credit bureau.
 e. The credit bureau has already undertaken some compaigns in mass media to inform the
 population of the working and purpose of a credit bureau. However, the majority of the
 population apparently still does not have a solid understanding what a credit bureau does, and
 what their rights are.
 Recommendation
 An entity in charge of oversight of the credit bureau infrastructure in the country should be
 determined, and appropriate laws and regulations put in place.
 Procedures for handling of consumer complaints should be developed and clearly communicated
 to the client.
 The access to information should be facilitated. Having to come personally is likely prohibitive
 for most of the clients of microfinance organizations and credit unions, as the majority lives in
 rural areas.
 Financial education measures developed by the government and stakeholders should include
 information on credit reporting. It would be useful to include the Credit Bureau in the working
 groups that were established to design and implement a financial education strategy in the
 country.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 119
II.        Good Practices: Banking Sector                                   Comparison with Good Practices

                            Section E. Dispute Resolution Mechanism


                                       E.1. Internal Complaints Procedure

 Good Practice
 Complaint resolution procedures should be included in the non-bank credit institutions’ code of
 conduct and monitored by the supervisory authority.

 Description
 The legal and regulatory framework for MFOs and credit unions does not foresee Codes of
 Conducts per se.
 There exist several provisions on internal complaint procedures for MFOs. The Law on MFOs
 requires in Article 35-2.12 that customers must be informed on complaint consideration
 procedures and who to contact in the MFO in case of requests, complaints and other
 considerations. However, the regulation on credit risk management for MFOs stipulates in
 Article 29 that the MFI and the clients are obliged to sign in the loan agreement that the client has
 the right to record their comments and suggestions in the book of complaints and suggestions of
 customers, which should be numbered, bound and certified by the Executive Body. The
 regulation does not refer to any other complaint procedures or requirements that internal
 procedures for complaint handling and resolution be developed in MFOs.
 For credit unions, a number of measures pertaining to dispute resolution are provided in the Law
 on Credit Unions. Overall, however, the rights are dispersed and like for MFOs, there is no
 specific requirement to have internal complaint mechanisms in place which is clearly
 communicated to the members. The separate provisions include: In case of expulsion of a
 member, Article 13.1 mandates that the members is notified 30 days in advance and has the right
 to make a statement on his/her behalf at the meeting of the Credit Union Board. The member can
 also comment and approve on a number of policies of the Credit Union during the annual
 meeting (Article 14.3), and can share any observations with the Board. In case a Steering
 Committee is established17, for credit unions with over 100 members, the Steering Committee is
 authorized to review member complaints on the activities of the Board, the Audit and the Credit
 Committees. Finally, the member, whose loan application has been rejected, can appeal the
 decision of the Credit Committee at the Board or the General Assembly18.




 17
      Article 16.
 18
      Article 17.3.


                    Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 120
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 The legal framework should clearly mandate that each financial entity should have internal
 complaint procedures in place, and that the client should receive information on whom to contact
 and steps involved for dispute resolutions. This information should be part of the factsheet
 discussed under good practice B.5, and the procedures should not involve any additional cost for
 the client and be easy to understand. The processes for internal dispute resolutions should be
 documented and timeframes established.
 The financial entity should be required to centrally collect statistics on received complaints, and
 management of the financial entity should be required to assess the provided information in
 regular intervals to determine whether changes in internal policies are required.
 Information on the received complaints should be compiled and regularly reported to the NBKR.


                           E.2. Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms

 Good Practice
      a. A system should be in place that allows consumers to seek affordable and efficient third-
         party recourse, such as an ombudsman, in the event the complaint with the non-bank
         credit institution is not resolved to the consumer’s satisfaction in accordance with internal
         procedures.
      b. The role of an ombudsman or equivalent institution in dealing with consumer disputes
         should be made known to the public.
      c. The ombudsman or equivalent institution should be impartial and act independently from
         the appointing authority, the industry and the parties to the dispute.
      d. The decisions of the ombudsman or equivalent institution should be binding upon non-
         bank credit institutions. The mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of these decisions
         should be established and publicized.
 Description
      a. So far, there exists no financial ombudsman or any institution performing similar
         functions in the Kyrgyz Republic. The NBKR has a system in place which receives
         information on complaints from clients of non-bank credit institutions. This is not a
         formal mandate of the NBKR, but much rather carried out as part of its overall oversight
         function over the sector. Clients can also launch a complaint with the Anti-Monopoly
         Agency, which so far has not received any complaints on financial services.
      b. Not applicable.
      c. Not applicable
      d. Not applicable




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 121
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                 Comparison with Good Practices


 Recommendation
 The working group considering the question of the establishment of a banking or financial
 services ombudsman should move forward with its work, concentrating initially on the question
 of what role it would be beneficial for the ombudsman’s office to play and allowing more
 specific questions of structure, funding and details of authority to be resolved on that basis. If an
 ombudsman is not found to be acceptable, other models that could be considered include a
 dispute resolution board with participation of both consumer representatives and representatives
 of the industry, or other configurations. Mechanisms should be in place requiring reporting and
 communication between the ombudsman or other institution for dispute resolution and the other
 bodies that play important roles in the banking sphere (NBKR, consumer organizations, the banks
 union) to ensure that information on complaints and problems is shared and that action can be
 taken by those bodies on a broader scale if required.


                       Section F. Consumer Empowerment


                        F.1. Broadly based Financial Capability Program

 Good Practice
      a. A broadly based program of financial education and information should be developed to
         increase the financial capability of the population.
      b. A range of organizations–including government, state agencies and non-governmental
         organizations–should be involved in developing and implementing the financial capability
         program.
      c. The government should appoint an institution such as the central bank or a financial
         regulator to lead and coordinate the development and implementation of the national
         financial capability program.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 122
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                                Comparison with Good Practices


            F.2. Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media

 Good Practice
      a. A range of initiatives should be undertaken by the relevant authority to improve the
         financial capability of the population, and especially from low-income communities.
      b. The mass media should be encouraged by the relevant authority to provide financial
         education, information and guidance to the public, including on non-bank credit
         institutions and the products and services they offer.
      c. The government should provide appropriate incentives and encourage collaboration
         between governmental agencies, the supervisory authority for non-bank credit institutions,
         the associations of non-bank credit institutions and consumer associations in the provision
         of financial education, information and guidance to consumers.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.


                            F.3. Unbiased Information for Consumers

 Good Practice
      a. Consumers, especially the most vulnerable, should have access to sufficient resources to
         enable them to understand financial products and services available to them.
      b. Supervisory authorities and consumer associations should provide, via the internet and
         printed publications, independent information on the key features, benefits and risks –
         and, where practicable, the costs – of the main types of financial products and services,
         including those offered by non-bank credit institutions.
      c. The relevant authority should adopt policies that encourage non-government
         organizations to provide consumer awareness programs to the public regarding financial
         products and services, including those offered by non-bank credit institutions.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 123
II.    Good Practices: Banking Sector                              Comparison with Good Practices


                 F.4. Consulting Consumers and the Financial Services Industry

 Good Practice
 The relevant authority should consult consumer associations and associations of non-bank credit
 institutions to help the authority develop financial capability programs that meet the needs and
 expectations of financial consumers, especially those served by non-bank credit institutions.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.



                   F.5. Measuring the Impact of Financial Literacy Initiatives

 Good Practice
      a. Policymakers, industry and consumer advocates should understand the financial
         capability of various market segments, particularly those most vulnerable to abuse.
      b. The financial capability of consumers should be measured, amongst other things, by
         broadly based household surveys that are repeated from time to time.
      c. The effectiveness of key financial capability initiatives should be evaluated by the
         relevant authority from time to time.

 Description
 See Annex A.
 Recommendation
 See Annex A.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 124
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                           Comparison with Good Practices


Annex A: Financial Education
Findings

Available empirical evidence from the Kyrgyz Republic suggests low financial capability levels,
even though comprehensive, nationally representative, and precise evidence is scarce. In 2013 a
financial literacy survey was conducted in the Kyrgyz Republic by the International Finance
Corporation (IFC) with the objective to assess people’s financial literacy levels and to obtain
information on their financial behaviors. Due to its rather small sample size and mode of interviewing
the reliability and precision of the survey results as well as the depth and complexity of the covered
topics is limited. However, the survey presents some interesting findings on people’s financial
awareness. According to this survey, for instance, 60 percent of the respondents lack awareness and
understanding of the term ‘effective interest rate’. Much less, only around 10 percent of the survey
participants were familiar with the term ‘compound interest’. Similarly, a financial literacy study
conducted by the UNDP in 2013 revealed low overall levels of financial capability.
A few financial capability enhancing activities in the Kyrgyz Republic undertaken by public or
private institutions exist, but they are largely uncoordinated and untargeted. The NBKR
conducted several financial education campaigns through the medias – newspapers and TV. Despite
news articles and press-releases, there is a weekly broadcast "The National Bank Informs" at "Birinchi
Radio" Station in Kyrgyz and Russian languages, and a TV program with the same name is
broadcasted on a monthly basis by "ElTR" channel.
Private financial institutions and industry associations, in particular in the non-banking
financial sector have also been active in initiating financial capability programs . Examples of
these are posters with the golden rules to obtain a credit which have been developed by the MFO
association or the array of programs offered by FINCA; In the last 3 years, several programs,
completed and ongoing, have been developed and implemented; from conducting trainings and
seminars to a wide array of individuals and target groups, to a radio program presented in 2 languages
(Russian and Kyrgyz), to periodic training for students and rural dwellers. Commercial banks, on the
other hand, appear to have no financial education initiatives outside of materials handed to clients to
explain their products and services as well as credit counselling sessions when issues arise with loans.
Important steps have recently been taken which are geared towards increasing coordination
between various stakeholders, including public and private institutions. (i) In 2013, a grant
agreement has been signed between NBKR and the Alliance for Financial Inclusion on the project
“Financial Literacy to Support Financial Accessibility”. Under this project a financial education
strategy is to be developed by the end of the year. (ii) By Resolution of the Kyrgyz Government No.
259-r dated 24/06/2013, a high policy-level Inter-Agency Working Group has been established in the
Kyrgyz Republic for the development and implementation of a national strategy. 19 At the same time,
to support the Inter-Agency Working Group, (iii) an expert working group has been established under
the Coordination Council for Microfinance Development (CCMD) which is tasked with the drafting of




19
  The high policy-level interagency working group is chaired by the vice prime minister. Members of the group include the Deputy Chairman of NBRK,
the Deputy Ministers of Finance, Economy, and Education and Science in the Kyrgyz Republic, the Deputy Chairman of the State Service for Regulation
and Supervision of the Financial Market of the Kyrgyz Republic, as well as the Executive Management of MFI and banks associations.



                    Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 125
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                           Comparison with Good Practices


the national strategy.20 In addition to these efforts, (iv) another working group has been established
under the banking association.
Findings of four focus group discussions with financially active adults suggest a number of
priority areas for the national strategy. These results can by no means be interpreted as being
nationally representative (see Box 1). They are, however, indicative of pressing areas which deserve
policy attention. According to the analysis of the focus group discussions, participants show strengths
in performing simple financial calculations, but struggle to understand basic financial concepts such as
compound and simple interest or the purpose of insurance products. Other major findings are that
participants appear to master the task of managing their day-to-day finances, but they struggle with
setting funds aside for unexpected and old age expenses. The results further suggest that consumers do
not widely report complaints or other conflicts with financial providers.
Box 1. Focus group methodology

 Four focus groups discussions have been conducted (10 participants each) by the firm M-Vector with the view
 of gaining quick insights on the topics of discussion. Due to the non-random selection procedure and the
 limited number of participants the results of the focus group discussions cannot be extrapolated to the overall
 population, they may be indicative, however, for the most pressuring needs for policy action.
 The focus group discussions conducted utilize a qualitative methodology that seeks to delineate knowledge,
 attitudes, motivations, skills, and behaviors of the participants with respect to managing their finances. In
 particular the assessment methodology has been designed to enable rich and detailed discussions about
 participants’ knowledge, attitudes, skills and behaviors related to day-to-day money managing, planning for
 the future, choosing and using financial products and services, as well as their experiences and levels of
 satisfaction with different type of financial service providers. In addition, respondents were also asked to
 participate in a short financial literacy quiz at the end of the discussions to assess their basic numeracy skills
 and awareness of financial concepts.
 To provide a basis for comparative analysis across different segments, a sample of two communities within
 the country has been selected. In selecting the data collection sites, the main criterion was the disaggregation
 of rural and urban areas. In order to get an indication of financial capability levels among urban residents, two
 focus group discussions were held in Bishkek, which is not only the biggest city but also the financial center
 of the country. In order to factor in the view of rural populations an ordinary village in the South of the
 country, called “Communism village’ was selected. The major occupancies of this village’s residents are crop
 and animal farming, which are typical for rural dwellers all over the country. According to the local
 authorities the portion of people who leave this community to migrate to another country for labor purposes is
 quite substantial.
 In addition to these geographical considerations, participants within each of these communities were selected
 according to certain criteria that are expected to correlate with different levels of financial capability. Within
 each community, one focus group was conducted with adults aged 18 or more and one focus group with
 migrant workers who left the Kyrgyz Republic and came back home on a temporary basis. Additionally, in
 each of the 4 focus there were participants of both genders and of different age.
 The participants for the focus groups were recruited by using a random walk selection method and by
 applying a brief filter survey during the recruitment. With a view of covering different districts of the selected
 data collection sites, recruiters operated in districts assigned beforehand. Moreover, suitable participants were
 identified through a short screening questionnaire. Only adults who met the aforementioned criteria were
 invited to participate in the focus group discussions.

20
 The financial literacy working group under the CCMD comprises experts from four government agencies, four industry associations, and four
multilateral and bilateral donor organizations.



                    Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 126
          Annex I. Financial Education                                                                                         Comparison with Good Practices


          The focus groups discussions reveal certain subgroups of the population to be specifically
          targeted with financial capability enhancing programs (see Box 2). As shown in Figure 3 and 4, a
          wide gap seems to exist between the financial awareness levels of rural and urban dwellers as well as
          low and high income segments. Similarly, Kyrgyz participants who migrated for labor purposes to
          other countries, answered on average less financial literacy related questions correctly than those who
          did not migrate to another country. Compared to non-migrants, migrant participants also appear to be
          more challenged with managing and monitoring their higher incomes and expenses.
          Box 2. Findings of focus group discussions

          According to the analysis of the focus group discussions, participants were able to answer on average 2.7 out
          of 7 financial literacy related quiz questions which cover basic calculus and financial concepts such as interest
          rates, inflation, compound interest, the main purpose of insurance products, and deposit insurance awareness.
          As can be seen in Figure 1, around 2 out of 5 participants were able to correctly answer 2 financial literacy
          questions. A similar portion of the participants achieved a score between 3 and 5 questions, whereas only 3
          percent of the participant was able to provide correct responses to 6 and no one answered all 7 questions
          correctly.
          A deeper exploration into the type of correctly answered financial literacy questions reveals that participants
          show strengths in performing simple financial calculations but struggle to understand basic financial concepts
          (see Figure 2). While around 90 percent of the participants were able to perform simple divisions, much less,
          around 50 percent demonstrate understanding of the concept of inflation, and only 15 percent understand
          simple interest of the main purpose of insurance products. The largest knowledge gap is found in the area of
          deposit insurance awareness. Only 10 percent are aware of the maximum amount covered by the Deposit
          Insurance Agency in case a bank goes bankrupt.
          Vulnerable groups who struggle the most in understanding basic financial concepts are more likely to live in a
          rural habitat, to be a low income earner, and to be a migrant. As shown in Figure 3, rural residents answered
          on average 1.9 financial literacy quiz questions correctly as compared to their urban counterpart group who
          answered 3.5 questions correctly. Likewise, while those who live on low incomes answered 2.5 questions
          correctly, high income earners demonstrate a better understanding of basic financial concepts by answering 5
          questions correctly. The survey results also suggest an awareness gap between permanent residents and
          people who migrated for labor purposes to other countries.
           Figure 1: Distribution of correct FL quiz answers                                   Figure 2: FL quiz overview
                                    41.03
            40




                                                                                                   Deposit Insurance Awareness

                                                                                                   Simple Interest
            30




                                                                                                   Purpose of Insurance
Percent




                                                                                                   Compound Interest
            20




                                                  17.95
                       15.38
                                                              12.82                                Inflation
                                                                       10.26
            10




                                                                                                   Compare Bargain

                                                                                   2.564
                                                                                                   Simple Division
             0




                   1            2                  3             4             5           6   0               20         40         60          80   100
                                            Financial Literacy Score                                                 Correct Answer Percentage




                               Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 127
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                       Comparison with Good Practices


Figure 3: Correct FL quiz answers urban vs. rural                        Figure 4: Correct FL quiz answers by
                                                                         income

                                                                                                                5.00
   4




                                                                         5
               3.53




                              Average Financial Literacy Score




                                                                         4
   3




                                                                         3
                                                                                      2.57
                                                                 1.90
   2




                                                                         2
   1




                                                                         1
   0




                                                                         0
              urban                                              rural         Income <20000 KGS         Income >20000 KGS




Another major finding is that participants appear to be very skilled in managing their day-to-day finances and in
prioritizing their spending on essentials. All participants stated that they primarily spend their money on regular
expenses while using the funds left, if any, for other purposes. For instance, a middle-aged woman from
Bishkek stated: “First of all, we allocate money for utilities. If an electricity bill is not paid in the first three
days, power supply would be cut off – so we have to pay it. Second we buy food. However, if we have some
food left, we can spend less.”
Compared to permanent residents, for migrant participants it appeared to be more difficult to cope with
budgeting and living within their means. The inability to budget properly forced the migrant participants to
borrow money from their colleagues, housemates or employers.
An area the majority of participants seemed to struggle with is setting funds aside for unexpected and old age
expenses. Only 8 out of 40 participants stated that they put money aside for particular needs or unforeseen
expenses. Mainly urban dwellers were inclined to make savings, due to the regularity of their income streams,
unlike rural residents whose incomes were most of the times seasonal, tied to the harvest.
The focus group results further suggest that consumers do not widely report complaints or other conflicts with
providers of financial services. None of the participants said that he or she ever experienced a conflict with a
financial service provider. Although participants heard of fraud such as pyramid schemes, they personally, or
their family members did not face such violations.
Rigorous assessments of the assessments of financial capability enhancing initiatives have been
scarce so far. International experience shows that increasing the number of financial capability
enhancing programs does not always lead to desired outcomes in terms of improved financial
capability levels among the targeted populations. It is therefore crucial to identify programs which are
most effective and should receive wide support.

Recommendations
The development of the envisaged financial education strategy requires extensive coordination
between different working groups and a wide consultation process including relevant
stakeholders from the public, private and non-profit sector. To ensure ownership and provide
focus and momentum in the process of developing the national strategy, extensive coordination and
communication is needed between the interagency working group chaired by the vice prime minister
and the expert group established under the CCMD which is tasked with the actual drafting of the


                 Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 128
Annex I. Financial Education                                             Comparison with Good Practices


concept and a subsequent national financial education strategy. Furthermore, to avoid overlaps and
duplications, better coordination is needed between the expert group under the CCMD and the
financial literacy working group established by the banking association. It is recommended to conduct
monthly coordination meetings between the technical level working groups as well as quarterly
briefing meetings with the high-level Inter-Agency Working Group.
Consider extending membership of the CCMD financial literacy expert group to a broader
range of stakeholders. The expert group under the CCMD needs to comprise a wide range of
stakeholders to ensure wider consensus building about the importance of financial education,
knowledge exchange, and most importantly to secure overall support and funding of the development
and implementation of the strategy. There are, however, a plethora of other stakeholders from public,
private and non-profit sectors which could provide additional insights to the working group (e.g. the
deposit insurance fund, the credit bureau, the antimonopoly agency, etc.). A consultation with a wider
range of stakeholders would also be helpful to mitigate the risk that scarce resources are inefficiently
allocated or certain needs in the population remain unaddressed.
Commercial banks can play an essential role in supporting the development and implementation
of the strategy. The role of commercial banks in enhancing financial capability, not only of their
current but also their potential future clients, needs to be further promoted. Sharing of national and
international practices and examples of successful financial education programs with bank executives
may help to encourage banks in Kyrgyz Republic to become more active in supporting or delivering
financial capability enhancing programs.
It is recommended that the strategy and subsequent programs give special emphasis to
migrants, rural and low income populations. Given that total remittances transfers (both inflows
and outflows) account for 42% of the GDP and that migrants demonstrate weaknesses in the area of
understanding of financial concepts as well as managing their day-to-day finances and planning ahead,
a potential target group of the financial education strategy could be migrants and their families. Simple
actions such as providing guidance on budgeting, record-keeping and financial planning can help
migrant workers and their families gaining control over their financial lives and making realistic plans
for the future. Moreover, the results of the focus group discussions suggest the need to extend
financial capability enhancing programs to rural and low income segments of the population.
To validate the focus group results and create a baseline against which the impact of financial
capability enhancing initiatives can be measured, it is recommended to conduct a comprehensive
and nationally representative financial capability survey. This financial capability survey should
cover awareness and understanding of basic financial concepts and products. Since knowledge does
not always translate into proper action, it should also capture attitudes, such as impulsiveness,
farsightedness and action orientation as well as behaviors related to day-to-day money management,
planning for unexpected and old age expenses, choosing and using financial products and using
information and advice. In order to get a better understanding if people in the Kyrgyz Republic benefit
from the financial products they use, it is further recommended to measure their reported incidences of
conflicts with financial service providers and their levels of satisfaction with different types of
financial products they used.




              Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 129
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                                  Comparison with Good Practices


Representative, reliable, and precise survey results which effectively inform policy objectives
require careful consideration to be given to the questionnaire design, the sampling methodology,
the mode of interviewing, and data analysis and interpretation. In particular, careful consideration
should be given to the size of the sample of individuals to be interviewed, the use of standard
probability sampling methods, the design and customization of the questionnaire, the training of
supervisors/enumerators in administering the survey, the conduct of a small pilot survey, the use of
face-to-face interviews, the monitoring of the fieldwork, and the proper analysis and interpretation of
the collected data.
In addition to the financial capability survey, the design of financial education programs should
be informed by the results of rigorous impact assessments of similar programs in other
countries. Even though the impact of financial education programs is context dependent and may vary
within and between countries, relying on previous experience is expected to increase the effectiveness
of newly designed programs. For instance, recent research shows that financial education works best,
when delivered to adults during teachable moments21.
Financial capability enhancing initiatives should be tested initially on a small scale and only be
rolled out upon rigorous evaluation of their positive impacts. International experience shows that
increasing the number of financial capability enhancing programs does not always lead to desired
outcomes in terms of enhanced financial capability levels among the targeted populations. It is
therefore crucial to identify programs which are most effective. When properly done, a Randomized
Control Trial (RCT) is the best possible methodology for identifying the causal impact of a financial
education initiative.22 Only those programs which prove to be most effective should receive wide
support.




21
     Teachable moments are times in people’s lives when they are more likely to be receptive to new information.
22
   In this method, similar to a clinical trial, participants are randomly assigned to treatment and control groups, whereby the treatment group receives the
financial capability intervention and the control group does not. The control group forms then the basis of comparison against which the change in
outcomes of the treatment group can be assessed.



                       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 130
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                         Comparison with Good Practices


Overview of Financial Education Activities

                             Lead and
      Initiative                               Target Group                         Description                           Status
                           stakeholders
General FL                    NBKR                 KGZ          This is a series of educational projects to enhance      Planned
education initiatives                            Population     financial literacy of the population, as well as to
                                                                provide details on specific operations of the central
                                                                bank. According to the program, special activities,
                                                                which include workshops, trainings, round tables,
                                                                meetings with the NBKR's management, shall be
                                                                conducted regularly, as well as include lectures and
                                                                discussions with journalists on topical economic and
                                                                financial subjects. Also there is a weekly broadcast
                                                                "The National Bank Informs" at "Birinchi Radio"
                                                                Station in Kyrgyz and Russian languages, and a TV
                                                                program with the same name is broadcast on a
                                                                monthly basis by "ElTR" channel. Each issue covers
                                                                topical subjects
Financial literacy to     NBKR and AFI                          Activities include:                                      Planned
support financial                                                      To conduct a study on demand and supply in
accessibility project                                                   the sphere of financial literacy. For this
                                                                        purpose the project budget envisaged hiring a
                                                                        local company capable to conduct such a
                                                                        study.
                                                                       To develop the National Concept for
                                                                        enhancement of financial literacy of the on
                                                                        enhancement of KR population. A local
                                                                        consultant is expected to be engaged to
                                                                        implement this project component.
                                                                       To conduct 'training of trainers' activities.
                                                                        The project envisages the engagement of a
                                                                        training company (for T-o-T) and the


                                             Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 131
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                            Comparison with Good Practices


                                                                          selection of a local company operating in the
                                                                          area of financial literacy enhancement (for
                                                                          further involvement).
Seminar on                NBKR and World              NBKR         Assistance with the development of the national         Completed
protection of                 Bank                 Officials and   program for the enhancement of financial literacy
consumer rights and                               members of the
financial literacy                                 interagency
                                                  working group
Workshop on               NBKR and UNDP               NBKR       Workshop                                                  Completed
enhancing financial                                Officials and
literacy                                          members of the
                                                   interagency
                                                  working group
Financial institutions   NBKR, MFO and the            MFOs       Organized and conduct joint trainings on financial        Completed
education campaign            ICCO                               literacy and training of in-house trainers for
                                                                 customers of small and medium-size micro-
                                                                 financing organizations. Topics aimed at managing a
                                                                 household's budget (income, expenditures), credit
                                                                 debt management, understanding of interest and
                                                                 interest rates, assessment of own solvency and
                                                                 planning of debt payments. Financial pyramid info,
                                                                 family budget (management and planning methods),
                                                                 savings and the Borrower's Golden Rules. Also
                                                                 engaged several micro-financing organizations, such
                                                                 as "Agrocredit Plus", "Ak-Shoola", "Arysh Kench",
                                                                 ABN Credit Unions, "Kopilka", several NGOs,
                                                                 including the TES-Center.
Credit and savings           The German                KGZ       Implement a training program in 38 rayons of the           Ongoing
campaign                  Development Bank          Population   country on such issues as obtaining credits and
                         (KfW) in cooperation                    savings for rural population
                          with the Agency for
                              Community
                           Development and

                                                Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 132
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                                Comparison with Good Practices


                          Investment of the
                          Kyrgyz Republic
                               (ARIS)
General awareness          Banking union               Children,      Will be prepared and held:                              Under
and trust campaigns                                 youth, teachers   - Seminars and workshops;                            development
                                                       parents,       - Handouts
                                                     women, rural     - Special events on the topic of financial literacy
                                                      population,     - Specialized websites on financial literacy
                                                    poor and trade    These activities will increase awareness of the
                                                      union reps      activities and trust. To acquire basic skills for
                                                                      avoiding the risks associated with the activities of
                                                                      scammers and unscrupulous players of credit and
                                                                      finance
Financial Education             AMFI                  Beginning       It has developed TV animated ads, posters with the Completed
Work                                                 Entrepreneurs    golden rules to obtain a credit, as well as the
                                                                      guidelines on financial literacy for entrepreneurs-
                                                                      beginners.
Various financial          Large MFCs (e.g.           Clients and     Training of trainer programs, individual client        Ongoing
education initiatives          Molbulak,              Employees       training program on loan basics, interest rate
                          Companion, Salym,                           calculations, repayment structure, etc.
                                  etc)
Project:                  CJSC Micro-Credit            Entire         Launched a project on basics of financial literacy to    Completed
Enhancement of FL          Company FINCA,           population/not    educate not only its active borrower, but the
in KGZ - FL             under the guidance by         specified       population     in   general.     Financial    literacy
Training programs        the Secretariat of the                       fundamentals:     aimed      at    developing      the
                          Steering Council on                         understanding of how it is important to be able to
                        Implementation of the                         manage financial resources, keep records for
                           Micro-Financing                            household purposes, understand the need for
                                Strategy                              savings, to correctly choose financial instruments
                                                                      available    in    banks      and    micro-financing
                                                                      organizations, and for active and potential borrowers
                                                                      to be aware of the responsibility when obtaining a


                                                  Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 133
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                    Comparison with Good Practices


                                                          loan.
                                                          Initiatives: developed a special training, hand-outs in
                                                          the state and official languages, trained corporate
                                                          trainers. The training is conducted in both languages
                                                          for free. Over-lending risks, financial pyramid
                                                          schemes and how they operate, Radio programs-
                                                          program “Saramjalduu Akcha” in the Kyrgyz
                                                          language is broadcast every Tuesday at 12:30 and is
                                                          re-broadcast at the same time but on Thursdays by
                                                          “Sanjyra” radio (107.4 FM). The program “Literate
                                                          Money” is broadcast by “Echo of Moscow –
                                                          Bishkek” radio (103.3 FM) each Tuesday at 8:30 am
                                                          and re-broadcast at the same time on Thursdays.
Financial Literacy                                        Plans to conduct 300 trainings covering up to 6,000-      Planned
                           CJSC "MCC         KGZ
programs                                                  7,000 people among local population, as well as
                            FINCCA"        Population
                                                          students
General financial                                         Trainings on financial literacy are through 26            Ongoing
literacy trainings                                        branch offices on a continuous basis. In 2012 the
                                                          company conducted 116 trainings in all regions of
                                                          the KR, covering 112 settlements and 2,642 people;
                           CJSC "MCC         KGZ
                                                          35 corporate trainers have been trained. In 2013, 140
                            FINCCA"        Population
                                                          trainings in 129 populated areas throughout
                                                          Kyrgyzstan; 52 corporate trainers have been trained.
                                                          Financial literacy trainings have been attended by
                                                          2,953 people.
Newspaper                                                 Materials on financial instruments through mass           Ongoing
campaigns                                                 media. Initiative: long-term weekly publications are
                                                          issued in the Kyrgyz language in the printed version
                           CJSC "MCC         KGZ          of the “De-Facto” newspaper and in a separate rubric
                            FINCCA"        Population     of the “Vechernyi Bishkek” newspaper web-site in
                                                          the Russian language. From time to time articles
                                                          aimed at financial literacy enlightenment are
                                                          published in other newspapers: “The Financier”,

                                       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 134
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                          Comparison with Good Practices


                                                                 “Slovo Kyrgyzstana”.




Higher education           CJSC "MCC               Students      Agreement       with     Kyrgyz-Russian       Slavonic Planned
course introduction         FINCCA"                              University, university teachers to develop the course
campaigns                                                        - “Personal Finance Management” for students based
                                                                 on materials on financial literacy;introduce a course
                                                                 of lectures on the subject of “Financial Literacy” in
                                                                 other universities of the republic; launch a project to
                                                                 enhance financial literacy of journalists writing
                                                                 economic articles. A special contest among
                                                                 journalists for the best economic article/program in
                                                                 printed, electronic mass media, as well as on TV and
                                                                 radio is expected to be conducted.
Corporate financial        CJSC "MCC                KGZ          The advertising and information newspaper Ongoing
literacy program          FINCCA" and             Population     “Karakolka” is FINCA’s partner under the corporate
                       regional print media                      “Financial Literacy” project. The newspaper is
                                                                 published in Karakol and distributed throughout
                                                                 Issyk-Kul oblast. It will publish materials on key
                                                                 concepts in the financial sphere, the culture of
                                                                 savings, the use of new payment systems, etc.
Public campaigns           CJSC "MCC                KGZ          The newspaper plans to publish about 50 materials Planned
                          FINCCA" and             Population     to build up financial literacy in Kyrgyz and Russian
                       regional print media                      languages. The “Karakolka” newspaper’s circulation
                                                                 is 5,000 copies each week. A similar cooperation is
                                                                 expected with printed media in Chui and Naryn
                                                                 oblasts. Intend to provide advice on money
                                                                 management, deposits and loans. Materials
                                                                 published, brochures, articles and distributed to
                                                                 people on borrowers rights, jointly with AMFI give


                                              Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 135
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                           Comparison with Good Practices


                                                                 out printed material, videos on stages of obtaining a
                                                                 loan




Project: increased    EBRD and Oiko credit         KGZ           Financial literacy fundamentals training. Developed Completed
awareness of          through grant to CJSC      Population      training and content based on NBKR requirements.
borrowers on the         "MCC FINCCA"
problem of excess
borrowing
Financial Education   The Swiss government        All rural      Involvement of citizens in the budget process and          Ongoing
for the poor            through the policy      municipalities   improving services in rural areas. Long scale project
                      development institute         KR           (provided training for investment skills, financial
                                                                 planning).
Public broadcast        IRG (International         Students,     Preparation and broadcasting of 10 short public             Not clear
initiative              Resources Group)            young        service announcements, brochures on financial                 ( but
                      implemented by NGO        professionals,   literacy in Kyrgyz and Russian languages.                  previously
                          "Club Private           mid-level                                                                scheduled to
                           Investors",           employees,                                                                 start 2013)
                                                beginners and
                                                 experienced
                                                investors, top
                                                  managers.
Various initiatives     Policy development           KGZ         General financial literacy including various activities    Ongoing
                              institute           Population     on financial literacy, including special training
                                                                 courses (for journalists, trainers), round tables,
                                                                 contest, publications
Media and NGO            CIPE (Center for          KGZ           Studying the experience of Kazakhstan in the              Completed
initiative             international private     Population      implementation of the state program to improve
                      enterprise) through the                    financial literacy / study tour for representatives of
                            Press club                           media and NGOs


                                             Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 136
Annex I. Financial Education                                                                              Comparison with Good Practices


Public financial         CIPE through the              KGZ           Recognizing the need for a comprehensive program        Completed
literacy campaign       development Policy           Population      to improve public financial literacy / International
                          Institute, Public                          Conference, 11 countries / state system of education,
                        service for financial                        business, NGOs, media
                         market supervision
                        KR, Private Investors
                          Club, Press Club
                                KSE)
Conferences on the       CIPE through the           Central Asia     International Conferences on the role of the media      Completed
media’s role in         development Policy           journalists     in improving financial literacy achievement of social
improving financial           Institute                              stability and sustainable development of the, 10
literacy, Journalists                                                countries / media, business associations, financial
Economic Forum                                                       sector, development of recommendations and
                                                                     agreements in the field of Economic Journalism and
                                                                     mass increase opportunities, providing access to
                                                                     journalists from Central Asia to expert sources of
                                                                     information on the web, etc.
Training of trainers     Policy development          All market      • Training of trainers "How to organize business        Completed
and master class.          institute through         participants    financial consulting?"
                        professional financial                       • Workshop "Why professional financial market
                        advisor (Moscow) and                         participants unscrupulous financial advisers?"
                           the University of
                         Finance, Ministry of
                                Finance
Media training          Soros Foundation and       Journalists and   Training journalists on financial literacy topics       Completed
                         partners (press club,      other media      amongst others. About 100 training days, about
                                 UCA)                participants    1,000 participants, more than 700 articles from 80
                                                                     authors.
Source: NBKR, Microfinance Council, MFOs (2013)




                                                 Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 137
