                                                              90422 v1




Kyrgyz Republic:
Diagnostic Review of
Consumer Protection and
Financial Literacy
  Volume I: Key Findings and Recommendations




                                                           May, 2014
Financial and Private Sector Development Vice-Presidency
Europe and Central Asia Region
Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection Service Line
Washington, DC
This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
Acknowledgments                                         Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review



                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Diagnostic Study was produced by a team comprising Johanna Jaeger (Mission Leader
and Financial Sector Specialist), Siegfried Zottel (co-Mission Leader and Financial Sector
Specialist), Mairam Usupova (World Bank Senior Financial Sector Specialist), Sarah Reynolds
(Banking Sector Consultant), Ilka Funke (Microfinance Sector Consultant), and Adetola
Adenuga (Financial Analyst). Technical guidance was provided by Samuel Munzele Maimbo
(Lead Financial Sector Specialist, ECSF2, and Task Team leader), with oversight provided by
Douglas Pearce (Acting Service Line Manager, FFIMS) and Paloma Casero (Sector Manager,
ECSF1).
Peer review comments were provided by Nataliya Mylenko (Senior Financial Sector
Specialist) and Cedric Mousset (Lead Financial Sector Specialist).
The team expresses its appreciation to the Kyrgyz authorities for their cooperation during the
preparation of the Review. The project team would like to thank all those who so generously
contributed to the final report.
The Review was prepared as part of the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO)
Trust Fund on “Financial Sector Development”.




         Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | i
Table of Content                                                                  Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review


Table of Content
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ........................................................................... 3
PREFACE ........................................................................................................................... 4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................ 6
I.        CONTEXT FOR CPFL IN KYRGYZ REPUBLIC ................................................. 11
II.       FRAMEWORK FOR FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION IN KYRGYZ
          REPUBLIC ............................................................................................................. 17
III.      CONSUMER DISCLOSURE ................................................................................. 23
IV.       BUSINESS PRACTICES ........................................................................................ 25
V.        DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS ............................................................ 28
VI.       FINANCIAL EDUCATION .................................................................................... 30


Tables
Table 1: Key recommendations .......................................................................................... 8
Table 2: Adults with a Financial Product at a Formal Financial Institution ..................... 11

Boxes
Box 1. Findings of Global Survey on Financial Consumer Protection............................. 13
Box 2. Relationship between financial literacy and inclusion .......................................... 15
Box 3. Key findings of focus group discussions............................................................... 16
Box 4. Impact assessments of financial capability targeted at migrants and their families
........................................................................................................................................... 32




       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | ii
Abbreviations and Acronyms                        Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review



                   ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AFI               Alliance for Financial Inclusion
AMFI              Association of Microfinance Institutions
CCMD              Coordination Council for Microfinance Development
CPFL              Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
EU                European Union
GDP               Gross Domestic Product
IAIS              International Association of Insurance Supervisors
IFC               International Finance Cooperation
IOSCO             International Organization of Securities Commissions
IRG               International Resources Group
KfW               Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau (English Translation)
MFO               Microfinance Organization
MoU               Memorandum of Understanding
MTO               Money Transfer Operators
NBKR              National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic
NGO               Non-governmental organization
OECD              Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
RCT               Randomized Control Trial
UNDP              United Nations Development Program
WB                World Bank




  Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 3
                                                 PREFACE
The Diagnostic Review for Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (CPFL) provides a
detailed assessment of the institutional, legal and regulatory framework for consumer
protection in two segments of the financial sector: banking and microfinance1. The review was
undertaken in response to a request for technical assistance in the field of financial consumer
protection made by the National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic (NBKR) in November 2012.
A World Bank (WB) mission visited Bishkek from February 27-March 7, 2014 to prepare the
review. An Aide Memoire was prepared in the field highlighting preliminary findings and
recommendations and shared with official counterparts for comments. The objectives of the
CPFL Review were: (i) to assess the existing consumer protection and financial literacy
framework by reviewing laws, regulations, and practices in Kyrgyz Republic compared to
international good practices; and (ii) to provide recommendations on ways to improve the
level of financial consumer protection and financial literacy in the country. As the second part
of the review, four focus group discussions have been conducted during the mission with the
view of gaining quick insights into people’s knowledge and understanding of financial
concepts and products, their attitudes, financial behaviors and experience in using financial
products.
The CPFL Review is part of the World Bank’s Program on Consumer Protection and
Financial Literacy. It seeks to identify key measures in strengthening financial consumer
protection, with the ultimate aim of increasing the availability and transparency of financial
information, helping build consumers’ trust in the financial sector and expanding their
capacity to wisely use financial services.
CPFL Reviews against Good Practices have been conducted by the World Bank in a plethora
of countries including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Latvia, Lithuania, Malawi, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, South
Africa, Slovakia, Tajikistan, Tanzania and Ukraine.
The main objective of the Review is to assess the legal/regulatory and institutional
frameworks for financial consumer protection in a country, with reference to international best
practices. The Review addresses the following issues: 1. Institutional Arrangements, 2. Legal
and Regulatory Framework, 3. Disclosure, 4. Business Practices, 5. Dispute Resolution
Mechanisms, and 6. Financial Education.




1
    These include microfinance organizations (MFOs) and credit unions.
Abbreviations and Acronyms                                    Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review


The Review is based on compliance with a set of Good Practices for Financial Consumer
Protection2 which was developed by the World Bank since 2006. They provide a set of good
practices based on in-depth country level reviews of consumer protection and financial literacy
conducted by the World Bank as well as international benchmarks, such as the principles released by
the Basel Committee, IOSCO and IAIS, and the OECD recommendations as well as laws, regulations
and codes of business practices from the EU, United States, Australia, Canada, France, Ireland,
Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and South Africa.




2
 http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Misc/Good-practices-for-financial-
consumer-protection.pdf.



         Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 5
                               EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.      Consumer protection and financial literacy (CPFL) are key to increasing
responsible access to financial services—this is particularly relevant to Kyrgyz Republic,
where access to formal financial services is still lower than the regional average. Given
the relatively low levels of financial inclusion in Kyrgyz Republic a number of initiatives are
currently underway to ensure that more people are brought into the financial system. While
increased access to finance can result in significant economic and societal benefits, it can be
neutral or even harmful if consumers: (i) cannot exercise their rights as consumers; (ii) cannot
select the financial products that suit them best and (iii) are not protected against frauds and
other market abuses.

2.      Despite the lack of a clear legal mandate for financial consumer protection, the
National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic (NBKR) has been taking important steps to
regulate and supervise consumer protection in relation to banking and microfinance
clients, for which it should be commended. However, new provisions are not organized in a
coherent way and the sheer volume of new regulation raises concerns regarding supervisory
capacity to enforce. It will be important to continue efforts to streamline and clarify NBKR’s
role in consumer protection through (i) support for the new NBKR consumer protection unit
through the allocation of appropriate resources and regulatory and capacity building
measures, and (ii) a focus on ensuring that the new Banking Code contains a clear and
appropriate NBKR mandate and tools in this area. At the same time it will be important to
strengthen cooperation with other stakeholders such as the Antimonopoly Agency as well as
industry and consumer associations.
3.      A very significant amount of work has either recently been completed or is
currently in process for the establishment of the legal and regulatory framework in a
variety of important areas. These include a series of regulations on risk management of
various kinds, rules on lending processes and disclosures, draft legislation on credit reporting,
draft legislation covering remittances and electronic payments, amendments of foreclosure
processes, changes in administrative penalties, and others. NBKR, as well as the other
stakeholders and participants in these processes, should be commended for their attention to
these important issues and the substantial effort contributed. Nonetheless, progress has in
some important areas been fragmented and piecemeal. This may lead to gaps in coverage and
create difficulties for both financial institutions and consumers in understanding and
application of the rules.
Executive Summary                                       Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review



4.      Important steps have been taken in enhancing disclosure requirements,
especially for microfinance institutions. However, the plethora of disclosures is likely to
confuse and overwhelm consumers so there is a need for further standardization.
Consideration should therefore be given to simplifying and streamlining disclosures by
requiring financial institutions to provide their clients with a standardized ‘Key Facts
Statement’. This product information sheet should clearly indicate all fees and charges related
to the financial product or service, as well as the mechanisms for recourse available to the
consumer in the event of any complaint. Publication of the effective interest rates offered by
various financial institutions on the NBKR website, with parallel distribution mechanisms for
consumers without internet access, can help bring down interest rates as well as spur more
effective competition among financial institutions.
5.      While there is some evidence that interest rates for microfinance loans have gone
down since the introduction of the usury law, several negative tendencies in the market
call for a careful impact assessment of the usury law while comparing its cost
effectiveness with alternative measures targeted at increased transparency and disclosure. At
the same time, the increasing number of unregulated pawnshops poses risks to consumers. It
is therefore recommended to bring pawnshops under the consumer protection regime of
NBKR. The low level of capacity of microfinance management and staff noted during the
mission requires enhanced availability and quality of training offered to credit officers.
Developing and further strengthening industry Codes of Conduct would further benefit
consumers.
6.      Legal rules do exist establishing some requirements and standards for internal
complaints handling but these are contained in a number of legal and regulatory acts
and do not form a coherent whole. When internal complaints handling fails to resolve a
consumer problem, there is no easily accessible alternative that consumers can use. It is
recommended that NBKR develop and adopt normative legal regulation defining appropriate
internal complaints handling procedures for banks and non-bank credit institutions and
require submission of periodic complaints statistics. Further steps should also be taken in
developing a financial ombudsman scheme for Kyrgyz Republic in order to address the
current lack of easily accessible and speedy alternatives available to consumers.
7.      A few activities geared towards improving low levels of financial capability exist
in the Kyrgyz Republic, but they are largely uncoordinated and untargeted. Important
steps have been taken towards a more concerted approach and the development of an over-
arching financial education strategy. To provide focus and momentum in the process of
developing the national strategy for financial education extensive coordination and
communication is needed between the recently established interagency working group chaired
by the vice prime minister, the Coordination Council for Microfinance Development
(CCMD), and the expert group under the CCMD. Consulting with a wide range of
stakeholders would allow the expert group under the CCMD to ensure wider consensus
building on the importance of financial education, knowledge exchange, and overall support
and funding of the implementation of the strategy. Preliminary results of focus group
discussions conducted during the mission indicate that potential groups to be targeted in the
strategy and subsequent programs are migrants and their families as well as rural populations.



       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 7
Executive Summary                                                 Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review


8.      The recommendations for strengthening consumer protection and financial
literacy are summarized in the table below and are described throughout this report.
Further technical analysis can be found in Volume II which provides a detailed
assessment of each relevant segment compared to the Good Practices. During the coming
1-2 years, work on the new Banking Code presents an important opportunity to clarify the
NBKR mandate for consumer protection and to establish clear and appropriate rules and
standards for bank conduct across all areas of importance to consumer (client) protection. It
will also be important that NBKR finalizes steps to form its new consumer protection unit.
Plans to further expand coverage of the deposit insurance scheme should be continued
preceded by a rigorous analysis of the implications of such an expansion. Passage of the draft
law on credit histories will be required to allow the creation of enforceable legal standards in
the credit reporting industry. The NBKR should, in connection with the passage of the draft
law on the payments system, consider the issuance of rules containing minimum standards for
consumer protection in relation to money transfers and mobile banking services. Moreover,
further development of specific disclosure requirements should be a focus as well as the
establishment of an ombudsman scheme. To ensure ownership and provide focus and
momentum in the process of developing the national financial education strategy coordination
and communication between all stakeholders should be further enhanced.

Table 1: Key recommendations

     Recommendations                                                             Responsible         Term3

     Institutional Arrangements
    Strengthen NBKR’s role further in consumer protection by ensuring that
                                                                             NBKR, government         MT
    a clear mandate is included in the draft Banking Code.
                                                                             NBKR, State
    Establish a formal mechanism for cooperation between the State
                                                                             Antimonopoly             MT
    Antimonopoly Agency and NBKR.
                                                                             Agency
    Finalize the establishment of a new financial consumer protection unit
                                                                             NBKR                      ST
    within the NBKR that is separate from prudential regulation.
    Strengthen capacity of consumer associations and include them in         Government, NBKR,
                                                                                                      LT
    consultative processes.                                                  donors




3
 ST, short term, indicates action can be undertaken in 0-6 months. MT, medium term, indicates 6 months-1 year.
LT, long term, indicates 1+ years.




           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 8
Executive Summary                                                Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review


 Legal and Regulatory Framework
In light of the current work on the draft Banking Code, use the unique
opportunity to establish adequate rules and standards across all areas of
                                                                             NBKR, government        MT
importance to consumers, and bring more coherence to the normative
legal framework.
Pass the law on credit histories in order to allow for creation of
enforceable legal standards in the credit reporting industry, including      Government, NBKR        ST
standards for the protection of consumers.
Assess impact of expansion of coverage of the current deposit insurance      Deposit Insurance
                                                                                                     ST
scheme to individual entrepreneurs, credit unions and MFOs.                  Agency
In connection with the passage of the draft law on the payments system,
consider the issuance of rules containing minimum standards for              NBKR, government        MT
consumer protection in relation to money transfers.
Begin developing rules and instructions regulating the provision of mobile
                                                                             NBKR                   MT-LT
banking services to consumers.
Disclosure
Introduce Key Fact Statements for lending products and test consumer
                                                                             NBKR                    MT
understanding of the disclosure material.
Take measures to enhance disclosure and transparency of loan terms and
                                                                             NBKR, industry
conditions which would help to bring down interest rates as well as
                                                                             associations,
spurring more effective competition among financial institutions by                                  MT
                                                                             consumer
uploading effective interest rates of products on NBKR website with
                                                                             associations, media
parallel distribution mechanisms for consumers without internet access.
Revise advertising rules to ensure that they are consistent and clear and
that their application produces information that consumers can readily       NBKR                    LT
understand and compare.
Business Practices
Reconsider the introduction of interest rate caps due to their limited
effectiveness and the potential to drive lenders into informality and
                                                                             NBKR, government        ST
compare their cost effectiveness to alternative measures of enhanced
transparency and financial education.
Consider bringing pawn shops under the consumer protection regime of
                                                                             NBKR, government        MT
NBKR.
Enhance the availability and quality of training of credit officers and      NBKR, industry
managers of microfinance organizations in order to strengthen sound and      associations, market    LT
transparent business practices.                                              participants
Develop and further strengthen industry Codes of Conduct focusing on         NBKR, industry
disclosure, complaints, product appropriateness and other areas of           associations, market    LT
business practices                                                           participants
Dispute Resolution Mechanisms
Develop and adopt a single, coherent normative legal act governing           NBKR, industry
                                                                                                     ST
complaints handling by financial institutions.                               associations
Develop and adopt a regulation requiring financial institutions to make      NBKR, industry
                                                                                                     MT
periodic reports on the number and type of complaints they have received.    associations
Continue efforts to establish an independent ombudsman structure for         Working Group on
retail financial services by (i) conducting an analysis of complaints        Financial
statistics as well as the suitability of the existing complaints handling    Ombudsman,
                                                                                                     LT
mechanisms, (ii) based on the data analysis as well as the review of         government, other
international experience and best practice develop a concept on the          stakeholders
development of a financial ombudsman in the Kyrgyz Republic.



       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 9
Executive Summary                                                Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review


Financial Education
                                                                             CCMD financial
Organize monthly meetings between the technical level working groups of
                                                                             literacy working
the CCMD and banking union and quarterly briefing meetings with the                               ST
                                                                             group members and
high-level Inter-Agency Working Group.
                                                                             other stakeholders
                                                                             CCMD financial
Consider opening membership of the CCMD financial literacy expert
                                                                             literacy working
group to a wider range of stakeholders and conduct stakeholder                                    ST
                                                                             group members and
consultations.
                                                                             other stakeholders
                                                                             CCMD financial
Conduct a nationally representative financial capability survey and use
                                                                             literacy working
results as a baseline to measure the overall impact of financial education                        MT
                                                                             group members and
initiatives.
                                                                             other stakeholders
                                                                             CCMD financial
Consider giving special emphasis to migrants and rural population in the     literacy working
                                                                                                  MT
development of the financial education strategy and subsequent programs.     group members and
                                                                             other stakeholders
                                                                             CCMD financial
Test financial capability enhancing programs on a small scale and only       literacy working
                                                                                                  LT
roll them out upon rigorous evaluation of their positive impacts.            group members and
                                                                             other stakeholders




      Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 10
I.           CONTEXT FOR CPFL IN KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
a.            Access to financial services
9.      Kyrgyz Republic has significantly low levels of access to finance compared to
neighboring countries. The credit-to-GDP ratio is among the lowest in the region (16 percent
in 2013). The supply of financial services is limited, with few financial instruments and low
savings mobilizations. Only 4 percent of the adult population has an account at a formal
financial institution compared to the regional average of 44.9 (see Table 2). With regards to
savings accounts, figures are very low at 0.9 percent but on par with comparable countries. At
the same time 11.3 percent of adults had a loan which exceeds the regional average.4

Table 2: Adults with a Financial Product at a Formal Financial Institution
(In percentage, adults over age 15)

    Country                        Account a/        Savings b/          Loan             GNI per capital (USD)

    Armenia                        17.5              0.8                 18.9             3,200
    Azerbaijan                     14.9              1.6                 17.7             5,330
    Georgia                        33.0              1.0                 11.0             2,690
    Kazakhstan                     42.1              6.7                 13.1             7,580
    Tajikistan                     2.5               0.3                 4.8              800
    Turkmenistan                   0.4               1.1                 0.8              3,790
    Russia                         48.2              10.9                7.7              9,900
    Uzbekistan                     22.5              0.8                 1.5              1,280
    Kyrgyz Republic                3.8               0.9                 11.3             830
    Europe & Central Asia          44.9              7.0                 7.7              7,272
a/ Defined as an account at a bank, credit union, cooperative, post office, or microfinance institution
b/ Percentage of adults over 15 that saved at a formal financial institution in the past year
c/ Percentage of adults over 15 that took out a loan from a formal financial institution in the past year
Source: Global Findex, 2012

10.     Rural areas remain significantly underserved compared to urban areas. Although
the number of banks’ branches increased from 254 at end-2011 to 287 in November 2013,
given the mountainous character of the country and its limited infrastructure, customers in
rural areas remain significantly underserved compared to urban areas. Currently 8 percent of
adults in urban areas have a formal account compared to only 2.6 percent in rural areas.
Despite the fact that two thirds of the population live in rural areas, most banks are unwilling
to expand operations to rural areas due to associated high costs.

4
 With more than 400,000 clients, the microfinance sector (non-deposit taking) has reached systemic importance
which explains the dominance of loans over formal accounts.
I. Context for CPFL in Kyrgyz Republic


11.     There is a significant market for the transmission of remittances from the Kyrgyz
Republic’s large migrant labor population, and money transfers are one of the most
commonly used banking services. Total remittances transfers (both inflows and outflows)
account for 42 percent of the GDP of which around 80 percent account for inflows. According
to Global Findex 2012, a total of 22.8 percent of adult population received remittances in the
last year compared to 9.2 percent in Russia, 8 percent in Kazakhstan and 25.7 in Tajikistan. In
addition, consumers can make payments for utilities and other services through money
transfers directly to the service provider through banks, post offices, and a number of
payments system operators who operate “cash in” terminals that accept cash for such
payments. The market appears to be quite competitive, with services available through a
number of money transfer systems. Banks often offer their customers a choice among a
number of transfer systems with differing costs and conditions.
a.     Overview of CPFL framework in Kyrgyz Republic
12.     Consumer protection and financial literacy (CPFL) are key to increasing
responsible access to financial services—this is particularly relevant to Kyrgyz Republic,
where access to formal financial services is still lower than the regional average. Given
the relatively low levels of financial inclusion in Kyrgyz Republic a number of initiatives are
currently underway to ensure that more people are brought into the financial system. While
increased access to finance can result in significant economic and societal benefits, it can be
neutral or even harmful if consumers: (i) cannot exercise their rights as consumers; (ii) cannot
select the financial products that suit them best and (iii) are not protected against frauds and
other market abuses (see Box 1 on key findings of Global Survey on Financial Consumer
Protection).




      Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 12
I. Context for CPFL in Kyrgyz Republic


Box 1. Findings of Global Survey on Financial Consumer Protection

    To contribute to the international dialogue on financial consumer protection, the World Bank in
    conjunction with FinCoNet conducted a Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
    to collect information from financial regulatory agencies in 114 economies. Key findings suggest that in
    Europe and Central Asia there has been progress from 2010 to 2013 in terms of strengthened legal and
    institutional arrangements for financial consumer protection. Figure 1 shows that countries increasingly
    assigned legal responsibility for financial consumer protection to financial supervisors and created dedicated
    teams or units between 2010 and 2013.
    Figure 1: Financial regulators responsible            Figure 2: Disclosure and Dispute Resolution Indices5




    Figure 2 indicates the levels of disclosure and dispute resolution requirements on an aggregate level.
    Kyrgyzstan scores 2 out of the 5 major disclosure requirements. This index ranks low, alongside Russia when
    compared to other neighboring countries. The dispute resolution index measures the existence of formal
    internal and external dispute resolution mechanisms. Kyrgyz Republic has established an external dispute
    resolution mechanism within its supervisory agency. This seems to be the norm across neighboring countries
    with the exception of Kazakhstan and Armenia who have both put in place internal as well as external dispute
    resolution mechanisms.

13.     In Kyrgyz Republic, the lack of general trust of the population in the financial
sector as well as the low levels of financial capability of consumers highlight the need for
a strengthened CPFL framework. Confidence in the formal financial sector is lacking as a
consequence of banking crises experienced in the 1990s and in 2005, followed by the political
unrest in 2010. In addition, the level of financial capability of Kyrgyz consumers is perceived
to be particularly low. A few activities geared towards improving low levels of financial
capability exist in the Kyrgyz Republic, but they are largely uncoordinated and untargeted.
Preliminary results of focus group discussions indicate that potential groups to be targeted in
the financial education strategy and subsequent programs are migrants and their families as
well as rural populations.




5
  Disclosure index denotes the sum of a variety of existing disclosure requirements. These are (i) Law specifies
disclosure requirements in plain language, (ii) Law specifies disclosure requirements in local language, (iii) Law
specifies requirement for prescribed standardized disclosure format, (iv) Law specifies requirement for recourse
rights and processes, and (v) Law specifies disclosure requirement of annual percentage rate using standard
formula for credit products. The dispute resolution index reflecting the existence of formal internal and external
dispute resolution mechanisms takes the value 1 if both resolution mechanisms are available, the value 0.5 if one
of the mechanisms is available, and 0 if neither of the mechanisms is available.



          Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 13
I. Context for CPFL in Kyrgyz Republic


15.     Concerns about over-indebtedness and predatory lending practices especially in
the microfinance sector have led to the introduction of a number of important consumer
protection provisions to the existing legislation. Existing financial laws contain several
provisions intended to protect customers. With over 400 000 clients, the microfinance sector
has reached systemic importance, and NBKR should be commended for having taken timely
action in introducing relevant consumer protection provisions in the areas of disclosure and
responsible lending. A recently passed usury law, however, may not have the expected
positive effect on reducing interest rates and has the potential for negative impact on financial
access and consumer protection.
16.     Although significant work has been done on the regulatory framework, new
provisions are not organized in a coherent way and the sheer volume of new regulation
raises concerns regarding supervisory capacity to enforce. NBKR as a regulator and
supervisor of banks and non-bank credit institutions monitors and enforces a variety of
consumer protection provisions related to disclosure and transparency of information, unfair
business practices, data protection and freedom of choice. Many of the amendments to
existing laws and regulations, especially related to financial consumer protection of
microfinance institutions, have recently been introduced. The piecemeal approach as well as
the volume of recently issued legislation results in a voluminous and somewhat fragmented
framework that contributes to potential gaps in coverage and poses challenges to the existing
supervisory capacity of NBKR as well as to the absorption capacity of individual institutions.
17.     Several initiatives are currently underway to further strengthen the consumer
protection and financial literacy framework. The NBKR is in the process of establishing
the institutional and legal framework for financial consumer protection, including the issuance
of normative rules of conduct and the creation of a consumer protection unit at the central
bank. Several working groups have been established with the aim to strengthen the financial
capability levels of the Kyrgyz population. A financial education strategy is to be developed
by the end of the year. In addition, an initiative has recently been launched to establish a
financial ombudsman scheme.
b.     Financial Literacy
18.     Financial knowledge and skills enables consumers to make well-informed
decisions about the products and services that best fit their needs. As financial products
and services become more sophisticated and households assume greater responsibility for
their financial affairs, it becomes increasingly important for individuals to manage their
money well, not only to help secure their own and their family’s financial well -being, but also
to facilitate the smooth functioning of financial markets and the economy. A well-educated
consumer is able to understand consumer disclosures, the risks and rewards, and their legal
rights and obligations. Based on this, a financially literate consumer will be able to make
informed decisions on their choice of financial products and services. Such empowered
consumers can play an active role in shopping for the best financial products and services -
and the best providers that meet their needs. People who lack financial knowledge, on the
other hand, either end up choosing financial products they do not fully understand or they may
not even use them at all (see Box 2).




       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 14
I. Context for CPFL in Kyrgyz Republic


Box 2. Relationship between financial literacy and inclusion

 Findings of the WB financial capability survey conducted in Tajikistan in 2013 show that the higher the
 level of financial literacy is, the more likely respondents are to use financial products from different
 providers. To capture financial literacy levels of the Tajik population, randomly selected respondents were
 requested to answer eight quiz-like questions regarding basic economic concepts, as well as questions to test
 their basic numeracy skills. Respondents were then categorized into three groups according to the number of
 questions they answered correctly. The figure highlights that compared to those who answered two or less
 questions correctly, those who scored better are more likely to use products offered by different types of
 providers.
 Proportion of respondents who use financial products from different providers, by their financial
 literacy levels.




19.     Available evidence from the Kyrgyz Republic highlights the need for policy
actions to boost financial literacy levels. In 2013 a financial literacy survey was conducted
in the Kyrgyz Republic by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) with the objective to
assess people’s financial literacy levels and to obtain information on their financial behaviors.
According to this survey 60 percent of the respondents lack awareness and understanding of
the term ‘effective interest rate’. Much less, only around 10 percent of the survey participants
were familiar with the term ‘compound interest’. Similarly, the results of the focus group
discussions which were conducted as a second part of this review show that the majority of
participants lack understanding of basic financial concepts (see Box 3).




       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 15
I. Context for CPFL in Kyrgyz Republic


Box 3. Key findings of focus group discussions

The results of four focus group discussions with financially active adults suggest a number of priority
areas for the national strategy. These results can by no means be interpreted as being nationally representative.
They are, however, indicative of pressing areas which deserve policy attention. According to the analysis of the
focus group discussions, participants show strengths in performing simple financial calculations but struggle to
understand basic financial concepts such as inflation, compound and simple interest, the purpose of insurance
products and lack awareness of the maximum amount covered by the Deposit Insurance Agency in case a bank
goes bankrupt (see Figure 1). Other major findings are that participants appear to be very skilled in managing
their day-to-day finances but struggle with setting funds aside for unexpected and old age expenses. The results
further suggest that consumers do not widely report complaints or other conflicts with providers of financial
services.

  Figure 1: Proportion of participants who        Figure 2: Average FL scores for urban and answered
  FL questions correctly          rural populations




                                                                                      4
       Deposit Insurance Awareness                                                         3.53
                                   Average Financial Literacy Score




       Simple Interest


                                                                                      3
       Purpose of Insurance

       Compound Interest
                                                                                                  1.90
                                                                                      2


       Inflation

       Compare Bargain
                                                                                      1




       Simple Division

   0               20         40                                      60   80   100
                                                                                      0




                         Correct Answer Percentage                                        urban   rural



The focus group discussions reveal the need for certain subgroups of the population to be specifically
targeted with financial capability enhancing programs. As shown in Figure 2, a wide gap seems to exist
between the financial literacy levels of rural and urban participants. While urban dwellers were on average able
to answer 3.5 questions out of 7 correctly, their rural counterparts provided only around 2 correct answers.
Similarly, Kyrgyz participants who migrated for labor purposes to other countries, answered on average less
financial literacy related questions correctly than those who did not migrate to another country. Compared to
non-migrants, migrant participants also appear to be more challenged with managing and monitoring their higher
incomes and expenses.




            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 16
II.    FRAMEWORK FOR FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION IN
       KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
a.     Legal and regulatory framework

Findings

18.     Significant work has recently been completed or is currently in process for the
establishment of the legal and regulatory framework in a variety of important areas
including disclosures, credit reporting, and others, for which NBKR should be
commended. But progress has in some areas been piecemeal with rules for consumer
protection included in normative acts that deal primarily with other subjects. This piecemeal
approach, as well as the sheer volume of recently issued legislation particularly in the
microfinance area results in a voluminous and somewhat fragmented framework that may
create difficulties for both financial institutions and consumers in understanding and
application of the rules.
19.    The evolving legal and regulatory framework is complex and at times
inconsistent, and poses a substantial burden particularly on smaller entities. Over the last
1.5 years, more than 50 amendments to the legal and regulatory framework of microfinance
organizations were put in place. While the larger financial entities have the size and human
resources to incorporate the changes on their own, the many small players lack both human
resources and capacity to understand and adjust their internal procedures and structures to the
evolving regulatory framework. The frequency of changes is a considerable cost for both and
support from the associations is not yet available.
20.     Microfinance loans and individual entrepreneurs are currently not covered by
the deposit insurance scheme. Deposits by individual persons who carry out entrepreneurial
(income earning) activity without having registered a legal entity for this purpose, are
currently not covered if the deposits are connected with that activity. This exception is likely
to be difficult to administer and to unfairly distinguish between individual banking consumers,
as there is very often no real distinction between the personal (family) funds of an individual
engaged in small scale economic activities and the funds that are used for those activities.
Moreover, neither microfinance organizations nor credit unions are currently covered by a
deposit insurance scheme. This leaves around 1200 clients of the currently 12 deposit taking
credit unions uncovered. Government plans to expand coverage to individual entrepreneurs,
MFOs and credit unions are thus very timely and preferable from a cost-efficiency and risk
pooling point of view but will have to be rigorously assessed regarding its impact.
II. Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in Kyrgyz Republic


21.      A dedicated legal framework for credit bureaus is currently lacking. A draft law
regulating credit reporting was adopted by the parliament in November 2013, but the law was
returned by the President in January 2014 with a number of objections, including the absence
of any identified state body responsible for the licensing and oversight of credit reporting
activities. Credit reporting is currently accomplished through a single credit bureau, founded
in 2003, that is run as a non-profit organization providing reporting services to more than 100
participating lenders. Participants may choose to be members of the organization and
participate in its management (currently 37 in total) or may simply conclude a contractual
agreement for exchange of information. Nearly all of the banks currently operating in the
Kyrgyz Republic are full members of the bureau. In addition to the credit bureau, a credit
registry is currently being established through the NBKR. The credit registry is designed to
allow banks and other lenders to receive information on other loans that a borrower may have.
Provision of information to the credit registry is mandatory.
22.     There is a significant market for the transmission of remittances from the Kyrgyz
Republic’s large migrant labor population, and money transfers are one of the most
commonly used financial services. There are three formal channels for sending remittances:
money transfer operators (MTOs), bank accounts and transfers via Kyrgyz Post with almost
all remittances entering via MTOs. The market appears to be quite competitive, with services
available through a number of money transfer systems. Results from the focus group study
suggest that users of such services are highly positive about the performance of these
remittances systems. Neither migrant workers nor remittances receivers who participated in
the focus group discussions mentioned any negative experiences in sending or receiving
money (mainly from Russia). According to the focus group participants, transfer fees are
quite low, with an average of 1 to 3 percent depending on the amount transferred and the
country of destination. During the focus group discussions, participants further explained that
a passport is the only requirement for sending and receiving money and that transactions are
done almost instantaneously, literally within 15 minutes of dispatch. Counterparts generally
agreed that problems and complaints concerning both remittances and payments transfers are
not a common occurrence. At the same time, NBKR has expressed a desire to increase its
oversight over payment flows and the payments system in general, for the purposes of
combatting money laundering and also for the protection of consumers. A draft law “On the
Payments System in the Kyrgyz Republic” that is now in the process of passage contains
some general provisions on money transfers.
23.     The development of mobile financial services is still at very nascent stage of
development but is seen as an important means to provide services to the unbanked
population. Most forms of mobile banking are not yet available at all. There is, however, very
strong interest in the development of mobile phone banking as a means to provide services to
the large mass of currently unbanked consumers. The mobile phone networks have wide
coverage and voice and text services are reported to be affordable and widely used, making
this a potentially promising direction for rapid expansion of access to banking services.
Although the legal and regulatory frameworks are not yet well developed, work on this is in
process.




      Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 18
III. Consumer Disclosure


Recommendations

24.      A draft Banking Code currently in development takes a unified approach and
offers an important opportunity to address both institutional authority and substantive
consumer protection rules and to bring more order and coherence to the legal
framework. The draft Code directly establishes broad requirements for market conduct in
relation to clients and authorizes NBKR to issue regulation containing further detail in a
variety of areas as well as strengthening and clarifying the NBKR mandate in this area.
Substantive rules address important issues including disclosures and dispute resolution, but
need to be further elaborated and clarified in a number of areas (advertising and public
disclosures, regular communication with clients, requirements on early repayment of loans,
restrictions on changes in contract provisions and others). The process of bringing laws and
normative acts into compliance with the provisions of the Banking Code will also offer an
opportunity for NBKR to bring greater order to the normative legal framework and to
consider the consolidation of some of the many existing provisions into a more coherent and
compact framework that is easier for financial institutions to apply, consumers to understand
and NBKR to supervise.
25.     Further expansion of coverage of the deposit insurance scheme should be
considered preceded by a rigorous analysis of the implications of such an expansion.
Exclusion of the deposits of individual entrepreneurs from the deposit guarantee is likely to
create administrative complications, and may unfairly disadvantage small farmers, traders,
and craftspeople and discourage them from using the banking system. Steps toward
eliminating this exception from the guarantee scheme should continue as quickly as is
reasonably possible. Moreover, further consideration should be given to bring deposits of
MFOs and credit unions under the guarantee scheme. However, a detailed analysis will need
to be conducted first to determine whether the Deposit Insurance Agency would be able to
cover those deposits and at what level of contribution.
26.     Passage of the law on credit histories will be required to allow the creation of
enforceable legal standards in the credit reporting industry, including standards for the
protection of consumers who are the subjects of credit history reporting . A
determination will need to be made concerning the appropriate entity to perform the licensing,
regulatory and supervisory tasks required. NBKR, as the regulator for most lenders and a
member of the existing credit bureau, appears to be the state body best placed to perform these
functions. Additional resources should be provided to NBKR if necessary for the fulfillment
of these tasks. The new unit responsible for consumer protection within NBKR should
participate in the work, in particular in the creation of appropriate regulations concerning
consumer protection issues.
27.     The NBKR should, in connection with the passage of the draft law on the
payments system and with the participation of those providing payments services,
consider the issuance of rules containing minimum standards for consumer protection in
relation to money transfers. These rules should more clearly define the information that
must be made available to consumers prior to use of the service, the form and content of
records and of documents (receipts) that must be provided to senders and recipients, and clear
rules concerning the minimum protections for consumers (senders and recipients) in the case
of mistake or fraud.

       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 19
III. Consumer Disclosure


28.     The NBKR should start developing rules and instructions regulating the
provision of mobile banking services services to consumers. A first priority at the present
time should be improvement of consumer protection in relation to the types of accounts and
services that are currently offered to consumers in the Kyrgyz Republic. However, it is clear
that the types of services are beginning to expand, and also that mobile banking services in
particular are likely to be an important tool to increase the access of Kyrgyz citizens to
banking services. Given the difficulties experienced by the banking system in recent years
and the correspondingly low levels of consumer trust in banking services, it will be quite
important for effective consumer protection standards on mobile banking to be in place as
those services are rolled out to the population. Significant consumer difficulties with mobile
banking services could frustrate plans to make mobile banking a strong component of
systemic development and expansion of financial inclusion.
b.         Institutional arrangements for financial consumer protection

Findings

29.     Regulatory authority and enforcement responsibility for consumer protection in
the banking and non-bank credit institution sector are not clearly assigned. Banking
legislation makes NBKR responsible for protection of depositors and creditors, and also
specifically for enforcement in relation to its licensees of antimonopoly legislation, including
rules on unfair competition. Some counterparts viewed this as sufficient to provide NBKR
with authority in the area of consumer protection. References to protection of depositors and
creditors, however, can also be understood to refer to prudential supervision (an interpretation
consistent with the structure and remaining content of the banking legislation). The lack of a
clear legal assignment to NBKR of authority and responsibility for protection of all users of
banking and services may raise questions about the scope and extent of NBKR’s authority in
this area and may force NBKR to address issues of bank conduct in relation to clients through
prudential supervision and competition law tools and concepts that are less clear and efficient
than is desirable.
30.     The State Agency for Antimonopoly Regulation on the other hand is responsible
for enforcement of a general consumer protection law. The law is broadly drafted to cover
all kinds of goods, work and services, but its provisions are more appropriate to everyday
consumer goods than to financial products and the Agency would currently interpret the law’s
definition of “consumer purpose” to exclude coverage of interest bearing bank deposits and
any other financial product that earns income. The Agency lacks any experience in addressing
banking or other financial matters and a single staff member in the central office 6 is now
assigned to address all financial markets issues. Agency counterparts explained that a focus
of consumer protection activity to date has been the protection of consumers through
oversight and control of tariffs and fees on important consumer items (e.g. utilities,
transportation) and that it would need assistance to develop other appropriate approaches. Just
recently the Agency has recently initiated a study of consumer lending by banks to determine
whether general consumer protection norms are being violated.

6
    Out of 81 total staff in the head and 9 regional offices.



           Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 20
III. Consumer Disclosure



31.     Despite the lack of a clear legal mandate for banking consumer protection,
NBKR has been taking important steps to regulate bank conduct in relation to
consumers, and to create institutional structures and enforcement channels, for which it
should be commended. NBKR has included provisions addressing financial consumer
protection issues in a significant number of recent regulations, including those addressing risk
management, internal bank procedures, and competition issues. A specialized consumer
protection unit within the NBKR legal department is expected to have its first staff and begin
operation soon and regulation now provides explicitly for a NBKR role in addressing
consumer complaints. Draft amendments to regulations on supervision would further clarify
its ability to address consumer protection issues through the supervision process and to
employ supervisory measures. The draft Banking Code that is currently in development takes
a clearer and more comprehensive approach, establishing broad requirements for market
conduct in relation to clients and authorizing NBKR to issue and enforce regulation
containing further detail.
32.     There are a few existing consumer protection associations however they lack
resources and do not directly deal with financial consumer protection matters. Financial
issues and banking concerns do not appear to have been a topic of work for the existing
consumer associations in the Kyrgyz Republic. Due to their wide focus and a lack of
resources and specialized training, consumer organizations are not yet effective in supporting
proper financial consumer protection environment in Kyrgyz Republic. Moreover, consumer
associations have so far not taken active part in legal and regulatory consultative processes
initiated by NBKR or other stakeholders.

Recommendations
33.     Efforts to expand and clarify NBKR’s role in banking consumer protection
should be continued through ensuring that the new Banking Code contains a clear and
appropriate NBKR mandate and tools in this area. Although the draft amendments to the
regulations on supervision allow only limited supervisory measures to be imposed in relation
to consumer protection problems, it is important for NBKR to have a clear ability to include
consumer protection issues in supervision processes while the Banking Code and associated
regulations are being refined and adopted. And it is particularly important that the new
Banking Code provide not only for NBKR ability to regulate further in narrowly specified
areas, but also for a clear general mandate for protection of consumers (and of other banking
clients) and the ability to use regulatory and enforcement tools to achieve this end.

34.     It will be important that NBKR finalizes steps to form its new consumer
protection unit. The consumer protection division within NBKR which is currently under
formation will need resources and support for human capacity building, as well as appropriate
regulatory support to ensure that it receives needed information and has effective channels for
reaction in handling complaints. Immediate priorities for the new consumer protection unit
within NBKR, in addition to staffing, will have to be the establishment of working
procedures, dissemination of contact information through individual institutions and other
channels, and creation of a reliable flow of information on the kinds of problems that banking
consumers are encountering and whether those problems are appropriately resolved by banks

       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 21
III. Consumer Disclosure


and microfinance institutions. Resources should be sufficient to allow the unit not only to take
over the task of addressing complaints directly received by the NBKR, but also to monitor and
respond to information on consumer concerns received from individual institutions and to
carry out effective coordination with consumer bodies, industry associations, and other state
bodies involved in banking activities. International experience shows that financial consumer
protection departments within the financial regulator are typically tasked with a number of
objectives and responsibilities, ranging from core supervisory activities (e.g. on-site
inspections, off-site supervision and market monitoring) to broader financial consumer
protection activities such as rule-making, enforcement complaints handling and financial
education. Given the limited supervisory capacity, it may be wise to develop an initial risk-
based agenda that determines immediate priorities and leverages resources for optimum
impact.
35.     In light of severe capacity constraints and to avoid conflicts with market conduct
regulations issued by NBKR, the State Antimonopoly Agency should not separately
enforce the provisions of the general consumer protection law against financial
institutions. A form for the interaction of the Agency and NBKR should be defined by
regulation or by an agreement or Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the bodies.
A pattern that might be appropriate at the present time would be a more formalized Agency
responsibility to produce a periodic report on competition and consumer protection issues,
which in the banking sphere would be discussed with NBKR and then publication and/or
delivery to the Government and other state bodies. This would provide for alternate views
and approaches to be aired while maintaining clarity on the roles.

40.     The role of consumer organizations in financial consumer protection should be
strengthened. Consumer associations could play an important role in raising awareness of
financial consumers’ rights, monitoring business practices (for example by mystery
shopping7), and giving advice to consumers, among other activities. Grant funding for specific
projects and technical assistance could be provided to consumer organizations to develop a
more effective consumer protection role. The NBKR should involve such organizations in
consultative processes, for example on regulations and draft laws, in order to ensure that the
voice of consumers is heard during the formulation of financial services policies and the rules
that flow from them.




7
  Mystery shopping or a mystery consumer is a tool externally used by market research companies or watchdog
organizations or internally by regulators themselves to measure quality of service or compliance to regulation, or
to gather specific information about products and services. The mystery consumer's specific identity is generally
not known by the establishment being evaluated.



        Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 22
III.    CONSUMER DISCLOSURE

 Findings
 34.     Recent legal amendments to enhance disclosure and transparency, in particular
 in the microfinance industry, in many instances follow international best practice.
 International experience shows that measures to enhance the transparency of lending
 conditions can play an important part in enhancing consumer protection, as they allow the
 client to compare lending conditions between institutions, and to take an informed decision. A
 number of important provisions along those lines were introduced by the NBKR. For
 example, for microfinance institutions, disclosure of annual effective interest rates,
 commission fees and nominal payment schedule was made mandatory, as well as a
 requirements introduced to make information on general loan conditions publicly available in
 a dedicated area of each branch. Furthermore, the framework provides for compounded
 interest rates to be used. In addition, a special memo from the NBKR and standardized Annex
 informing the client of his rights and responsibilities has to be signed by the client to ascertain
 reception of adequate information.
 35.     The presented information has the potential to be overwhelming for the client,
 and is not very efficient in creating transparency for comparison across entities. For
 example, instead of presenting the most relevant facts in one single factsheet, the information
 is spread over the document and annexes. Given the low overall level of financial literacy, the
 wealth of presented information is likely to overwhelm the borrower, and also leaves room for
 the loan officer to select the information to highlight. As noted during visits to the selected
 entities and in line with findings of on-site supervisions, the staff of financial entities does not
 necessarily understand the complex calculation of the interest rate and many errors are
 reported. The publicly available information is usually presented in the form of a “booth”, and
 requires scanning of pamphlets to retrieve the relevant information. Interest rates are either
 presented in nominal terms, or not disclosed at all. This makes comparison shopping more
 difficult and time consuming. The NBKR includes on its website information on interest rate,
 but the information is not easy to find, and both nominal and effective interest rates are
 presented in different files and locations.
III. Consumer Disclosure


Recommendations

36.     The disclosure framework should be revised to simplify requirements, reduce
cost of compliance, and increase impact. International experience shows that one page long
key facts statements are the most efficient way to create transparency in lending. The factsheet
could for example include information on the effective annual percentage rate, the monthly
installments broken down by component, and the commission fee, and provide concrete
information on cooling off, early repayment and options and contacts for dispute resolution.
Prior to its launch, it would be beneficial to undertake consumer testing of key fact statements
in order to ensure that the presented content is properly understood by consumers and that the
format covers all necessary information.
37.     Disclosure and transparency of interest rates and terms and conditions on
consumer loans should be further enhanced. Publication of the effective interest rates
offered by various financial institutions on the NBKR website, with parallel distribution
mechanisms for consumers without internet access, can help bring down interest rates as well
as spur more effective competition among financial institutions. NBKR could compile
comparison tables of fees, charges and effective interest rates and publish them on its website.
NBRK needs to ensure, however, that this information is easily accessible and presented in an
understandable way. As a complement to the webpage, price comparison tables could also be
made available through newspapers and the industry associations. This would be especially
beneficial for microfinance clients as publicly available pricing information tends to be
difficult to access. Considerations should be given to revising advertising rules to ensure that
they are consistent and clear as well as readily understandable and comparable to the
consumer. It is recommended that advertising use as a single comparable measure, such as the
effective interest rate, to allow consumers to compare credit products.




      Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 24
IV.     BUSINESS PRACTICES

Findings
38.      The NBKR also issued a number of legal amendments and regulations to improve
business conduct in the financial sector. This includes the requirement that internal pricing
policies and pricing changes be notified to NBKR, minimum documentation requirements and
assessment standards for credit evaluations, and requirements for internal risk management
standards, as well as the newly introduced usury law that introduces interest caps for lending
activities. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that overall business practices of
microfinance organizations and credit unions continue to pose consumer protection concerns,
especially in relation to creditworthiness assessment and disclosure practices. Low levels of
capacity in management and staff in many of the smaller institutions contribute further to
challenges in ensuring that those institutions duly collect and assess information about
consumers in order to provide them with suitable financial products.
39.     The recently passed usury law has the potential to have a negative impact on
financial consumer protection by pushing low-income clients into the informal market
where they have no protection. It is unclear whether the usury law is meeting its objective of
protecting the borrower, rather than simply increasing the complexity of lending and pricing
schemes and excluding borrowers at the margin. Banking sector data indicates a significant
increase of fees and commissions that may be a consequence of the law’s introduction, while
the maturities of loans provided by microfinance entities increased.8 Anecdotal evidence also
suggests that some microfinance organizations have shifted into informality.9
40.    At the same time, the increasing number of unregulated pawnshops poses risks to
consumers. Until 2009, pawnshops were licensed by the NBKR, and provided basic
information on a regular basis. This requirement was however dropped in 2009, leading to an
explosive growth of the sector from 189 entities at the end of 2008 to the currently estimated
699 entities10. According to anecdotal evidence, most pawnshops and moneylenders do not
provide written contracts and lack basic transparency and disclosure standards in their
operations. The average reported interest rate of pawnshops stood at 130 percent in 2008, and
reportedly continues to increase. There are also reports of abusive enforcement practices. A
law has recently been passed requiring licensing of pawnshops, but this task has not been
assigned to a government body.




8
   In the banking sector, the income from services and commissions as a share of total income spiked from 6-9
percent in earlier years to 16.2 percent in 2013.
9
  17 institutions closed within three months of the adoption of the law.
10
    Most recent data as of August 2012.
IV. Business Practices


41.     There is a code of conduct applicable to the microfinance industry, while a code
of conduct for the banking sector has not yet been developed. The Association of
Microfinance Institutions (AMFI) issued an Ethics Code in 2010. The Code is mandatory for
all members, and accordingly was signed by all 34 members. The Code aims at safeguarding
the reputation of the members, and establishes as core values (i) transparency, (ii) high quality
of products and services, (iii) equality for all members and clients, and (iv) professionalism at
every level. It already provides for fair and transparent disclosure requirements, right to early
repayment, clarity in language, and information on consequences of failure to the obligations
assumed under the contract, and non-offensive debt collection. However, the wording is very
general and requires further implementation guidance. There exists currently no code of
conduct for banks.

Recommendations
42.     Reconsider the introduction of interest rate caps due to their limited effectiveness
and the potential to drive lenders to informality. While there is some evidence that interest
rates for microfinance loans have gone down since the introduction of the usury law, several
negative tendencies in the market call for a careful impact assessment of the usury law while
comparing its cost effectiveness with alternative measures. Enhanced disclosure and
transparency of loan terms and conditions have proven to have a positive effect in bringing
down interest rates and spurring more effective competition among microfinance
organizations. A national price comparison website established by the financial regulator in
Peru, for example, has increased competition and reduced consumer prices.11
43.    In addition, considerations should be given to bringing pawnshops under the
consumer protection regime of NBKR. It is recommended that pawnshop clients receive the
same protection as other microfinance clients, particularly with regard to disclosure and
complaints handling provisions and procedures. While the law on licensing was amended in
October 2013, reinstating the requirement for pawnshops to be licensed, no supervisory
agency is yet assigned. As the NBKR is the supervisor of all other entities that conduct
banking services, as has previous experience with supervising them, it would be best suited to
assume such as role.




11
  The Superintendence of Banking, Insurance and Private Pension Funds of Peru found that online publication of
consumer loan rates reduced the average consumer lending rate by 1000 basis points (or ten percentage points) at
the time of stable interest rates – see http://www.sbs.gob.pe.



        Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 26
IV. Business Practices


45.     The development and further strengthening of industry Codes of Conduct for
banks and non-bank credit institutions would benefit consumers. The Union of Banks
should revisit the question of development of a basic voluntary code of conduct or code of
ethical principles with member banks and facilitate the beginning of work on such a code. It
might be beneficial for work on such a code to be connected with the work the Union of
Banks is already doing on customer concerns, such as the meetings that have been held to
discuss the borrower issues that have been the subject of public attention in recent months. A
voluntary code of conduct might be seen as a responsible and desirable step on the part of
banks in addressing such concerns. It is recommended to further promote the adoption of the
Ethics Code within the microfinance sector and provide more guidance material on its
application.
46.     Proper training of credit officers needs to be ensured in order to strengthen
sound and transparent business practices of microfinance organizations and increase
their efficiency. The Banking Training Center currently offers capacity building courses.
However, the main target audience of these training programs is so far limited to management
officials. The low level of capacity in management and staff noted during the mission requires
a move away from the ad hoc provision of uncoordinated and limited training toward a system
of formalized training and dissemination of best practice. Possible institutional approaches in
the medium to long term include (i) identifying a private or public training facility that could
add capacity building courses for microfinance institutions and credit unions into its
curriculum, and (ii) establishing a separate training center, possibly together with the Union of
Kyrgyz Banks.




       Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 27
V.     DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Findings
47.    Legal rules do exist establishing some requirements and standards for internal
complaints handling by financial institutions, but these are contained in a number of
legal acts and do not form a coherent whole. For example, the requirement that banks
maintain a journal for customer complaints and comments as well as time frames for response
to customer complaints are specified in different legal acts. In addition, the law on
microfinance stipulates that the client be informed of the complaint procedure and the contact
person responsible for receiving requests while there are no requirements for internal statistics
and processes. A single normative act on proper handling of customer complaints would
provide both financial institutions and consumers with clarity that is now lacking.
48.     Overall, consumers lack any direct channels to quickly and effectively resolve
disputes that are not resolved by the financial institution’s own initial complaint
procedures. Counterparts reported that court processes are long and costly and that
consumers do not tend to resort to the courts except in relation to enforcement proceedings
against their property that have already been initiated by banks. Only a few consumers are
currently raising complaints with regard to financial institutions and the services they provide.
This can be attributed at least partially to the absence of accessible complaint mechanisms as
well as the lack of a lacking ‘complaints culture’ in the country. NBKR is dealing directly
with consumer complaints and inspectors may sometimes ask to review institutions’ records
on the issue (such as the required journal of complaints and suggestions). In 2013, NBRK
received a total of 985 written complaints. In large, these have been complaints concerning the
unwillingness of an institution to restructure, or forgive, a debt that was legally contracted but
that the consumer is not able to pay. In addition, NRKR and its regional offices receive more
than 100 calls weekly from citizens concerning financial services and the operation of the
central bank. However, NBKR cannot directly resolve a large number of individual consumer
complaints.
V. Dispute Resolution Mechanisms


49.     Initial steps to develop external dispute resolution mechanisms have been
undertaken by the Kyrgyz authorities to address the current lack of easily accessible and
speedy alternatives available to consumers. Currently there is no financial ombudsman or
any institution performing similar function in Kyrgyz Republic. A working group has recently
been established under the Coordination Council for Microfinance Development (CCMD)
comprising financial regulators, industry associations and private market participants to work
on the establishment of a financial ombudsman but no progress has been made so far.

Recommendations
50.     It is recommended that NBKR develop and adopt normative legal regulation
defining appropriate internal complaints handling procedures for banks and non-bank
credit institutions. This will provide NBKR with systematic information on the nature and
frequency of consumer problems as well as the levels of institutions’ observance of legal and
regulatory requirements in relation to consumers. Consumer experiences with banks and non-
bank credit institutions will in large part determine overall levels of trust in and willingness to
use the financial system, in turn affecting system stability and the achievement of policy
goals, such as increasing non-cash settlements in the economy as a whole.
51.     In addition, banks and non-bank credit institutions should be required to submit
periodic complaints statistics. Without a regular reporting requirement, the newly forming
consumer protection unit within NBKR will lack critical information needed for it to function
effectively. At a minimum, the suggested reports should allow NBKR to see patterns and
trends in consumer complaints. It may also be useful to require the inclusion of some
indication of the means by which complaints have been resolved, although this is a more
complicated exercise.
52.     Further steps should be taken in developing a financial ombudsman scheme for
Kyrgyz Republic. It is recommended that the working group conduct a detailed analysis of
complaints statistics (courts, NBKR, individual institutions) as well as the suitability of the
existing complaints handling mechanisms. Based on the data analysis as well as the review of
international experience and best practice12, a concept should be developed by the working
group on the most appropriate institutional set-up for a financial ombudsman in Kyrgyz
Republic. A number of design issues will need to be considered including the legal framework
under which a financial ombudsman could operate, governance structures, coverage of the
ombudsman scheme, funding, accessibility and accountability.




12
     A World Bank note on financial ombudsman schemes was shared with NBKR in December 2013.



          Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 29
VI.    FINANCIAL EDUCATION

Findings
53.     Financial capability levels in the Kyrgyz Republic appear to be low, even though
comprehensive, nationally representative, and precise evidence is scarce. An individual-
level survey on financial literacy has been undertaken in 2013 which shows low levels of
financial capability in the Kyrgyz Republic. However, the sample size of this survey has been
rather small and the data was collected through computer-assisted telephone interviews which
limit the reliability and precision of the survey results as well as the depth and complexity of
the covered topics. The key findings of the four focus groups discussions which were
conducted as a second part of this review confirm low levels of financial capability among the
selected participants (see box 3). They do not allow, however, for extrapolation of the results
to the general population.
54.     A few financial capability enhancing activities in the Kyrgyz Republic
undertaken by public or private institutions exist, but they have been largely
uncoordinated and untargeted. The NBKR conducted several public education campaigns
through mass media outlets. Private financial institutions and industry associations, in
particular in the non-banking financial sector have also been active in initiating financial
capability programs. Commercial banks, on the other hand, appear to have no financial
education initiatives outside of materials handed to clients to explain their products and
services as well as credit counselling sessions when issues arise with loans.
55.     Important steps have recently been taken which are geared towards increasing
financial literacy levels of the Kyrgyz population: (i) a high policy-level interagency
working group chaired by the vice prime minister has been established for the development
and implementation of a national financial education strategy. At the same time, (ii) an expert
working group has been established under the Coordination Council for Microfinance
Development (CCMD) in the Kyrgyz Republic which is tasked with the drafting of the
national financial education strategy based on the results of their planned demand-side
financial capability survey and their findings from an initial stocktaking of existing financial
capability enhancing initiatives. In addition to these efforts, another working group has been
established under the banking union.
VI. Financial Education


Recommendations
56.     The development of the envisaged financial education strategy requires extensive
coordination between different working groups and a wide consultation process including
relevant stakeholders from the public, private and non-profit sector. To ensure ownership
and provide focus and momentum in the process of developing the national strategy extensive
coordination and communication is needed between the interagency working group chaired by the
vice prime minister and the expert group established under the Coordination Council for
Microfinance Development (CCMD) which is tasked with the actual drafting of the concept and a
subsequent national financial education strategy. Furthermore, to avoid overlaps and duplications,
better coordination is needed between the expert group under the CCMD and the financial
literacy working group established by the banking union. It is recommended to conduct monthly
coordination meetings between the technical level working groups of the CCMD and banking
union as well as quarterly briefing meetings with the high-level Inter-Agency Working Group.
57.     Consider extending membership of the CCMD financial literacy expert group to a
broader range of stakeholders. The expert group under the CCMD13 needs to comprise a wide
range of stakeholders to ensure wider consensus building about the importance of financial
education, knowledge exchange, and most importantly to secure overall support and funding of
the development and implementation of the strategy. There are, however, a plethora of other
stakeholders from public, private and non-profit sectors which could provide additional insights
to the working group (e.g. the deposit insurance fund, the credit bureau, the antimonopoly agency,
etc.). A consultation with a wider range of stakeholders would also be helpful to mitigate the risk
that scarce resources are inefficiently allocated or certain needs in the population remain
unaddressed.
58.     It is recommended that the strategy and subsequent programs give special emphasis
to migrants and rural populations. Given that total remittances transfers (both inflows and
outflows) account for 42 percent of the GDP and that migrants demonstrate weaknesses in the
area of understanding of financial concepts as well as managing their day-to-day finances and
planning ahead, a potential target group of the financial education strategy could be migrants and
their families. The results of the focus group discussions also suggest the need to extend financial
capability enhancing programs to rural populations.
59.     To validate the focus group results and create a baseline against which the impact of
financial capability enhancing initiatives can be measured, it is recommended to conduct a
comprehensive and nationally representative financial capability survey. This financial
capability survey should cover awareness and understanding of basic financial concepts and
products. Since knowledge does not always translate into proper action, it should also capture
attitudes, such as impulsiveness, farsightedness and action orientation as well as behaviors related
to day-to-day money management, planning for unexpected and old age expenses, choosing and
using financial products and using information and advice. In order to get a better understanding
if people in the Kyrgyz Republic benefit from the financial products they use, it is further
recommended to measure their reported incidences of conflicts with financial service providers
and their levels of satisfaction with different types of financial products they used.

13
  Currently, the expert group comprises four government agencies, four industry associations, and four multilateral
and bilateral donor organizations.



            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 31
VI. Financial Education

60.     Representative, reliable, and precise survey results which effectively inform policy
objectives require careful consideration to be given to the questionnaire design, the
sampling methodology, the mode of interviewing, and data analysis and interpretation. In
particular, careful consideration should be given to the size of the sample of individuals to be
interviewed, the use of standard probability sampling methods, the design and customization of
the questionnaire, the training of supervisors/enumerators in administering the survey, the
conduct of a small pilot survey, the use of face-to-face interviews, the monitoring of the
fieldwork, and the proper analysis and interpretation of the collected data.
61.    In addition to the financial capability survey, the design of financial education
programs should be informed by the results of rigorous impact assessments of similar
programs in other countries. Even though the impact of financial education programs is context
dependent and may vary within and between countries, relying on previous experience is
expected to increase the effectiveness of newly designed programs. For instance, recent research
shows that financial education works best, when delivered to adults during teachable moments14.

62.     Financial capability enhancing initiatives should be tested initially on a small scale
and only be rolled out upon rigorous evaluation of their positive impacts. International
experience shows that increasing the number of financial capability enhancing programs does not
always lead to desired outcomes in terms of enhanced financial capability levels among the
targeted populations. It is therefore crucial to identify programs which are most effective. When
properly done, a Randomized Control Trial (RCT) is the best possible methodology for
identifying the causal impact of a financial education initiative.15 Only those programs which
prove to be most effective should receive wide support.
Box 4. Impact assessments of financial capability targeted at migrants and their families

A recent RCT from Indonesia shows, that targeting not only remittances senders but also their families is
expected to deliver promising results (see Doi et al., 2012). The study also shows that providing financial
literacy to migrant workers and their families at a teachable moment, when they are more likely to be receptive
to new information as they can relate it directly to their own lives can have huge value too. Right before the
migrant leaves, could offer such a moment as migrants and their families will not have the familiarity with
different methods of sending and receiving remittances. At that time they will not have formed any habits either
on how to effectively manage their new and relatively higher earnings. Simple actions such as providing
guidance on budgeting, record-keeping, and financial planning can help migrant workers – and their families –
gaining control over their financial lives and make realistic plans for the future.
Evidence from Australia and New Zealand further shows that financial education offered to migrants can
increase the development impact of remittances by changing migrant’s knowledge about the costs of
remitting and leading them to rely on less expensive remittances channels (see Gibson et al., 2013). On the
other hand, the study finds that teaching migrants that bundling smaller transactions into a single large
transaction saves costs ultimately did not change the frequency or the level of remittances.




14
  Teachable moments are times in people’s lives when they are more likely to be receptive to new information.
15
  In this method, similar to a clinical trial, participants are randomly assigned to treatment and control groups,
whereby the treatment group receives the financial capability intervention and the control group does not. The control
group forms then the basis of comparison against which the change in outcomes of the treatment group can be
assessed.



            Kyrgyz Republic - Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy | 32
