                                                                                 90420
                                                                  Myanmar
  Development of A Myanmar National
  Electrification Plan
  Towards Universal Access 2015-2030




Why Universal Access?

Myanmar has one of the lowest rates of electrification in Southeast Asia. Less than 30 percent
of households in Myanmar have access to electricity, and electricity consumption per capita is
among the lowest in the world. The urban-rural divide in access to electricity is huge – while the
electrification rate in urban areas is about 75% (e.g. Yangon and Mandalay), the rural areas
have an extremely low electrification rate of only 16 percent. In fact, most of rural communities
in border areas have no access to the grid-based electricity at all, and some regions and
states with a high share of rural population (e.g. Ayeyarwady and Magway Regions and
Rakhine State) have access to grid-based electricity below 10 percent. Therefore, the access
to electricity provides a clear indication of relative and absolute poverty levels in Myanmar.

Energy poverty also affects population with access to electricity due to shortages and poor
reliability of power supply. Delays in investments in power infrastructure, over-reliance on
seasonal hydropower production (which accounts for about 70 percent of power generation),
and a rapid increase in electricity demand, which tripled over the last decade, resulted in
large electricity shortages which are estimated at about 30 percent of power demand during
the dry season.

Access to modern energy service has direct bearing on poverty reduction and rural
development. Universal access to electricity in Myanmar by 2030 is achievable and affordable
goal and, as proven in neighboring countries such as Thailand, Vietnam, Laos and
China, the goal can be achieved with sustained government’s commitment, targeted sector
policies, and significant financial support from donors.
What is the National Electrification Plan?

With help from the global Sustainable Energy for All initiative, led by the World Bank and the UN, the
Government (through the Ministry of Electric Power and the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural
Development) is preparing a National Electrification Plan (NEP) which includes recommended
geospatial, least cost grid rollout plan for achieving universal access to electricity by 2030, and an
Investment Prospectus for the phased financing of the investment needs. The NEP also proposes
institutional reforms required to ensure alignment of funding sources and accountabilities for
effective and timely implementation of the electrification program. The development of NEP is
coordinated with the government’s ongoing effort for the preparation of the Power Sector Master
Plan (funded by JICA) in which related strategic issues of the future energy mix in power generation
and transmission expansion are being addressed.




     •   The National Electrification Plan (NEP) charts out a path towards universal
         access designed specifically for Myanmar, embrace both grid and off-grid
         solutions, and include appropriate policy and technical innovation to lower
         cost, improve reliability, and provide timely service to all households

     •   The World Bank Group is supporting NEP development and implementation.
         Both financial support for investments, and technical assistance for institutional
         development and capacity building will be available to Myanmar for the
         implementation of NEP




What Approach does the NEP Involve?

    NEP is envisaged to be a comprehensive action plan for developing, financing, and
    implementing electricity access scale-up program nationwide, with the target of achieving
    universal access by 2030. Its aims to align support from different stakeholders with the
    implementation program for achieving national access targets and syndicates financing
    on a timely, ongoing and programmatic basis.


What are the Key Elements/Components of the NEP?

•   The NEP includes two key components: 1) Geospatial Least Cost Electrification Rollout plan
    (grid and off-grid) and 2) Road Map and Investment Prospectus

    First component consists of a high level geospatial rollout plan comprising of a systematic
    grid network rollout connection plan and complementary spatial plans for mini-grids and
    individual systems.

    While second component looks at the long-term and intermediate targets for 2015-2030,
    investment financing framework for the first 5 years, action plan to address enabling policy
    and institutional framework, as well as the capacity strengthening initiatives for key
    institutions and agencies.
What are Implementation Arrangements?

    •   MOEP and MLFRD jointly lead the NEP
        preparation with participation from other
        member agencies of NEMC and REPWSC and
        assistance from the World Bank.
    •   MOEP and MLFRD co-manage consultants
        together with World Bank. This includes
        strategic guidance to data collection, review
        of key deliverables, organization of workshops
        and study tours.
    •   Consultants work closely with the government
        teams throughout the NEP preparation
        process
    •   Close coordination with ADB, JICA and other
        DPs on respective, related initiatives.


At the same time, two consulting firms were
competitively selected to assist in NEP development:

•   Columbia University is working on the Geospatial
    least cost electrification rollout plan, with
    experience in Indonesia, Kenya, Nigeria,
    Tanzania, etc.
•   Castalia is in charge of the creating the
    Roadmap and Investment Prospectus bringing its
    experience from Indonesia, Rwanda, Kenya,
    Vanuatu




What are Recommended Next Steps?

•   Government of Myanmar formally adopts the NEP, including the
    Roadmap and the institutional implementation
    Plan via Government Decree;

•   Government appoints an Executive Secretariat (ES) tasked with coordinating roll-out program and
    responsible directly to the Vice-President;

•   Government initiates a donor coordination process, and continues working with donors to secure the
    full financing package needed for program implementation.
