                                                90522

      International Comparison Program




           [05.01]
Lessons learned from use of Basket
   of Construction Components


                 Fred Vogel




         3rd Technical Advisory Group Meeting
                   June 10-11, 2010

                     Paris, France
                                                       Table of Contents



1.    Background ......................................................................................................................... 3

2.    Data review ......................................................................................................................... 5

3.    Lessons Learned ................................................................................................................. 5

4.    Thoughts for 2011 .............................................................................................................. 5



Tables

Table 1. Systems for Residential Buildings (basic components in Italics) ................................ 6

Table 2. Site work system for residential buildings .................................................................. 7



Annexes
Annex 1. Portland Cement ......................................................................................................... 8
Annex 2. Skilled Labor ............................................................................................................ 10
            Lessons learned from use of Basket of Construction Components



1.     Background


The underlying principle of the BOCC was that the construction costs of residential and non
residential buildings and civil engineering works could be compared by pricing the major
components going into the construction of each. A set of 34 components were identified of
which 12 were basic input items such as building materials, types of labor and rental costs for
four types of equipment. The data collection form for each basic item captured average
purchaser costs for different quantities such as three different measures of cubic meters of
concrete. Costs of skilled labor were obtained for 6 different kinds ranging from bricklayers
to machine operators. There was overlap in the basic components. Even though concrete
was treated as a basic component, so were sand, cement, and aggregates which make up
concrete.



The 22 composite components included parts of the construction process such as earthwork, a
column footing, or an interior wall. The data to be collected for each composite component
included the materials, labor, and equipment; however, the main objective was to obtain the
total cost of each component which was the comparison variable. It should be noted that
there was considerable overlap between the composite components and basic items. For
example, a structural footing is a composite component, but the total cost included concrete,
reinforcing steel, and different kinds of skilled and unskilled labor which were basic items
and also priced separately. The difference was that the concrete, etc., in the composite
component was included as a total cost while an average price was captured for the basic
item.



The idea to price composite components was that it would be easier to get the cost of
components than for an entire project. In addition, it was assumed that the components were
fundamental parts of construction projects that were comparable across countries. By
obtaining the total cost of a component, the relative trade-offs between countries of labor vs.
capital were captured. In other words, the component costs reflected the relative
contributions of labor, equipment and materials. Although the costs of the composite
components were assumed to be more easily obtained than the data for the Bills of
Quantities, it still required the input of experts for the data collection.



The component costs were based on the purchaser prices of the material, labor, and rental of
equipment. These costs do not include any profit margin or overhead expenses for architects


                                                                                             3
and other construction experts. The comparison based on costs assumes that the profit
margins and overhead costs are proportional to overall costs across countries.



The basic and composite components were combined into different sets of systems for
residential and non residential dwellings and civil engineering projects. The systems for
residential dwellings are: Sitework; Substructure; Superstructure; Exterior shell; Interior
partitions; Interior/exterior finishes; Mechanical and plumbing; and Electrical. Table 1 shows
the basic items and composite components associated with each system for residential
buildings.



Table 2 shows the composite components and basic items going into the Site Work system.
Note there are three composite components. The comparison variable for each is the total
cost. The composite components obtain the combined total cost of materials, labor, and
equipment. It is pointed out that the total cost, for example, of labor will be correlated to the
average input costs of the different types of workers. Some additional points are that:

        Each System for PPP estimation was to be treated like a basic heading which meant
         there would be no weights applied to the composite component costs and basic item
         prices within each system.
        The basic input items are not independent—concrete includes cement, sand, and
         aggregates.
        The sidewalk composite component includes concrete (which is made up of cement,
         sand, and aggregates)
        If the total cost were provided for every composite component and average prices for
         every basic item, there would be 24 variables for comparison purposes across
         countries for the Site work system.
        Even though there would not be quantity weights, there is an implicit weighting. For
         example, the composite components make up only 3 of the 24 items. Sand, because
         it is priced for three different quantities, also makes up three of the 24. Concrete
         which reflects the prices of sand, cement, and aggregates could be said to make up
         half of the variables being compared. Skilled labor with six different types has twice
         the weight of the composite components.
        A review of the other systems in Table 2 shows a similar pattern. The basic
         component—sand—appears in 6 of the 8 systems, skilled and unskilled labor in 7 of
         the 8 systems. One could say from this that the two most important things to price
         for residential housing were sand and labor.


Once the PPPs for each system were computed, the next step was to weight these to the
residential PPP. These system weights, or W2 weights, were to be determined for the country
as a whole. Regions and countries were advised to use construction experts to obtain the
system weights for the country as a whole. In general, it was difficult for countries to furnish
the system weights. As a result, system weights were determined for each region for the
residential and non residential, and civil engineering basic headings.

                                                                                               4
Countries within the region in effect received the same weights for aggregation.



2.       Data review
The costs of the complex components and the prices for the basic items were reviewed by
expert consultants. A global office review showed there was considerable noise in the data.
The review process was by triage with implausible data removed because there was not
sufficient time to send the data back to countries.



3.       Lessons Learned
        The services of expert consultants were required to collect the data for the composite
         components and to do data validation across countries, so it was still an expensive
         process.
        The BOCC comparison method was essentially a comparison of basic components.
         The extra cost to obtain composite component costs was not reflected in the weighting
         in the estimation process.
        Countries were not able to develop a set of system weights that reflected the overall
         residential, nonresidential, and civil engineering sectors even with input from expert
         consultants.
        Time for data validation needs to allow for a second review by countries




4.       Thoughts for 2011
        Increase the number of basic items to be priced.
        Use the 2005 product specs for basic items as a starting point which provide different
         measures of quantities and types of labor, for example
        Determine the relative importance of each basic item at the country level for some
         selected buildings and construction projects relevant to the regional economy. For
         example, each country could provide weights for a single family dwelling, a two story
         flat, a school, and a section of a roadway.
        If weights cannot be provided, a fall back solution would be to simply calculate item
         PPPs for the basic items which is essentially what was done in 2005.
        Seek information on profit margins, but be willing to assume relative equality across
         countries rather than making haphazard guesses..
        Emphasis should be in the collection of good data on input prices and the willingness
         to say what they represent.




                                                                                             5
Table 1. Systems for Residential Buildings (basic components in Italics)

System         Component                   System            Component
Site work      Aggregate base              Exterior shell    Aluminum frame window
               Earthwork                                     Sand
               Exterior sidewalk                             Portland cement
               Concrete                                      Unskilled labor
               Aggregate                                     Skilled labor
               Portland cement             Interior          Masonry interior wall
               Sand                        partitions        Portland cement
               Backhoe                                       Sand
               Unskilled labor                               Plywood
               Skilled labor                                 Unskilled labor
Substructure   Aggregate base                                Skilled labor
               Column footing              Interior/exterior Exterior wall cement plaster
               Aggregate                   finishes          Interior ceiling plaster
               Portland cement                               Interior wall plaster
               Reinforcing steel                             Exterior paint
               Sand                                          Interior paint
               Concrete                                      Portland cement
               Backhoe                                       Sand
               Plywood                                       Plywood
Superstructure Structural column round                       Unskilled labor
               Structural column square                      Skilled labor
               Concrete                    Mechanical and Unskilled labor
               Aggregate                   plumbing          Skilled labor
               Portland cement             Electrical        Electrical service point
               Reinforcing steel                             Unskilled labor
               Sand                                          Skilled labor
               Structural steel
               Plywood
               Unskilled labor
               Skilled labor




                                                                                       6
Table 2. Site work system for residential buildings



Composite
Components
                       Aggregate Base          Includes           Total cost
                                               aggregate, labor,
                                               equipment
                       Earthwork               Includes labor and Total cost
                                               equipment
                       Sidewalk                Includes concrete, Total cost
                                               labor,         and
                                               equipment

Basic components       Aggregate           for 1.00 cubic meter     Average price
                       concrete
                                               50.00 cubic meters   Average price
                                               100.00       cubic   Average price
                                               meters
                       Portland cement         10.00                Average price
                                               100.00               Average price
                                               200.00               Average price
                       Sand for concrete       1.00                 Average price
                                               50.00                Average price
                                               100.00               Average price
                       Concrete                10.00                Average price
                                               100.00               Average price
                                               1,000.00             Average price
                       Unskilled labor         All                  Average price
                       Skilled Labor           Bricklayer           Average price
                                               Plumber              Average price
                                               Carpenter            Average price
                                               Steel worker         Average price
                                               Electrician          Average price
                                               Machine operator     Average price
                       Backhoe                 Rate / hour          Average price
                                               Rate/ day            Average price
                                                                    Average price




                                                                                    7
Annex 1. Portland Cement

15.02.00.0.23         Portland Cement                                    Observation:
                                                                           Auto Calc
Source Information:
 Date of price collection (dd/mm/yyyy):
 Country:
 Describe source of price
  Material Supply
  Informal or temporary sales location
  Average, Price Index data collection
 Price is for year:
  2005
Details:
Cement to be priced shall be ordinary Portland Cement that is used for typical concrete work
in a variety of residential, non-residential and civil works projects. Cement used for these
purposes is generally categorized into the following categories:
        Type I—for use when the special properties specified for any other type are not
        required
        Type IA—air-entraining cement for the same uses as Type I, where air-entrainment is
        desired
        Type II—for general use, more especially when moderate sulfate resistance or
        moderate heat of hydration is desired
        Type IIA—air-entraining cement for the same uses as Type II, where air-entrainment
        is desired
        Type III—for use when high early strength is desired
        Type IIIA—air-entraining cement for the same use as Type III, where air-entrainment
        is desired
        Type IV—for use when a low heat of hydration is desired
        Type V—for use when high sulfate resistance is desired
Even though the roman numerals based designation of the types may be prevalent in only
certain regions of the world the general categorization is applicable worldwide. Whichever
type of cement is most commonly used in the country should be priced.

Quantity and Packaging:
    Package size (kg):
 Package type (paper sack, cloth sack, etc.):
 Volume effects:
    Price for single package:
    Discount for larger quantities:

Source:
 Domestic:
      Manufacturer:
    Imported:
      Country of origin:
      Manufacturer:




                                                                                          8
Product Characteristics:

Percent volcanic ash:
Fineness:
Compressive Strength (MPa):


Pricing Information:

Material Costs (in national currency)
            Type

Ordinary Portland Cement
Ordinary Portland Cement
Ordinary Portland Cement


Comments (if any):




                                        9
Annex 2. Skilled Labor

15.02.00.0.29           Skilled Labor                          Observation:
                                                                Auto Calc
 Source Information:
  Date of price collection (dd/mm/yyyy):
  Country:
  Describe source of price
  General Contractor
  Specialty Contractor
  Average, Price Index data collection
  Other (    )
 Price is for year:
  2005

Details:
Provide details of the compensation of employees for the following six kinds of skilled
workers
 bricklayer,
 plumber,
 carpenter,
 structural steel worker,
 electrician,
 machine operator.

A skilled worker is one that has had training in one of these trades. The training may
consist of an apprenticeship, on the job training, or training in a technical college or similar
institution.

Compensation of employees includes wages and salaries (before deductions for social
contributions such as health or retirement benefits, income taxes, or trade union dues) plus
social contributions made by the employers, plus in-kind benefits such as meals or housing.

You may report one of the following:
 Rates per hour for regular hours (i.e. excluding overtime)
 Rates per day (specify the regular number (excluding overtime) of hours worked per day)
 Rates per week (specify the regular number (excluding overtime) of hours worked per
   week)

Depending on the choice to report rates per hour or per day or per week, you will need to
impute rates for Social Security Contributions and Income in Kind and record them in the
table below.

The rates should refer to skilled labor employed on a construction project near a major urban
center.




                                                                                                   10
Pricing Information:

Compensation of employees (in national currency)


Bricklayer




Plumber




Carpenter




Structural
steel worker




Electrician




Machine
operator




Comments (if any):




                                                   11
