                                                                                                90748

    The Economic Impact of the 2014 Ebola Epidemic:
    Short and Medium Term Estimates for Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone



                                         The World Bank1
                                        September 17, 2014


Highlights

       Beyond the terrible toll in human lives and suffering, the Ebola epidemic currently afflicting
        West Africa is already having a measurable economic impact in terms of forgone output; higher
        fiscal deficits; rising prices; lower real household incomes and greater poverty. These economic
        impacts include the costs of healthcare and forgone productivity of those directly affected but,
        more importantly, they arise from the aversion behavior of others in response to the disease.

       Using a method based on sector decomposition, the short-term (2014) impact on output is
        estimated to be on the order of 2.1 percentage points (pp) of GDP in Guinea (reducing growth
        from 4.5 percent to 2.4 percent); 3.4 pp of GDP in Liberia (reducing growth from 5.9 percent to
        2.5 percent) and 3.3 pp of GDP in Sierra Leone (reducing growth from 11.3 percent to 8.0
        percent). This forgone output corresponds to US$359 million in 2014 prices.

       The short-term fiscal impacts are also large, at US$93 million (4.7 percent of GDP) for Liberia;
        US$79 million (1.8 percent of GDP for Sierra Leone) and US$120 million (1.8 percent of GDP) for
        Guinea. These estimates are best-viewed as lower-bounds. Slow containment scenarios would
        almost certainly lead to even greater financing gaps in 2015.

       Inflation and food prices were initially contained but are now showing upward movements in
        response to shortages, panic buying, and speculation. The food poor in these countries are
        becoming increasingly vulnerable. Exchange rate volatility has increased in all three countries,
        particularly since June, fueled by uncertainty and some capital flight.

       As it is far from certain that the epidemic will be fully contained by December 2014 and in light
        of the considerable uncertainty about its future trajectory, two alternative scenarios are used to
        estimate the medium-term (2015) impact of the epidemic, extending to the end of calendar

1
 This document was prepared jointly by teams from the World Bank’s Global Practice for Macro & Fiscal
Management (led by John Panzer) and the Office of the Chief Economist for the Africa Region (led by Francisco
Ferreira), with major contributions from the Development Prospects Group. It includes inputs provided by Timothy
Bulman, César Calderón, Marcio Cruz, Sebastien Dessus, David Evans, Yusuf Bob Foday, Errol Graham, Hans
Lofgren, Maryla Maliszewska, Mead Over, Cyrus Talati, Hardwick Tchale, Mark Thomas, and Ali Zafar.

                                                       1
           year 2015. A “Low Ebola” scenario corresponds to rapid containment within the three most
           severely affected countries (henceforth the “core three countries”), while “High Ebola”
           corresponds to slower containment in the core three countries, with likely broader regional
           contagion.

          The medium-term impact (2015) on output in Guinea is estimated to be negligible under Low
           Ebola, and 2.3pp of GDP under High Ebola. In Liberia, it is estimated to be 4.2pp of GDP under
           Low Ebola, or 11.7pp of GDP under High Ebola. In Sierra Leone, the impact would be 1.2pp of
           GDP under Low Ebola, and 8.9pp under High Ebola. These estimates of lost GDP in the core
           three countries (for calendar year 2015 alone) sum to US$97 million under Low Ebola (implying
           some recovery from 2014), and US$809 million under High Ebola.

          The take-away messages from this exercise are that the economic impacts are already certain to
           be serious in the core three countries - particularly Liberia and Sierra Leone – and could become
           catastrophic under a slow-containment, High Ebola scenario.

          Preliminary estimates suggest that, in the absence of strong containment measures, the
           epidemic is likely to spread, and both Low Ebola and High Ebola scenarios are likely to result in
           economic costs numbering in the billions.

          A swift policy reaction by the international community is crucial. With the potential costs so
           high, containment and mitigation expenditures as high as several billion dollars would be cost-
           effective, if they successfully avert the worst epidemiological outcomes.

          Finally, these estimates are subject to considerable uncertainty, arising not only from the usual
           and well-known problems associated with economic forecasting and data scarcity, but even
           more so from the unusually high uncertainty associated with the future epidemiological path of
           Ebola, and with people’s behavioral responses to it. All of the numbers in this note represent
           best-effort estimates under documented assumptions and modeling choices, but the margins of
           error associated with them are inevitably large. The scenarios should be read and interpreted
           accordingly.


Section 1: Introduction

Overview
The 2014 outbreak of the Ebola Virus Disease2 in West Africa has taken a horrible human toll. Although
the outbreak originated in rural Guinea, it has hit hardest in Liberia and Sierra Leone, in part because it
has reached urban areas in these two countries, a factor that distinguishes this outbreak from previous
episodes elsewhere. As of September 10, 2014, there had been 2,281 recorded deaths out of 4,614

2
    Hereafter the term Ebola is used to refer to the virus, the disease or the epidemic outbreak.

                                                            2
suspected or confirmed cases of Ebola.3 Experts fear that the true numbers may be two to four times
larger, due to underreporting.4 Misery and suffering have been intense, especially in Liberia where
doctors have had to turn patients away for lack of space in Ebola treatment centers.

Inevitably, before the outbreak is contained the human impacts will increase considerably over these
numbers. Epidemiological estimates are acknowledged as highly uncertain and are not the subject of
this note. What is certain is that limiting the human cost will require significant financial resources and a
concerted partnership between international partners and the affected countries. Particularly in Liberia
and Sierra Leone, government capacity is already overrun and the epidemic is impacting macroeconomic
activity and budgetary resources.

This note informs the response to the epidemic by estimating these macroeconomic and fiscal effects.
Any such exercise is necessarily highly imprecise due to limited data and many uncertain factors, but it is
still necessary in order to plan the economic assistance that must accompany the immediate
humanitarian response. The goal is to help affected countries to recover and return to the robust
economic growth they had experienced until the onset of this crisis.

Channels of impact
The impact of the Ebola epidemic on economic well-being operates through two distinct channels. First,
are the direct and indirect effects of the sickness and mortality themselves, which consume health care
resources and subtract people either temporarily or permanently from the labor supply. Second, are
the behavioral effects resulting from peoples’ fear of contagion, which in turn leads to a fear of
association with others and reduces labor force participation, closes places of employment, disrupts
transportation, and motivates some government and private decision-makers to close seaports and
airports. In the recent history of infectious disease outbreaks such as the SARS epidemic of 2002-2004
and the H1N1 flu epidemic of 2009, behavioral effects have been responsible for as much as 80 or 90
percent of the total economic impact of the epidemic.5

The first of these channels, consisting of the labor force and health expenditure impacts, closely tracks
the number of suspected and actual cases of the disease (see Figure 1). The second, or behavioral,
channel, is less sensitive to the actual number of cases of Ebola because it is driven by aversion
behavior, and it is potentially more sensitive to information and public response. For example,
employers who learn how to protect themselves and their workers from contagion will reopen
workplaces and resume production and investment, and governments that demonstrate they have
controlled the epidemic and have resumed normal activity will inspire confidence in both domestic and
international economic agents to resume their former pace of economic activity.




3
  OCHA, “West Africa: Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) Outbreak (as of 10 Sep 2014),” September 10, 2014.
4
  World Health Organization, “Ebola Response Roadmap,” August 28, 2014.
5
  See, for example, Lee & McKibbin, “Globalization and Disease: The Case of SARS,” Australian National University
Working Paper No. 2003/16, August 2003.

                                                       3
Structure of the Note
This document presents the World Bank’s preliminary estimates of the economic impact of the Ebola
outbreak in West Africa for 2014 and 2015. Section 2 presents a single set of 2014 estimates for Liberia,
Sierra Leone, and Guinea, based on available data on current economic activity as well as assumptions
about the near-future impact. It also highlights current data on the limited current impacts on other
countries in the region. Section 3 presents estimates for the impact by the end of 2015 for Liberia,
Guinea, and Sierra Leone. Because the epidemic and the behavioral responses to it have more time to
diverge over the course of 2015, Section 3 presents two scenarios for 2015, which vary in the optimism
of their assumptions regarding the epidemic and the success of donor and government policy and
efforts to control it.

Figure 1: Broad channels of short-term impact




Section 2: Short Term Effects and Fiscal Impacts
The economic impact of the Ebola crisis is being felt acutely right now by the three directly affected
countries. Limited impacts are even being felt in the region beyond. Both the limited available survey


                                                   4
data and anecdotal evidence suggest impacts on agriculture, mining, services, and elsewhere. In order to
transform the partial evidence into credible measures of the short-term economic impact, estimates of
the impact of the crisis for this year – 2014 – for the three countries are built up from sector
components, based on the impact seen so far on economic activity. Representatives of economic sectors
were contacted to assess changes to economic activity. For example, mining officials provided metrics of
the extent to which Ebola was affecting current activity and plans for future investment. The estimates
also rely on leading indicators that usually serve as good predictors of economic activity. Cement
imports and sales, for example, are used to estimate the impact on construction activity and thereby on
services. Data on agricultural exports are used to estimate production shocks. Hotel occupancy rates,
airline traffic, and airport activity provide metrics for the transport sector, as does the closure of borders
and reductions in recorded cross-border trade.

In all cases, estimates of the impact of Ebola are compared with prior projections by the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund in the absence of Ebola. Other price information is also incorporated:
nominal exchange rates, parallel exchange rates (if any), fuel prices, and prices of a few other key goods,
all serve as indicators of supply bottlenecks and changes in investor or consumer behavior.

Fiscal impact has been estimated on the basis of actual year-to-date revenues, projected shortfalls, and
additional expenditures related to the crisis. Revenue shortfalls are determined by disaggregating
government revenues and focusing on areas most likely to be affected by the crisis, such as import taxes
and taxes on expatriate personnel. Expenditure estimates are based on spending plans of the Ministries
of Finance in each country. These plans include purchase of goods and supplies, core logistics, salaries
and hazard pay for emergency workers, training, and investment in rural health centers.

Short-run estimates of the economic impact assume no major disruptions in international supply chains,
for example the cutting-off of countries from international shipping, which would exacerbate the above
effects. Although it is true that there have been some border closings, these borders tend to be quite
porous. Such scenarios are only considered from 2015 onwards in the region-wide impact scenarios.
These estimates in this section presume a resumption of normal economic activities within six to nine
months. The economic estimates that follow are not derived from infection or mortality rates but reflect
both observed and posited individual, corporate, and government behavioral responses to the epidemic.

Liberia
Liberia is one of the poorest countries in Africa with a population of 4 million, per-capita income of
US$410, and about 60 percent of the population below the poverty line. More than half of the
population is urban, including in densely populated areas around the capital city of Monrovia. About
three-quarters of the labor force is engaged in informal activities, mainly agriculture, itinerant mining,
and commerce. Despite its post-conflict fragility and poor social conditions, Liberia had been growing
steadily prior to the Ebola outbreak under a regime of stable economic management, efforts to improve
public sector governance, and expansion of extractive industries.

Liberia is currently the country worst affected by the Ebola crisis, and the current trends in the rates of
infection and death suggest that the crisis is deepening. Since the first case of the Ebola virus was


                                                      5
reported in March 2014, the virus has spread quickly, particularly since July, to cover most of the
country.

Impact on Economic Activities
Since the escalation of the Ebola outbreak in July 2014, there has been a sharp disruption of economic
activities across sectors. The largest economic effects of the crisis are not the direct costs (mortality,
morbidity, caregiving, and the associated losses to working days), but rather those resulting from
changes in behavior – driven by fear – which have resulted in generally lower demands for goods and
services and consequently lower domestic income and employment.

Despite early signs that the initial fear-based behavioral response is abating amongst Liberians, as
evidenced by increased activities in local markets (about 80 percent of small and medium enterprises
remain open), the initial estimate of a 3.5 percentage point reduction in GDP growth for 2014 (from 5.9
percent to 2.5 percent) remains optimistic. Table 1 shows revised estimates of GDP growth with the
contribution of each sector. A deepening of the crisis over the remaining quarter of the year could
diminish overall GDP growth still further.

Table 1: Liberia - Estimated GDP Impact of Ebola (2014)
                           Contribution   Initial             Revised
                           to Growth      Projection          Projection
                           Shock (%)      (June 2014)
Real Growth in GDP                        5.9                 2.5
Agriculture                18.0           3.5                 1.3
Forestry                   -0.1           2.0                 2.0
Mining                     27.3           4.4                 -1.3
Manufacturing              4.6            9.6                 5.0
Services                   50.2           8.1                 4.0
Source: World Bank/IMF Staff Estimates

Mining
The mining sector accounts for about 17 percent of GDP and 56 percent of the US$559 million worth of
total exports in 2013. Production and exports are dominated by two large iron ore mining companies,
ArcelorMittal and China Union. Production at the largest mining company (ArcelorMittal) is holding
steady with production of approximately 3.3 million tons up to August—on track to achieve planned
production of 5.2 million tons by the end of 2014. However, investments to expand capacity to 15
million tons per year have been put on hold. The second major mining company, China Union, which had
projected production of approximately 2.4 million tons for 2014, has closed its operation since August.
Furthermore, restrictions on the movement of people have severely curtailed artisanal mining including
of gold and diamonds. Overall, the mining sector is expected to show a small contraction of 1.3 percent
in 2013 compared with an initial projection for growth above 4 percent.

Agriculture
The agricultural sector accounts for about one-quarter of Liberia’s GDP, but nearly half of the total
employed workforce and three-quarters of the rural workforce is engaged in the sector. Both export and
domestic agriculture have been severely affected by the crisis. The production and shipments of rubber


                                                          6
– the single most important agricultural export for Liberia – have been disrupted by both the reduced
mobility of the workforce and the difficulty in getting the products to the ports due to the quarantine
zones. Rubber exports which were initially expected to be about US$148 million in 2014 are estimated
to drop 20 percent.

Large investments in palm oil planting, including by the world’s largest producer of palm oil, Sime Darby,
have slowed due to the evacuation of managerial and supervisory personnel, and the focus has shifted
to maintenance. Sime Darby’s planned construction of a US$10 million modern oil palm mill for which
construction started in July 2014 and completion was expected in 2015, is also now on hold.

In domestic agriculture, the main food growing areas – in Lofa County in the North West part of the
country – are also the areas most affected by the outbreak of Ebola and are quarantined. Farms have
been abandoned. Even in the cases where farming operations are on-going, the shortage of labor as a
result of the quarantine as well as the migration of a number of families from the areas at the onset of
the outbreak has affected both harvesting and replanting of several crops, including rice, Liberia’s key
staple. In addition, quarantine zones and the restriction on movement of persons have adversely
affected the transport and marketing of food, resulting in shortages and higher prices.

Manufacturing
Liberia’s manufacturing sector, which accounts for only about 4 percent of GDP and is already hard-
pressed by weak infrastructure, has been adversely affected by the reduced demand as a result of the
crisis. Liberia’s small manufacturing sector is dominated by the cement and beverage sub-sectors which
together account for nearly 90 percent of manufacturing output. The production of paints, candles,
bottled water and mattresses comprise the remaining output. The adverse shock to the construction
sector as a result of the quarantines has resulted in substantially lower demands for cement, well
beyond the normal seasonal drop related to the rainy season (Figure 2). Cement sales fell nearly 60
percent between July and September, well beyond normal seasonal effects. There is also reduced
demand for beverages from the hotel and restaurant sector, as the disruption to commercial flights has
resulted in fewer business and tourist arrivals. The Ebola crisis has exacerbated the situation for an
already weak beverage sub-sector, which had seen a 30 percent reduction in beer production in the first
quarter of 2014.




                                                    7
Figure 2: Liberia – Cement sales
45,000
   Tons
                    Actual           Seasonally adjusted
40,000

35,000

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

 5,000

     0
         2010          2011             2012            2013             2014


Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the Liberia Cement Corporation.

Services
The services sector, which comprises approximately half of the Liberian economy and employs nearly 45
percent of the labor force, has been hardest hit by the Ebola crisis. Wholesale and retail traders have
reported a 50-75 percent drop in turnover relative to the normal amount for the trading period. The
reduction has been largest in markets serving expatriates. Both commercial and residential construction
activities, which were booming before the crisis, appear to be on hold as reflected by the sharp fall-off in
cement sales since June 2014 (Figure 2). Government construction activities in the energy and transport
sectors have also come to a halt as contractors have declared force majeure and have evacuated key
personnel.

The domestic transport sector has also been severely affected by the crisis. One indicator of this has
been the sharp drop in fuel sales, with petrol and diesel sales down by 21 and 35 percent (Figure 3).
Emergency regulations limiting taxis to 4 passengers have raised the cost of domestic travel. The cost of
transporting goods has also seen increases, in some cases by 50 percent.

The hotel and restaurants sub-sector has been adversely affected by the reduction of commercial flights
to Liberia, from 27 weekly flights up to August to only 6 at the beginning of September. Average hotel
occupancy has dropped from upwards of 70 before the crisis to about 30 percent now. Some hotels
have reported occupancy as low as 10 percent as a result of the crisis. As a direct result, hotel workers
have either been laid-off or had their working days reduced by half.

Food Prices and Inflation
The disruption to harvesting and transport as well as the closing of the borders and the quarantine of
areas including one of the primary agricultural production areas have led to rising prices, and domestic
food prices in particular, which have accelerated since June. In addition, panic buying has increased the
demand for food staples and has helped to push prices up (Figure 4). There are also concerns that
increased shipping insurance for ships transporting goods to Liberia could further drive up the price of
imported foods and fuel.


                                                               8
Figure 3: Liberia - Fuel sales
 "000 Gals/day
        6
                             Petrol (Seasonally adjusted)
                             Diesel (Seasonally adjusted)
        5


        4


        3


        2


        1


        0
            2010            2011             2012                  2013              2014
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from LPRC

Figure 4: Liberia - Inflation and food prices

                                         Inflation
 14

 12

 10

    8
%
    6

    4

    2

    0
             Jan-14   Feb          Mar       Apr          May        Jun       Jul
                                    CPI            Domestic Food


Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from LISGIS

External Sector
The Ebola crisis has had a substantial impact on regional and international travel to Liberia, with direct
effects on the hotel, transport and restaurant sub-sectors in particular. In the short-term, exports
(mainly rubber and iron ore) have held, and the reductions in imports (including of capital goods owing
to delayed investments) have resulted in an improvement in the balance of payments as reflected in the
modest appreciation of the exchange rate in July (Figure 5). However, this position is unlikely to be
sustained going forward with the expected increased demand for imported food, the fall-off in foreign
direct investment, and adversely affected exports. For sea transport, the impact has been limited so far,
largely due to pre-programmed scheduling contracts. However, there are indications that forward
scheduling is weakening. Volumes of containers coming into Liberia are down 30 percent from normal
August levels.




                                                                           9
Figure 5: Liberia - Movement of exchange rate since the crisis

                                       Daily exchange rate
               95


               90


               85
   $LD/US$
               80


               75


               70
                1-Jan-14   1-Feb-14 1-Mar-14   1-Apr-14 1-May-14   1-Jun-14   1-Jul-14   1-Aug-14   1-Sep-14

Source: Central Bank of Liberia.

Fiscal Impact
The fiscal impact of the Ebola crisis in Liberia has already been substantial, at nearly US$100 million, and
the direct and contingent fiscal costs continue to rise (see Table 2 below). On the revenue side,
government data up to the first week of September showed total revenue collection of US$80.4 million,
representing a shortfall of about US$10 million relative to pre-Ebola forecasts. Furthermore, the
government has revised its revenue target for September down from US$41.7 million to US$26.3
million—the lowest revenue collection since 2012. With the slowing of economic activity and weakness
in tax administration (due to curfews and quarantines) total revenues for the year are likely to be about
US$46 million below the initial forecast.

Table 2: Liberia - Estimated Fiscal Impact of Ebola (US$ millions)
                                                 Initial                Revised                                Difference
                                                 Projection             Projection
Total Revenues and grants                        558.9                  513.2                                  -45.7
Tax revenue                                      399.0                  361.4                                  -37.6
Non-Tax                                          100.3                  92.2                                   -8.1
Grants                                           59.6                   59.6                                   0.0

Expenditure                                      717.6                  764.7                                  47.1
Current Expenditure                              441.9                  509.1                                  67.2
Of which for health emergency                    0.0                    20.0                                   20.0
Capital Expenditure                              275.6                  255.6                                  -20.0

Overall Balance                                  -158.7                 -251.5                                 92.8
Overall Balance (% of GDP)                       -7.1                   -11.8                                  4.7
Source: IMF/World Bank Staff

On the expenditure side, substantial demands for health and social protection spending have pushed up
total spending by nearly US$50 million including US$20 million to address the health emergency. Of the

                                                                    10
total, current expenditure will increase by nearly US$70 million while the Government will reallocate
US$20 million from capital to the current budget. The sharp reduction in fiscal revenues combined with
the increased expenditure creates a fiscal gap of about US$93 million to be financed. This is likely to be a
lower bound.

Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone has made good economic and social progress over the past dozen years indicated by steady
progress in per capita income, which was US$680 in 2013. Despite the significant improvement, poverty
is widespread with 53 percent of the population below the poverty line as of 2011. In rural areas, where
the bulk of the population lives, the poverty rate is 66 percent. Three-quarters of the population is
under 35 years of age with the vast majority engaged in part-time agriculture related activities, as there
is little formal employment.

Ebola has now spread to all but one of the country’s 13 districts, including the capital. The disease has
taken a toll on the country’s health system, with 4 doctors and more than 30 nurses among the dead.
Most private hospitals have shut down, as have four public hospitals. The Government intends to shut
down the entire country for three days, from September 19 to 21, and to deploy some 28,500 persons
across the country to visit every household.6 Doctors without Borders (or MSF) has stated that the plan
is unlikely to succeed in addressing the epidemic and expressed concern that it may further erode public
trust in the health care system.

Impact on Economic Activities
The emergence of Ebola in rural Sierra Leone in May initially appeared to be an isolated event. By late-
July, however, the spread of Ebola led to the quarantining of the most severely affected districts and to
restrictions on internal travel, closure of markets and subsequently a number of other measures
designed to reduce public gatherings. This has begun to have a marked effect on economic activity, one
that is disproportionate to the human toll that Ebola has taken to date. The actions of economic agents
are being driven by a high level of aversion behavior and this may be considered the root cause of the
unfolding slow down. Leading indicators of the slowdown in economic activity and aversion by the
external community are captured by sharp reductions in cement sales and visitor arrivals (Figure 6 and
Figure 7), although the drop in cement sales coincided with the onset of the wet season in May when
cement sales would naturally decline due to reduced road-building.

The effect of the severe disruption to economic activity in 2014 will be less than might be expected due
to the broad based and robust growth achieved over the first 6 months of the year, which is not
expected to be unwound despite the sharp slowdown now evident in many indicators. On the economic
side, a sharper decline may be expected in 2015. Overall projected economic growth is expected to slow
to 8 percent in 2014 bearing in mind that the risks are to the downside (Table 3).

6
  Specific objectives of the exercise are to (a) reach 1.5 million households across Sierra Leone with correct
information about Ebola; (b) increase community acceptance of Ebola affected persons, especially children;
(c) promote hand washing with soap at household level (1.5 million bars of soap will be distributed); (d) rebuild
public confidence and trust in the health system; and (e) install neighborhood watch structures at community
level.

                                                       11
Figure 6: Sierra Leone - Weekly cement sales                      Figure 7: Sierra Leone - Visitor arrivals
 180                    Week-1=100                                    9,000
                                         June
 160                                                                  8,000


 140                                                                  7,000


 120                                                                  6,000


 100                                                                  5,000


  80                                                                  4,000


  60                                                                  3,000


  40                                                                  2,000


  20                                                                  1,000


   0                                                                     0
                                                                              Jan-14    Feb-14    Mar-14   Apr-14   May-14   Jun-14     Jul-14   Aug-14

                                                                              Holiday       VFR       Business      Conference        Other      Total

Source: World Bank staff calculations of cement factory sales.    Source: Sierra Leone Immigration Department.


Table 3: Sierra Leone - Estimated GDP impact of Ebola (2014)
                         Contribution   Initial       Revised
                         to growth      Projection    Projection
                         shock (%)      (June 2014)
Real GDP Growth                              11.3          8.0
Agriculture                   27.8            4.8          2.6
Industry                      54.5           24.9         18.4
 of which Mining             (39.6)        (27.3)        (21.8)
Services                      17.7            7.7          5.7
Source: World Bank/IMF Staff Estimates

Agriculture
Agriculture is the mainstay of the vast majority of the population and accounted for 50 percent of the
economy in 2013. The two eastern districts – Kailahun and Kenema – where Ebola first emerged are also
the epicenter of the disease and home to one-fifth of the population of the country. They contain the
most productive agricultural areas in Sierra Leone, producing both the staple food – rice – and cash
crops – cocoa and palm oil. According to data from the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food
Security, the two districts together produce about 18 percent of the total domestic rice output. With
expected production disruptions due to the quarantine-induced restrictions on farmer movements, it is
very likely that national rice production for the 2014/15 season will be significantly affected.
Furthermore, the closure of markets, internal travel restrictions and the fear of infection has curtailed
food trade and caused supply shortages. Although robust price data are not yet available, reports
indicate rice price spikes of up to 30 percent in the Ebola affected areas. This is further exacerbated by
the country’s heavy dependence on imported rice, with import volumes potentially reduced due to land
border closures.




                                                                 12
Reports indicate that farming activities are being disrupted with possible knock-on effects on the
expected harvest for this season, particularly in the hardest hit areas. A Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) rapid assessment in Kailahun indicates that at least 40 percent of farmers have
either abandoned their farms and moved to new, safer locations or have died, leaving the farms
unattended. In the most productive agro-ecological areas, about 90 percent of the plots have not been
cultivated. Current restrictions on movement are preventing cultivation from taking place. Moreover,
farmers have expressed fear of meeting together or even sharing working tools. As a result they have
missed some critical land husbandry activities in the recent planting season, and it is likely that they will
not have sufficient planting materials for the next planting season, as rice seeds have been consumed as
a result of the shortage of food stuff.
Nationally, 62 percent of household consumption expenditures are for food and 59 percent of rice
growers are net buyers of rice, an indication that food insecurity is an important issue. This increases
sharply during the lean season – referred to locally as the hungry season – which is also the planting
season, usually June to August. During this period about 45 percent of the population or 2.5 million
people do not have access to sufficient food. In Kenema, Kailahun, and Bo districts, an estimated
30 percent of the population is considered food insecure and this will surely rise due to the spread of
Ebola (Figure 8).

Figure 8: Sierra Leone - Share of households with insufficient food stocks (pre-Ebola)
 60%


 40%


 20%


  0%
               July



           October
            August



         November
           January



              April
              May
              June




         December
          February
             March




        September




The World Food Program (WFP) is leading the process of providing food to quarantined households, and
their assessment indicates that over 1 million people are likely to be in dire need of food due to the
direct and indirect impact of Ebola. FAO and WFP have made calls for an emergency operation
amounting to 65,000 tons to provide food assistance to approximately 1.3 million most affected people
in the three countries over a period of three months. Further support to WFP for provision of food
rations to quarantined households has been provided by UNICEF and the World Bank.

The disruption to agriculture and food production in particular will have strong adverse effects on
nutrition given the underlying situation with respect to chronic malnutrition. Chronic malnutrition is a
serious problem in the country, with 35 percent of children aged 6-59 months stunted and 10 percent

                                                        13
severely stunted. Comparable stunting rates for Kenema and Kailahun were 41 and 42 percent
respectively, considered critical by the WHO. School feeding programs provide nourishment to many
children, but with the government-ordered closure of all educational institutions in the country until
November, nearly 7,000 schools have been shut down, affecting close to 1.6 million children. WFP has
made a request to use school feeding program resources for the immediate emergency response to
quarantined households.

Mining
Mining accounts for 85 percent of industry in Sierra Leone. (Industry, altogether, makes up nearly 20
percent of the economy.) Mining is dominated by the iron ore sector which began production in late
2011 and already accounts for 16 percent of GDP. In addition, there are less significant operations in
rutile, ilmenite, bauxite, and diamonds. To date there has been little effect of Ebola on mining
production and the companies involved have indicated that they intend to maintain their originally
planned production levels to the extent possible. Nonetheless, many are operating with reduced
expatriate personnel and the risk of disruption remains. The maintenance of planned iron ore
production in 2014 will in fact likely shield the overall economy from a sharper decline in growth due to
Ebola. Notably, however, as iron ore prices have plummeted to 5-year lows in September 2014, this will
have an adverse effect on exports and relatedly on government revenues through lower royalty
receipts, which are based on the international price of the ore. Moreover, the larger of the two iron ore
operations appears to be experiencing financial difficulties.

Manufacturing
The manufacturing sector is a mere 2 percent of the economy. Its importance is, however,
disproportionate to this size as it is an important employer in a country with very little in the way of paid
employment opportunities. Most manufacturing enterprises are small scale and well-suited to the
economic landscape, being involved in the production of beer, soft drinks, paint, soap, cement, foam
mattresses and the like. Present indications are that the sector is faltering due to the generally reduced
demand in the economy. A case in point is the soft drinks sector which has experienced a recent decline
in sales attributed to Ebola (Figure 9).

Construction
Like manufacturing, the construction industry is far more important to the economy than its 1 percent
share would imply. This relates to its critical role in nearly all new investment and highlights its
significance for future growth. Another key aspect of the sector relates to the fact that it is generally
labor intensive and can utilize relatively unskilled labor, which is important for a labor surplus economy
such as Sierra Leone. Thus a booming construction sector is usually a good leading indicator of a
flourishing economy. With cement sales a good proxy for the state of the construction sector, it is
evident as noted above that the construction sector has entered a downturn, due to the advent of
Ebola.




                                                     14
Figure 9: Sierra Leone - Soft drink sales
 110.0                    Jan=100
                  110
 100.0            100

  90.0             90
    January=100




  80.0
                   80

                   70
  70.0

                   60
  60.0

                   50
  50.0
                   40
  40.0




Source: Bank of Sierra Leone.

Services
The service sector accounts for 30 percent of the Sierra Leonean economy, and this vibrant sector
provides both formal and informal employment to large numbers of people. The recent Ebola-induced
closures and restrictions on markets, restaurants, bars and nightclubs are having a severe dampening
effect on the sector, as are the transportation restrictions. The nascent hospitality sector has been
particularly hard hit by the cancelations of commercial flights to the country. The number of weekly
flights serving Sierra Leone fell from 31 flights per week up to August, to only 6 flights a week, as of
September 1, increasing the country’s isolation from international markets. The effects of this dramatic
reduction in flight service on the hospitality sub-sector are illustrated by the findings of a recent survey
of six hotels in Freetown with a combined 490 rooms. These establishments directly employed a little
over 500 persons. Two of the hotels had closed down and laid off their employees because of the fall in
occupancy. Most of the remainder had arranged for half the work force to work for 15 days a month, on
a rotating basis; some had shed workers. Occupancy rates had plunged to 13 percent after usually being
in the range of 60 to 80 percent year-round. The knock-on effects on others in the labor force linked to
the hospitality sector is likely to be large. Another illustration of these linkages relates to the local
brewery, which has put planned investment on hold indefinitely and was considering closing its facility
because of the fall in demand. Government estimates suggest that closure of the brewery would put up
to 24,000 people out of work nationwide – mainly in the hospitality industry – and render another
2,000-2,500 persons in agriculture without a breadwinner.

In addition, cancelations of service by commercial airlines noted above has direct and indirect adverse
consequences: apart from hotel occupancy, it has led to most airlines laying off staff and maintaining a
skeleton crew of one or two employees. The water taxi and ferry sub-sectors are now idle, and the many
young men previously employed are inactive.




                                                    15
Food Prices and Inflation
The effect of the Ebola crisis on food prices remains ambiguous for the moment, though it appears
certain that food prices will increase due to shortages caused by the crisis. Already there are reports of
rice price increases of 30 percent in some markets in the afflicted areas. The consumer price index has
recorded a slight uptick in food inflation in both June and July attributed in part to the Ebola-related
market closures, and to the depreciation of the currency as well as seasonal effects (Figure 10).

External Sector
The balance of payments financing gap will increase as imports rise in relation to health sector needs of
the emergency and food imports expand, both in the face of falling export earnings from both minerals
and agriculture. The exchange rate of the Leone has been relatively stable this year until June, when it
began to depreciate against the U.S. dollar, altogether by about 6 percent (Figure 11). The parallel
market rate has seen a similar widening. This may relate to capital outflow in the face of the current
uncertainty and the aversion that it is causing. Remittances have remained steady (Figure 12).
International reserves have been stable during the year and were the equivalent of about 2.5 months of
imports at the end of August 2014.

Figure 10: Sierra Leone – Inflation and Food prices (2014)
                           January=100                                     January=100
 112
 110.0
                                                                                                 Local Rice
                                                             110.0
 108.0
 110                                                                                             Imported
                                                                                                     Rice
 106.0
 108                                             Food CPI
                                                                                          Edible oils & fats
                                                     CPI                                              Fish
 104.0                                                       105.0
 106
 102.0
 104
 100.0
                                                             100.0
 102
  98.0

 100
 96.0
                                                              95.0
   98
  94.0


   96
  92.0

                                                              90.0
   94
  90.0

           JANUARY         FEBRUARY      MARCH              APRIL    MAY         JUNE    JULY

Source: Statistics Sierra Leone.




                                                              16
Figure 11: Sierra Leone - Exchange rate              Figure 12: Sierra Leone - Remittances
 108                    January=100                                           (US$ million)
                                                       1.8


 106                                                   1.6



                                                       1.4
 104

                                                       1.2

 102
                                                       1.0



 100                                                   0.8



                                                       0.6
  98
                                                       0.4


  96
                                                       0.2




Source: Bank of Sierra Leone.                        Source: Bank of Sierra Leone.



Fiscal Impact
The government is constantly revising its 2014 fiscal plan to take into account a rapidly changing and
uncertain environment (Table 4). Revenues are expected to fall in the second half of the year due to the
reduced economic activity and a probable reduction in compliance, all due to Ebola (about US$46 m).
This compounds a preexisting challenge: The government also had to contend with revenue
underperformance in the first half of the year that totaled some US$11 million. Additionally, the recent
historically low international price for iron ore will further reduce expected second half of 2014
revenues. An emergency Ebola response plan will require increased recurrent spending (US$38 million),
mostly for the health sector. Some of this is to be financed through a reallocation of capital spending
which still leaves an unfinanced gap of US$79 million. This figure is likely to be a lower bound as the
situation remains volatile.




                                                  17
Table 4: Sierra Leone – Estimated fiscal impact of Ebola (US$ millions)
                                                  Original           Revised
                                                                                  Difference
                                                 Projection         Projection
Total Revenue and Grants                               745                688          -57
Tax revenue                                            530                478          -53
Non-Tax revenue                                          50                 44          -6
Grants                                                 164                166            2

Expenditure                                             938               960           22
Current Expenditure                                     567               604           38
Of which for health emergency                             0                26           26
Capital Expenditure                                     371               355          -16

Overall Balance                                         -193              -272         79
(% of GDP)                                               -4.2              -6.0        1.8
Source: World Bank and IMF Staff estimates.




Guinea
Guinea is among the poorest countries in West Africa with a population of 12 million and per capita
income of US$460. It was the first country to be affected by the Ebola virus. When the epidemic hit,
however, the Ministry of Health reacted swiftly, in partnership with MSF. Isolation wards were set up in
Macenta and Gueckedou, the two most affected districts. Contact tracing and follow-up in these areas
seem to have allowed the authorities to contain the epidemic, despite some recent cases of migration
back from the border areas of Liberia and Sierra Leone.

The country is richly endowed with metals such as iron ore and bauxite, as well as strong hydro-power
potential, but is returning to macroeconomic and political stability after years of conflict and poor
leadership. Its economy is a mix of agriculture, services, and mining, and the poverty rate is high at more
than 55 percent of the population and recent income growth has not matched that in neighboring
countries.

Impact on Economic Activity
Projected GDP growth for 2014 has been revised from 4.5 percent to 2.4 percent (Table 5). The main
economic impacts of Ebola in Guinea to date have been on agriculture and services. Projected
agricultural growth for 2014 has been revised from 5.7 percent to 3.3 percent. Agriculture in Ebola-
affected areas has been hit by an exodus of people from these zones, affecting key export commodities
such as cocoa and palm oil. Coffee production has also fallen by half (from 5,736 tons to 2,671 tons
between the first six months of 2013 and the first six months of 2014); cocoa production has declined by
a third (from 3,511 tons to 2,296 tons for the same time period). Palm oil production has fallen by 75
percent. Local water production has fallen by 29 percent.

Services have also been hit. Growth in services is projected to fall from 6.7 to 3.8 percent, with the
categories transport and commerce remaining stagnant. Services are in part tied to the mining sector,

                                                        18
where major companies, including Vale and Rio Tinto, have evacuated many foreign workers. Airlines
have reduced travel to Guinea, Senegal and Côte d’Ivoire have sealed their Guinean borders, and many
expatriates in the mining sector have left. Hotel occupancy rates in Conakry have fallen by half, to less
than 40 percent compared with an average of 80 percent occupancy before the crisis.

Table 5: Guinea - Estimated GDP impact of Ebola (2014)
                        Contribution   Initial       Revised
                        to growth      Projection    Projection
                        shock (%)      (Jan. 2014)
Real GDP Growth                        4.5           2.4
Agriculture             20.3           5.7           3.3
Forestry                0.0            3.5           3.5
Mining                  3.8            -3.0          -3.4
Manufacturing           2.5            6.5           5.6
Services                73.5           6.7           3.8
Source: World Bank and IMF Staff Estimates

Still, mining output has not yet been severely affected by the Ebola outbreak, because the main mines
are not located in the affected areas (with the exception of iron ore). For example, in the mining sector,
where production was already forecast to contract by 3.0 percent before Ebola, projected output has
been revised downward to only 3.4 percent.

Manufacturing is a small sector in Guinea, accounting for less than 7 percent of GDP, mostly
concentrated in Conakry, including agro-industry, paint, plastics, soft drinks, cement, and metals. The
Ebola outbreak has made it more difficult for firms to obtain key imports due to port delays and logistics
challenges. Cement imports have fallen by 50 percent year-to-date, relative to 2013.

Food prices and inflation
Price data to August suggest little effect to date of lower agricultural production on food prices in
Guinea. Prices fell between April and June, with an uptick since July. Annual inflation for 2014 is still
projected at 8.5 percent (Figure 13).

Figure 13: Guinea - Inflation and food prices

                Inflation CPI 2014                                    Prices of Key Staples (GNF/KG)
    10.4                                                   12000

    10.2                                                   10000
                                                            8000
     10
                                                            6000
     9.8
%                                                           4000
     9.6
                                                            2000
     9.4
                                                                0
     9.2                                                            June,   June,    June,   Dec,   Apr,   May,       June,   Sept,
                                                                    2011    2012     2013    2013   2014   2014       2014    2014
      9
                                                                                    Imported rice     Domestic rice

                                                                                    Wheat             Tomato


Source: World Bank staff calculation based on government data

                                                           19
External Sector
There has been an increase in exchange rate volatility and small trends in depreciation (Figure 14).
According to the Central Bank, part of this is supply as artisanal gold production is down, mostly due to
seasonality but potentially with some impact of Ebola. The other part is capital flight; many expatriates
(and Guineans who can afford to) have left the country.

Figure 14: Guinea - US dollar-Guinean franc nominal exchange rate (2014)
 7100


 7050


 7000


 6950


 6900


 6850


 6800




Source: World Bank staff calculations

Fiscal Impact
The fiscal impact of the Ebola outbreak on Guinea is estimated at US$120 million, of which US$50
million are attributed to revenue shortfalls and US$70 million to increased spending on the Ebola
response (Table 6). Lower revenues from mining sector royalties, taxes on international trade, and taxes
on goods and services account for more than two-thirds of the revenue decline. The government has
adopted a $70 million response plan to fund logistics, health centers, the purchase of food and
equipment, and salaries.

Table 6: Guinea - Estimated Fiscal Impact of Ebola (US$ millions)
                                 Initial Projection         Revised Projection   Difference
 Total Revenues and grants       1,700                      1,650                 -50
 Tax revenue                     1,305                      1,255                 -50
 Non-Tax                            60                        60                     0
 Grants                            335                       335                     0

 Expenditure                            1,960                   2,030              70
 Current Expenditure                    1,090                   1,160              70
 Of which for health                       0                      50               50
 emergency
 Capital Expenditure                    870                      870                0

 Overall Balance                        -260                    -380             120
 Overall Balance (% of GDP)               -4.0                    -5.8            -1.8
Source: World Bank/IMF Staff Estimates



                                                           20
Neighboring Economies
The Ebola epidemic has so far not had a major effect on economic activity outside the three core
affected countries, although there have been some ripple effects. The first effect has been the
movement of Ebola-infected people from the core areas to Nigeria and to Senegal. The arrival of the
first case in Nigeria and in Senegal created a strong reaction among local populations, and the
authorities took immediate measures to contain the infection. The second effect has been on cross-
border trade from the sealing of borders. Both Ivory Coast and Senegal have sealed their borders with
Guinea, and other countries have made movement in the same direction. This affects the trade flows
between these countries. Additional channels of economic transmission may yet appear, although
countries in the region are making medical preparations to reduce that risk.

Nigeria
The emergence of Ebola in Nigeria is already having an economic impact. Preliminary reports from
shopping centers and many commercial businesses in Lagos indicate significant recent declines in
demand, sometimes in the range of 20 to 40 percent. The government is also spending significant
resources on containment. However, if Nigeria succeeds in containing the virus, the economic impact is
likely to be limited. The recent decline in commerce likely reflects initial shock, fear, and uncertainty
following the appearance of Ebola in Lagos and Port Harcourt. If confidence builds around the
containment effort, commerce should soon return to near-normal levels. While even a contained
presence of Ebola in Nigeria will discourage foreign tourists from visiting the country, Nigeria has a
limited foreign tourist industry to begin with, so this effect will be marginal. Nigeria's high oil
dependency for exports and budgetary resources may ironically be an advantage in the face of Ebola, as
the oil sector has a very high regional concentration, with much of it offshore, and should not face
Ebola-related disruptions in the absence of a mass epidemic. Official trade flows with West Africa are
relatively small. Informal trade flows are much larger, although it is not clear how these flows would be
affected by any Ebola-related trade disruptions. GDP growth in Nigeria is expected to be close to 6
percent in 2014, and the general government budget to be close to balanced.

Côte d’Ivoire
So far, Côte d’Ivoire has been spared any Ebola outbreak, and the government has taken measures to
limit contagion risks from neighboring Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. These measures include closing
the borders with Liberia and Guinea and mandatory health-checks for all visitors, as well as an intensive
sensitization campaign of the public. Notwithstanding these measures, concerns regarding Côte
d’Ivoire’s exposure to Ebola remain owing to the porousness and the free circulation of the population
across borders, including in areas affected by the Ebola outbreak in Liberia and Guinea.

Guinea-Bissau
No cases of Ebola have yet been reported in Guinea-Bissau. To protect its citizens from the spread of the
disease, the government closed the border with Guinea in August. Guinea-Bissau is poorly integrated in
regional trade networks so the economic effect is likely to be marginal. Health professionals have
warned that the closing of the border might in fact be counter-productive, diverting travelers to
unofficial crossings of the country's porous borders and thus reducing the authorities' ability to monitor
cross-border traffic for potential Ebola victims. A weak Bissau-Guinean health sector reduces the

                                                   21
authorities' ability to both identify and treat Ebola cases. The World Bank is thus restructuring an
ongoing Community Driven Development project to make US$750,000 available to the WHO to enhance
the country's preparedness. The project will also support a campaign to raise awareness of Ebola and
prevention mechanisms. Assuming that Guinea-Bissau avoids Ebola, the estimate for 2014 growth
remains unchanged at 3 percent, with an expected fiscal deficit of 1.7 percent of GDP.

Senegal and the Gambia
The one confirmed case of Ebola in Senegal has been cured, and the economic impact on Senegal so far
is modest. Recent economic indicators are nearly in line with the pre-Ebola GDP growth projection of 4.9
percent for 2014. Based on the index of general activity (excluding agriculture), GDP growth is estimated
at 4.7 percent for the first two quarters of 2014, driven mainly by services (up 6.6 percent) and public
administration (up 7.3 percent). However, delay in the onset of the rainy season and the outbreak of
Ebola could result in a slowing growth rate for the remainder of the year. Senegal had previously closed
its border with Guinea in an attempt to halt the spread of Ebola, and had banned flights and ships from
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Exports to these countries only account for 2 percent of total
Senegalese exports, so this effect will be small. The impact of Ebola on tourism will be more important.
Tourism is the largest single foreign exchange earner, accounting for some 12 percent of total exports of
goods and services. If tourism falls by half, this would lead to a 1 percent drop in GDP on an annual
basis. Several conferences have already been cancelled and incoming flights have relatively few
passengers. There is no available data on tourist flows in Senegal, but in neighboring Gambia it is
estimated that 65 percent of hotel reservations have already been cancelled, which will have a serious
impact for the country. The situation will be seriously aggravated if the disease spreads to Mali, since
this is Senegal’s number one export destination as well as the most important client for transit trade.
There are already additional public expenses related to the funding of emergency measures put in place,
notably through the Ministry of Health, but donors appear ready to cover most of these costs.



Conclusion
Under current caseloads, the impact of the West African Ebola crisis has deepened, particularly in
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Preliminary estimates for 2014 indicate that GDP growth could be halved in
Guinea and Liberia with a loss of 3 percentage points for Sierra Leone. In terms of foregone output, this
amounts to a total of US$359 million across the three countries, already a major loss.

The fiscal impact of the crisis has been enormous, emanating from the combination of revenue shortfalls
from reduced economic activities and increased expenditures, particularly for health and social
protection. 2014 financing gaps for the three core countries range from US$80 million to US$120
million, summing to over US$290 million. Slow containment scenarios will lead to even greater financing
gaps in 2015.




                                                   22
Section 3: Medium Term Impacts
Even if the Ebola epidemic were contained over the course of 2014, economic impacts would be felt into
the future: foreign and domestic investors are putting some investment decisions on hold which will
have ripple effects into the future. Many epidemiological projections suggest that the epidemic will in
fact continue into 2015. This section presents estimates for the medium-run, through the end of 2015,
for the three core affected countries. To estimate medium term impacts on the individual countries, this
document employs the same method as that for the short-term estimates, building up growth rates
from sector components, based on the impact seen so far on economic activity and assumptions of the
likely effects moving forward. Clearly there will be spillover impacts to the region as a whole, and future
reporting will document those estimates. Because medium-run estimates involve both more uncertainty
with regard to the path of the epidemic and stronger assumptions about the likely impacts on elements
of the economy (e.g., labor supply and capital utilization in various sectors), this section employs and
two scenarios.

Scenarios of the Ebola Epidemic
In late August 2014, the World Health Organization proposed that “the aggregate case load of EVD
[Ebola Virus Disease] could exceed 20,000 over the course of this emergency.”7 Since then, other
projections have suggested a much larger potential caseload and – importantly – a longer epidemic.8 As
such, this note examines two scenarios. First, a rapid containment scenario (called Low Ebola) is
considered, which assumes that containment of the disease by roughly the end of 2014 leads to a
resumption of economic activity in 2015. Second, a slow containment scenario (High Ebola) assumes
that the outbreak worsens significantly into 2015.

Estimates
Liberia
If Ebola is contained within the next six to nine months and activities gradually increase across most
sectors (Low Ebola), the Liberian economy could post a modest rebound in 2015, with GDP growth of
about 2.6 percent; that would amount to roughly US$82 million in lost GDP. Such growth is expected to
be driven mainly by the more resilient iron ore mining sector, agriculture, and services including
construction (particularly residential construction which may be more easily mobilized). Even with the
rebound, prices (food prices in particular) may remain sticky and exchange rate volatility may persist
into 2015.

If the epidemic is not so rapidly contained, economic reactions driven by fear may be heightened,
precipitating further economic shocks that could shut down production in large-scale mines and further
delay investments in capacity expansion. Other likely effects are further disruption to regional and
international flights; interruption of the 2015 planting seasons for the two main staples—rice and
cassava; and the shut-down of borders and markets. Financial markets and international trade would be


7
 World Health Organization, “Ebola Response Roadmap,” 28 August 2014.
8
 See Grady, Denise, “U.S. Scientists See Long Fight Against Ebola,” New York Times, September 12, 2014. Grady
reports projections of more than 50,000 cases just by October 12.

                                                     23
affected. Under this slow containment scenario, the sharp contraction in agriculture, manufacturing and
services as well as the cessation of mining would lead to an overall GDP contraction of nearly 5 percent
(Table 7), and a loss of US$228 million in output. Under this scenario, the sharp reduction in economic
activities would result in substantial fall-out in fiscal revenues, pushing the fiscal gap well beyond the
current estimate of nearly US$100 million.

Table 7: Liberia – Estimated GDP Impact of Ebola (2015)
                             2012          2013         2014      2015
                                         Annual growth rates
Pre-crisis baseline GDP        8.3          8.7          5.9         6.8
Low Ebola                        ..           ..         2.5         2.6
High Ebola                       ..           ..         2.5        -4.9




Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone’s overall growth prospects are dominated by the iron-ore subsector, the mainstay of its
mining sector. A positive aspect of this is that as the still fledgling iron-ore industry expands, it increases
overall GDP significantly. However, such an enclave sector, which has few linkages to the rest of the
economy, can mask the performance of other sectors in the economy, thus GDP numbers for Sierra
Leone are broken out for non-iron ore GDP (Table 8). Under the assumption that the Ebola outbreak is
contained relatively quickly (Low Ebola), an economic recovery emerges over the course of 2015,
anchored by government spending and iron ore, which increases production rapidly after the end of the
crisis. Agricultural growth falls to just over 2 percent as the effects of missing the planting season in
2014 appear through a weak harvest. The service sector rebounds, led by manufacturing and the return
of tourism and foreign visitors. Under this scenario, non-iron ore GDP rises by 4.5 percent in 2015.
Overall GDP rises by 7.7 percent relative to 8.9 percent in the pre-crisis projections, representing a loss
of approximately US$59 million.

A more pessimistic, slow-containment scenario is also simulated (High Ebola), built on the assumption
that efforts to end the crisis will not bear fruit until well into 2015. Under this assumption, agricultural
output falls dramatically due to large scale abandonment by farmers and rural deaths. Food crop and
cash crop production fall, necessitating increased imports which – coupled with widespread shortages –
places pressure on inflation and the exchange rate. Services also contract, especially the hospitality
sector. Only government spending buoys the economy. The major mines are assumed to be shut for at
least half the year. Under these assumptions overall economic growth is zero in 2015 and the non-iron
ore economy shrinks by 3 percent. The ensuing post-crisis recovery would be expected to be slow, with
growth shrinking to zero in 2015; this is associated with US$439 million in lost GDP, more than seven
times the loss in the Low Ebola scenario.




                                                      24
Table 8: Sierra Leone - Estimated GDP Impact of Ebola (2015)
                              2012   2013      2014     2015
                                     Annual growth rates
Pre-crisis baseline GDP         15.2    20.1    11.3         8.9
 - Non iron ore GDP              5.3     5.5     6.0         6.3
Low Ebola                         ..      ..     8.0         7.7
 - Non iron ore GDP               ..      ..     4.0         4.5
High Ebola                        ..      ..     8.0         0.0
 - Non iron ore GDP               ..      ..     4.0        -3.0
Source: Bank staff estimates.



Guinea
Absent any further outbreak of disease in Guinea, the economy is projected to remain resilient in the
medium-term, propelled by a rebound in services and stronger performance of mining. The impact of
Ebola will still be felt in 2015, even assuming an optimistic six-to-nine month crisis response operation.
But estimates of Guinea’s projected GDP growth in 2015 span a much narrower range than those
described above for Liberia and Sierra Leone, from 2.0 percent to 5.0 percent, given the containment of
the outbreak in Guinea (Table 9). The Low Ebola scenario actually represents an increase relative to the
pre-crisis projections, but the High Ebola scenario results in a loss of US$142 million in output. There
nonetheless remains the risk of Ebola affecting Guinea’s mining sector, which would lead to a dramatic
departure of business and foreign direct investment at a time when the country needs international
support. An additional danger is that negative perceptions associated with Ebola linger even after the
situation on the ground has improved.

Table 9: Guinea - Estimated GDP Impact of Ebola (2015)
                             2012     2013    2014     2015
                                   Annual growth rates
Pre-crisis baseline GDP        3.8     2.3      4.5     4.3
Low Ebola                       ..       ..     2.4     5.0
High Ebola                      ..       ..     2.4     2.0
Source: Bank staff estimates.
For the three core countries, the forfeited GDP in 2015 sums to US$97 million in the Low Ebola case and
a striking US$809 million in the High Ebola case. As Figure 15 demonstrates, the likely economic impact
of the Ebola epidemic will be significant for the affected countries in any plausible scenario. However,
the scenario in which the epidemic is not swiftly contained promises to leave a much deeper economic
scar.




                                                           25
Figure 15: Impact of Ebola over the short- and medium-run
                                                                                                        Core Three
                                              Guinea                 Liberia        Sierra Leone         Countries
                                     100
                                       0           43
                                     -100
   Millions of dollars in lost GDP




                                                                   -66 -82                 -59
                                                                                                               -97
                                     -200   -130        -142                        -163
                                     -300                                    -228

                                     -400                                                               -359
                                     -500                                                        -439

                                     -600
                                     -700
                                     -800
                                                                                                                     -809
                                     -900

                                               2014            2015 (Low Ebola)     2015 (High Ebola)




Section 4: Conclusions and Policy Recommendations
Diseases and the pain and suffering they cause engender treatment costs and also the costs of reduced
productivity. At the time of writing, at least 2,200 people have died in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea,
with some experts placing the number two or three times higher. Cases continue to accumulate, with
Liberia adding more cases in the last week than in the previous one. No one knows how high the human
toll may rise.

But in the case of an outbreak like those of SARS and H1N1 influenza, and now Ebola in West Africa,
most of the economic impact is due to the aversion behavior of economic agents. The present note
estimates the size of the economic impact on the three countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea,
taking into account not only the health care and productivity costs but also the effects of aversion
behavior. Two scenarios are considered, one in which the epidemic is contained relatively rapidly, near
the end of 2014, and one in which the epidemic continues well into 2015.

Liberia has taken the biggest economic hit, due both to the reach of the Ebola virus into the densely
populated zones of Monrovia and to the weakness of its health system and overall economy. Although
growing briskly at 6 percent in January of this year, its GDP is declining in the second semester, leaving it
with a net growth of only about 2.5 percent. The fiscal cost this year alone is nearly US$100 million. And
of the affected countries, Liberia faces the greatest downside economic risk, with a GDP contraction in
2015 of up to 5 percent, which would amount to an economic crisis.




                                                                                           26
Sierra Leone faces similar – yet slightly lower – costs and risks. A high prior growth forecast of 11
percent for 2014 will be reined in to perhaps 8 percent, with most of the progress recorded in the first
half of the year. The fiscal deficit will worsen by about US$80 million. Although Guinea was the origin of
this Ebola outbreak, it has escaped the worst of the caseload probably because it has so far avoided a
major urban epidemic. Still, the country – which was not growing well before – faces a halving of
growth this year and huge financial needs, of US$120 million or more, as a result of the crisis.

Fortunately, there is limited evidence of economic effects so far on neighboring regional economies,
even in Nigeria and Senegal where related Ebola cases have been recorded and treated. This is in part
because these countries’ stronger health systems seem to have succeeded in containing these events
and partly because their larger economies can better withstand shocks than can Liberia, Sierra Leone or
Guinea.

However, at this writing, the total number of cases of Ebola continues to rise, with no sign of an
inflection point in Liberia or Sierra Leone, so seeding of the epidemic into neighboring countries is a
continuing possibility. Projections for 2015 depend on how many surrounding countries are likely to
experience a belatedly detected secondary outbreak, how successful they are at containing it, how
robust their health systems and economies are to the resulting epidemic shock and how trade diverts
from the worst-affected countries to their neighbors. All four of these factors vary widely within West
Africa. Preliminary estimates suggest that the cost of Ebola to the West Africa region could attain
several billions of dollars by the end of 2015.

These findings underline the need for a concerted international response. External financing is urgently
needed in the three core countries, but this is clearly not enough. These impact estimates suggest that
containment and mitigation expenditures in excess of a billion dollars would be cost-effective, if they
successfully avert more pessimistic scenarios. Such a response should include four related sets of
activities.

Humanitarian response
The World Health Organization has provided a “roadmap” estimating the immediate humanitarian costs
to exceed $495 million. The United Nations has increased this estimate to $600 million.9 These amounts
will finance desperately needed personal protective equipment for health workers, emergency
treatment units, personnel salaries, etc., and are required just to shore up the ongoing efforts to contain
the epidemic, in order to reduce the direct and indirect cost from sickness and mortality in the three
core countries, including aid to the health sector. The World Bank is working with affected countries and
other donors to re-program existing money and channel new grant funding in order to procure the
needed supplies as quickly as possible.

Fiscal support
The robust economic growth anticipated for the three core countries for 2014 and 2015 is rapidly
becoming elusive even for later years, such as 2016. Increased injections of external support can

9
 See Clarke & Samb, “UN says $600 million needed to tackle Ebola as deaths top 1,900,” Reuters, September 3,
2014.

                                                    27
strengthen growth in these fragile economies. The fiscal gap, just for 2014, is estimated at around 290
million dollars. In either scenario, but especially in the more pessimistic scenario, that is likely to be
much, much higher. This goes far beyond the humanitarian response, but rather involves helping to
mitigate the potentially debilitating drop in economic growth occasioned by the Ebola outbreak.

Infrastructure support to international transport links
This past week the President of Sierra Leone called out for help with the Ebola epidemic, saying that at
the very time his country most needs outside help, it is suffering from a virtual “economic blockade.”
Quarantine procedures are essential public health tools for containing infection from a known Ebola
case. But when applied to a country, a quarantine policy will prevent that entire country from receiving
the help it needs to fight the epidemic and, by alarming trade, business and tourism partners, will
exacerbate aversion behavior and the resulting short and medium term economic impact of the disease.
Policies are required which will both enable the flow of relief and encourage commercial exchange with
the affected countries. To this end, it is recommended that options be explored for financing
improvements to the safety of those who travel in the region, whether for humanitarian, business or
tourism reasons.

Strengthening the surveillance, detection and treatment capacity of African
health systems
After the SARS and H1N1 epidemics, donors resolved to strengthen the epidemiologic surveillance
systems in poor countries by investing in primary care systems, referral networks and diagnostic
reporting from the periphery to the center, with links to WHO in Geneva. In response to the avian flu
and beginning in 2006, the World Bank established the Global Program on Avian Influenza Control and
Human Pandemic Preparedness and Response (GPAI), which was implemented by the country
governments and funded a total of 83 operations across 63 countries. But according to the World
Bank’s Independent Evaluation Group, initial GPAI projects rarely created permanent capacity and donor
attention waned, to the point that the last such projects are due to end over the next two years (see
Figure 16).




                                                   28
Figure 16: Number of Global Program on Avian influenza operations closing by fiscal year




Source: Independent Evaluation Group, “Responding to global public bads: Learning from the World Bank’s experience with
avian influenza, 2006-2013,” 2014.

Today we fight to control the Ebola outbreak. But In the medium to long run, the international
community must learn that weak health sectors in Africa are a threat not only to their own citizens but
also to their trading partners and the world at large. The enormous economic cost of the current
outbreak to the affected countries and the world at large could likely have been avoided by prudent
ongoing investment in such health system strengthening. The World Bank has approved a US$105
million Ebola emergency response project that not only strengthens curative health services in each of
the three most affected countries, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, but also includes $75 million to fund
a new Regional Multi-country Disease Surveillance and Public Health and Veterinary Labs Project to do
just what the name describes. But effort and memory will be required to sustain and continue
strengthening this early warning network after the Ebola outbreak has been contained.

Taken together, the humanitarian response, the fiscal support, the investment secure transportation
links and the expanded disease surveillance and treatment capacity will not only stem the Ebola
epidemic, but help to reverse as quickly as possible the aversion behavior that is causing so much
economic damage. Quick action by the international community working in concert with the directly
affected governments can avert a regional and global calamity.




                                                            29
