                                                                                   90990

       Status Report on the International Comparison Programme
                              3 March 2004

Prepared by the Global Office of the International Comparison Programme, World Bank



Introduction

1.      The International Comparison Program (ICP) Global Office welcomes the
opportunity to present the Statistical Commission and heads of National Statistical
Offices a status report providing updated information about progress so far and outlining
future plans for the 2004-2006 round.

Overview

2.       The ICP has made considerable progress since the last status report was submitted
to the UN Statistical Commission in December 2003. Members of ICP’s Technical
Advisory Group came together on 21-23 January 2004 to discuss major technical issues
and challenges facing the program, including the Ring Comparison. ICP surveys are done
at two stages: countries within a region are compared first and then the regions are linked
together through comparison between “ring” countries in the regions for a global
comparison (The Ring Comparison will involve about 18 countries pricing an additional
set of items from a list of products obtained from merging the regional lists). The Group
recommended that the full Ring comparison be implemented in this round of the
program, but that price collection take place in 2005. The Technical Advisory Group
also gave the Global office valuable input regarding “comparison resistant” GDP
components such as housing, government, and capital formation. The TAG expressed
some reservations about the proposed July 2004 starting time for price collection.
Minutes of the January 2004 TAG meeting will be posted on the ICP website shortly
(http://www.worldbank.org/DATA/ICP).

Timeline and Work plan

3.      The work program was thoroughly reviewed with the regional coordinators in
November 2003. A global time-schedule and work plan were prepared and presented at
the regional coordinators meeting in Tunisia in November 2003 to provide a basis for
discussion and to assist participants to formulate a realistic action plan for their respective
regions. The original timetable specified 1 April, 2004 as the start date for data
collection. Although significant progress has been made in most regions in preparation
for the price data collection fo r food, clothing, and footwear, a consensus was reached in
Tunis that launching the surveys in April 2004 would not be feasible. Since the Tunis
meeting, assessment of more specific details of the tasks ahead has lead some regions to
consider pushing the launching time to October 2004.
Funding

4.       Significant progress has been made on the resource mobilization front since the
last status report, thanks largely to a contribution of US$2.5 million by the Canadian
International Development Agency (CIDA) for financing impending activities in the
Latin America region. Furthermore, a review of the expenditure and reduction of cost
in some areas has helped to narrow the budget shortfall over the next three years to $4.3
million.

ICP Handbook

5.      The first nine chapters of the Handbook have been drafted and are on the ICP
website. The most critical chapters, including chapters 3, 4, and 5 on expenditure
weights, pricing concepts, and building regional list of specifications using the
Structured Product Description (SPD) approach have gone through the revision process
and are being translated. Chapter 6 (survey framework) has gone through several
revisions and has been sent to TAG members for their comments. Chapters 7 (data
editing and validation), 8 (go vernment) and 9 (capital formation) have been drafted and
are being revised.

Executive Board meeting

6.      Members of the ICP Executive Board met in Geneva, Switzerland on February
10-11, 2004 to review the progress of the global and regional activities of the program
since the last meeting of the Board in August 2003. The Executive Board expressed
satisfaction on the very substantial progress that had been made to correct the
deficiencies of the previous rounds of the program and strengthen all components of this
round of the ICP.

7.     In particular, it noted:

(a) the active participation of 158 countries, including 51 from Africa (there are many
others who would like to participate if funding were available – major gaps are Central
America, the Caribbean and the South Pacific);

(b) the substantial funding provided by many international agencies (particularly the
World Bank), donor agencies, and the in-kind contributions being provided by many
participating countries as shown in the attached table. (Table from Status Report);

(c) the spirit of cooperation and sense of partnership that has developed between global,
regional, and national stakeholders to achieve the project goals;

(d) the major contribution of the project towards reliable measurement of progress against
the Millennium Development Goals, as well as improved targeting of poverty alleviation
measures and the relative competitiveness of countries;




                                            2
(e) the major contribution of the project towards national statistical capacity building in
developing countries, especially with consumer price indices and the improvement and
harmonization of National Accounts;

(f) the infrastructure and investment in new technology and methodology that is being put
in place to enable lower cost rounds of the ICP in the future;

8.      Despite the very substantial progress, some critical issues raised concern. First
among these is the issue of funding. Although significant progress has been made on this
front since the last Board meeting, and the project is in no danger of failing to progress to
the data collection stage, sufficient funds are still not available to enable its completion.

9.       The second area of concern is with meeting the deadlines for preparing the
product lists, completing the testing of the software, and carrying out the training and
translation activities that precede the collection of price data. The timeline was deemed
ambitious but achievable if additional funding and specialist staff can be made available
at the appropriate time. Of course, good project management would be essential as
always at the global, regional and national levels to coordinate the activities and achieve
targets.


10.       Summary of Executive Board Actions

      •   The Executive Board agreed that preliminary estimates of PPPs be obtained using
          2004 expenditure weights and final estimates be based on 2005 weights and
          GDPs. The goal is to make preliminary PPPs available by mid to late 2006.

      •    After a review of the financial and budget situation and noting the funding
          shortfall that still needs to be addressed, the Executive Board agreed that the
          target comparison should be total GDP. The Board noted with pleasure that 125
          countries qualified for this comparison. The Board also noted that for the
          remaining countries, the basis of comparison might fall short of all GDP
          components.

      •   The Executive Board noted that the CIS plans to commence price collection
          surveys for consumption items in July 2004, and that the Western Asia and South
          American countries will begin in October 2004. The African region will be in a
          position to begin price collection prior to October 2004. The Asia and Pacific
          region plans to begin price collection in July for food, clothing and footwear, and
          by October for the rest of household consumption. Although July is the preferred
          timing, the Asian regional coordinators are instructed to consult with the heads of
          National Statistical Offices to see whether an October start would allow more
          time for regional and national preparatory work and for the translation of
          materials.




                                               3
    The Executive Board considered the implications of having regions begin price
    collection at different time periods and approved of it on the condition that all
    countries within a region start the price collection at the same time unless there
    were explicit and approved exceptions.

•   The Executive Board approved the proposal that price collection for Housing,
    Health, Education, Government, and Capital formation should take place as near
    to mid-2005 as possible so as to allow more time for global and regional
    preparatory work including translation of materials.

•   The Board instructed the Global office to ensure that regional coordinators assess
    the availability of price indices in each country so that price data may be
    estimated for a common reference period. The Global Office was also asked to
    request TAG to provide advice and assistance where price indices are not
    sufficient or available to deal with the technical issues caused by different
    collection periods across regions .

•   The Executive Board directed the Global office to thoroughly test the Tool Pack
    in some country offices and in particular that such tests be conducted by Statistics
    Canada to ensure it meets the requirements of the ICP and to instill confidence in
    its use. It is suggested the testing be immediate for the modules critical for the
    price collection and country level data editing phases. The results of the full test
    should be reported to the Executive Board.

•   The Executive Board suggested that the ICP Manual (Chapter 6 on Sampling and
    Survey Framework) be supplemented by an Operations Manual that could
    provide instructions and guidance to the National statisticians regarding price
    collection, the determination of outlets, the number of price quotes to be gathered,
    etc. The Global office was directed to prepare such a manual so that it could be
    used for training purposes.

•   The Executive Board directed the Global office to ensure that Chapter 7 of the
    ICP Handbook (Data Editing and Validation) set rules for the editing of country
    data and also for within region edits involving inter-country comparisons. The
    Board noted that the responsibilities of the country and regional coordinators are
    to be carefully described and must include descriptions of the necessary iterations
    starting from the country level data review to the acceptance of the regional price
    levels and PPPs. The Executive Board places the highest priority on the
    completion of this important chapter.

•   The Executive Board approved the TAG recommendation that the full Ring
    Multilateral Comparison be adopted and also approved the criteria for the
    selection of the countries. The Executive Board suggested that the data collection
    for the Ring comparison be carried out during the third quarter of 2005 as close to
    mid year as possible and provide point in time price estimates. The Board
    requested that the regional coordinators be asked to comment on the choice of



                                         4
    Ring countries using the criteria suggested by the TAG and inform the Global
    Office of any disagreement so that the matter can be quickly resolved.


    The criteria for determining the selection of the Ring countries and approved by
    the Board are as follows:

        Ø Openness of the economy;
        Ø Existence of markets trading in a wide range of goods and services;
        Ø A good statistical system in general, especially for price surveys and
          national accounts;
        Ø A country not too large or too small in size, and finally
        Ø The country’s willingness to participate.

    Once the list of Ring countries is completed and approved, the regional
    coordinators, with assistance from the Global office, will seek the cooperation of
    the selected statistical offices. The Executive Board approved the initial selection
    of the countries shown below:

        Ø Eurostat/OECD:         UK, Japan, Estonia and Slovenia. Australia, (Czech
    Republic reserve list)
        Ø CIS:                   Russia, Kazakhstan
        Ø ESCWA:                 Oman , Jordan
        Ø ECLAC:                 Brazil, Chile
        Ø Africa:                Egypt, Kenya, Senegal and South Africa
        Ø Asia:                  Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore and Sri Lanka,
    (Philippines reserve list)


•    The Executive Board noted with approval that first steps were being taken to
    estimate poverty PPP’s.

•   The Executive Board directed the Global Office to prepare advocacy materials to
    be presented to potential donors in international and national organizations
    giving priority given to those expected to be able to provide immediate funding
    assistance. The approach to donors, including approaching donors who have
    already contributed, should include the preparation of materials for face to face
    meetings and presentations .

•   The Executive Board approved the idea to include Pacific Island countries by
    asking them to price a reduced consumption list with the comparison results being
    used for analysis purposes. While the Board understood that this approach was
    conditional on the availability of funds it suggested that it be considered for the
    Caribbean Islands.

•   It was proposed and approved that the Executive Board meet at least once a year.
    It was recognized that unforeseen situations might force the Chairman to engage


                                           5
       in consultation with Members of the Board who were immediately at hand, in
       person or by teleconferencing. But in such cases the Chairman would take steps to
       keep other members of the Board apprised of the matter under discussion without
       delay. This way the full Executive Board would always have an opportunity to
       provide their views before important decisions were taken.



                       List of Executive Board Meeting Attendees

Mr Dennis Trewin               Australian Bureau of Statistics
Chairman

Mr Ifzal Ali                   Asian Development Bank
Ms Shaida Badiee               World Bank
Mr Len Cook                    Office for National Statistics, Great Britian
Mr Enrico Giovannini           OECD

Mr Li Xiaochao                 International Statistical Information Center,
                               China
Mr Brian Newson                Eurostat
Mr Jacob Ryten                 Statistics Canada
Mr Vladimir L. Sokolin         Goskomstat of Russia
Mr Frederic Vogel              Global Manager, ICP

Mr Andre Hoffman               ECLAC
On behalf of Mr Jose Luis
Machinea
Mr   Charles         Leyeka African Development Bank
Lufumpa
On behalf of Mr Henock Kifle

Mr Misha Belkindas             World Bank
Mr Yonas Biru                  Deputy Global Manager, ICP
Mr Peter Hill                  Consultant, World Bank
Mr Mikhail A Korolev           Interstate Statistical committee (CIS)
Mr Andrey E Kosarev            Bureau of Economic Analysis
Ms Silke Stapel                Eurostat
Mr Sun Zhen                    International Statistical Information Center,
                               China




                                            6
