                                                                                   91002
      United Nations

      Economic and Social Council                             Distr.: General
                                                              ------------------

                                                              Original: English




Statistical Commission
Forty-Fifth Session
------- March 2014
Item -- ( --) of the provisional agenda
Items for discussion: International Comparison Programme


Report of the World Bank on the International Comparison
Programme

    Note by the Secretary-General


    The Commission has before it the report of the World Bank on the International
    Comparison Programme (ICP). The report prepared by the World Bank on behalf of the
    Executive Board of the International Comparison Programme outlines the status of
    implementation of the 2011 round. The report describes the computation of the ICP
    2011 estimates; the governance activities that were carried out to support the
    computation process and review the preliminary results; the schedule of publication of
    the final results and the related communication strategy; the knowledge material
    prepared for the ICP 2011 round; the revision policy of Purchasing Power Parities
    (PPPs) statistics; and the plans for the evaluation of the ICP 2011 round. The
    Commission may wish to review the progress with respect to the publication of the final
    results, and establish the ICP Friends of the Chair group to carry out the evaluation of
    the ICP 2011 round.
   I. INTRODUCTION
This report provides the Commission with a comprehensive update on the status of the
implementation of the 2011 round of the International Comparison Programme (ICP), with
specific emphasis on the activities that took place from November 2012 – November 2013.
The report has eight sections covering (a) governance activities; (b) computation and
schedule of publication of the ICP 2011 results; (c) knowledge material; (d) communication
strategy and outreach activities; (e) revision policy of Purchasing Power Parities (PPPs)
statistics; and (f) evaluation of the ICP 2011 round.


   II. GOVERNANCE ACTIVITIES
To address the highly critical components of the final year of the ICP 2011 round, various
meetings of governance bodies were held. These included meetings of the Executive Board,
Technical Advisory Group, Regional Coordinators, Computation Task Force, and Results
Review Group.
       A. Executive Board Meetings
The Executive Board held two meetings in 2013: its eighth meeting on February 24 in New
York and its ninth meeting on October 30 in Washington, DC.
At its eighth meeting, the Board reviewed the timetable and deadlines and stressed the
critical need for timeliness. Additionally, the Board requested that the Global Office prepare
and share bi-monthly status reports of the progress of the programme. The Board requested
to review the preliminary results ahead of the release date. It was agreed that high-level ICP
missions would be conducted to economically large countries where inconsistencies in the
data remained after the data validation process was concluded. The Board highlighted the
need for a general ICP revision policy and an ICP communication strategy to better appeal to
policy-makers.
The ninth meeting addressed the critical stage of finalizing the computation process and
publishing results. For quality assurance, the Board formed a Special Task Force to review
the global results with a special emphasis on the economic consistency of the results of the
largest economies. The Special Task Force was tasked to specifically address technical issues
related to the impact of the following aspects on the results of these economies: the
representativity of global core products priced, the validation process and review of outliers,
as well as the treatment of construction and housing. To allow for this additional result
review step, the meeting decided that the ICP results publication date should be postponed to
March 5, 2014. Additionally, the Board endorsed the ICP 2011 Communication Strategy, and
recommended that the ICP 2011 evaluation should be conducted through the Friends of the
Chair modality.
As per the Board decision, the Special Task Force met from November 21-22, 2013 at the
World Bank to discuss and thoroughly examine the quality assurance issues surrounding the
results of economically large countries.




                                                                                              2
       B. Technical Advisory Group Meetings
The Technical Advisory Group held two meetings in 2013: its eighth meeting from May 20-
21, 2013 in Washington, DC and its ninth meeting from September 25-27 in Washington,
DC.
The eighth Technical Advisory Group meeting assessed the quality of preliminary datasets
and findings. The Technical Advisory Group addressed methodological issues on dwellings,
government compensation, equipment, and construction. They also reviewed the validation
of the 2011 National Accounts data and issues related to the consistency between the 2005
and 2011 ICP results. The most crucial output of the meeting was to examine the consistency
of the global core prices and to discuss how best to handle outliers. The meeting was fruitful
and the Technical Advisory Group recommended that weights of 3:1 be applied to the
important/non-important products at both regional and global levels. The Technical Advisory
Group agreed with the proposal that the Eurostat-OECD real expenditures on education
should be linked through Latin America. It was also decided that the Pacific Islands would be
linked via Fiji, Australia and New Zealand.
At its ninth meeting, the Technical Advisory Group considered preliminary ICP 2011
estimates that showed that global linking via the global core list approach is feasible. The
approach for housing was reconsidered and it was determined that a method similar to what
was done in the 2005 ICP would be used. In the critical stage of the program, it was
reiterated that outliers that could not be justified economically should be deleted by the ICP
Global Office.
       C. Regional Coordinators’ Meetings
The Regional Coordinators held three meetings in 2013: its eighth meeting on February 22 in
New York. The ninth meeting was held from May 22-24 in Washington, DC, and its tenth
meeting from September 23-24 in Washington, DC.
The eighth meeting reviewed and discussed four issues notes related to: high-level ICP
missions; enhancing the comparability of the ICP 2005 and 2011 results; testing the impact
of different methods and weights for importance indicators on the ICP 2011 results; and the
ICP validation steps. Regional Coordinators also reviewed the status of data submission and
confirmed a strong commitment to the way forward.
The ninth meeting focused on data review and validation to highlight the issues and
incorporate the recommendations made at the eighth Technical Advisory Group meeting in
order to improve the data. Analyses lead to concrete decisions regarding household
consumption data as well as special surveys, metadata, linking, and data gaps.
The tenth meeting covered ICP progress reports, review of data quality, review of metadata
quality, and the timetable and final results. The meeting specifically addressed the actions to
be carried out by the Regional Coordinators and the Global Office in order to resolve
remaining issues and adhere to the set timetable to publish the 2011 results.
       D. Computation Task Force Meetings
The Computation Task Force met in Washington, DC on September 26 and December 2-3,
2013 to ensure that their parallel and independent processes of global computation converged
to the same results. They thus harmonized their approaches and methods and reviewed the

                                                                                              3
preliminary results generated through the fourth round of computation. The sessions were
productive and led to an agreement on detailed guidelines for the subsequent rounds of
computation and a strict timetable to produce the results by January 31, 2014.
       E. Results Review Group Meeting
The Results Review Group, made up of several prominent Technical Advisory Group
experts, was formed to provide adept review of the ICP 2011 results and to ensure the highest
quality is achieved. The experts of the Results Review Group met on November 19, 2013 in
Washington, DC. The meeting was attended by the World Bank Senior Vice President and
Chief Economist. The meeting specifically covered poverty issues arising from: the current
set of preliminary results; the comparison of 2011 benchmark results with 2011 extrapolated
PPPs and volume measures in the World Development Indicators; and the consistency
between 2005 and 2011 ICP results.


   III. COMPUTATION AND PUBLICATION OF THE ICP 2011 RESULTS
The computation of the ICP 2011 results was carried out by the Global Office and the
Computation Task Force independent experts. Extensive validation and simulation work was
conducted to ensure the quality of the results and the soundness and reliability of the
methodology adopted in the 2011 round.
The Global Office and Computation Task Force examined the differences between the 2005
and 2011 rounds. Comparing the results from these two rounds is tricky, as improvements in
methodology were introduced in the 2011 round, including using the Global Core List
approach to link the regions, improving the global aggregation method, using the importance
notion to classify products, and introducing an improved approach to measuring construction.
The final ICP 2011 report will include analysis to estimate the effect of these changes in
methodology on the overall results.
The 2011 benchmark results will bring forth new information on the world economies when
compared with the current 2011 extrapolated PPPs and volume measures in the World
Development Indicators. Differences exist between GDP volume growth rates as
measured by the time series national accounts and as implied by PPP benchmarks . The
nature of these differences has been investigated since the initial phases of the ICP. The
broad reasons for these differences include issues such as the different product baskets
used in the time series national accounts deflators and in estimating the PPPs, different
computational methods, different weighting patterns, and so forth. Conceptually, it is
impossible to maintain consistency in PPPs simultaneously across time and space, no matter
which index number formulas are chosen for estimating both the time series price indexes
and the PPPs in the selected years. T he reason is that index number formulas are designed
either to measure price changes over time (e.g., consumer price index) or to measure prices
levels between countries (i.e., PPPs), but they are not designed to measure both of these
aspects simultaneously. Therefore, the 2011 benchmark results cannot converge with the
current 2011 extrapolated PPPs and volume measures in the World Development Indicators.
The work of the Computation Task Force was carried out in compliance with the quality
assurance processes and procedures set forth by the Technical Advisory Group and
approved by the Executive Board. It underwent further quality review by the Results Review
                                                                                            4
Group before onward sharing with the Executive Board for their final endorsement. The ICP
2011 results release date will soon be scheduled and will be followed by the publication of
the final report in the second quarter of 2014.


   IV. KNOWLEDGE MATERIAL
       A. ICP Book
On May 20, 2013, the World Bank announced the publication of “Measuring the Real Size of
the World Economy: The Framework, Methodology, and Results of the International
Comparison Program”. This book is the most comprehensive accounting ever presented by
the International Comparison Program of the theory and methods underlying the estimation
of PPPs. The full version of the book is available via the ICP website
(www.worldbank.org/data/icp).
       B. ICP Operational Guide
The “ICP Operational Guidelines and Procedures for Measuring the Real Size of the World
Economy” entails twenty-eight chapters of material that are all available on the ICP website
(www.worldbank.org/data/icp). It describes the approach and data requirements for the main
price survey and special surveys, including various guidelines produced and survey forms. It
also covers the framework and requirements for National Accounts activities for the ICP. In
addition, the Guide offers guidelines for data validation, computing national annual averages,
calculating PPPs, aggregation, and linking.


   V. COMMUNICATION STRATEGY AND OUTREACH ACTIVITIES
       A. Communication Strategy
The ICP communication strategy, endorsed by the Executive Board, covers the following
elements surrounding the release of the ICP 2011 results: messages, audience, products,
media outlets, communication activities and timing.
       B. ICP Seminars and Blogs
The fifty-ninth International Statistical Institute World Statistics Congress took place in
Hong Kong, China from August 25-30, 2013. The session entitled “Measuring the real size
of the world economy: Methodological and quality improvements of the International
Comparison Program” was organized by the ICP Global Manager. Members of the
Technical Advisory Group , Regional Coordinators as well as Global Office staff
contributed and presented papers.
The Washington Statistical Society held a seminar titled “Measuring the Real Size of the
World Economy - Methodology and Challenges” at the Bureau of Labor Statistics on
November 6, 2013 in Washington DC. The ICP Global Manager, the co-Chair of the
Technical Advisory Group and a Professor at the University of Pennsylvania briefed
participants on the conceptual framework of the ICP and presented an overview of the
statistical methods used to estimate Purchasing Power Parities, changes made from the ICP
2005 round, and the possible impact on the final ICP 2011 results.


                                                                                             5
The World Bank Africa Statistics Practice Group celebrated African Statistics Day on
November 8, 2013 with the theme “Promoting Quality Statistics for Africa’s Progress”.
One of the event's parallel session was on "International Comparison Program for
measuring Africa’s progress". The ICP Team Leader made a presentation on the
International Comparison Program and its application within Africa, the upcoming
release of the results of the 2011 round of the program, and the way ahead.
The ICP Global Office posted its first blog on June 17, 2013. It announced the upcoming
release of the results from the 2011 round of the ICP, which would be followed by a more in-
depth report in 2014. The post was shared with the World Bank and data users via the Open
Data blog website (http://blogs.worldbank.org/ ). The Global Office readily responds to
comments received from the blogs and will continue to post further announcements on the
progress of the programme and the expected release of the ICP 2011 results.
       C. ICP QUARTERLY UPDATES
The Global Office continues to share ICP Quarterly Updates with the ICP community on a
quarterly basis. The updates provide the ICP community with an insider perspective and
include several special interviews conducted with various stakeholders. All ICP Quarterly
Updates are available on the ICP website (www.worldbank.org/data/icp).

   VI. REVISION POLICY OF PURCHASING POWER PARITIES STATISTICS
The ICP revision policy explicitly defines how ICP indicators will be revised and
describes the relevant triggers and guidelines, as well as the timing of revisions and the
steps to be taken to communicate these revisions to users. The policy stems from user
interest to compare ICP results from subsequent benchmark rounds. The Executive
Board agreed that revisions should be implemented but acknowledged that the policy is
forward looking and its timeframe transcends the current governance of the 2011 ICP.
Therefore, the policy will be implemented by the World Bank as the custodian of the
ICP 2011 data, and will not pose any additional burden on the countries to provide
updated data beyond what they already compile as part of their routine statistical work
and report to international agencies (i.e. National Accounts data, population, and
exchange rates).

   VII. EVALUATION OF THE ICP 2011
The evaluation of the 2005 round of the ICP was carried out by the Friends of the Chair
group headed by Statistics Norway. The experience was successful, and thus, the Executive
Board recommended following a similar approach and having a Friends of the Chair-type
evaluation for the 2011 round under the general auspices of the United Nations Statistical
Commission. The Global Office prepared draft Terms of Reference for the Friends of the
Chair evaluation of the 2011 round of the ICP. They are included in the Annex to this report.


   VIII. POINTS FOR DISCUSSION
The Commission is requested to:
    a. review the progress with respect to the publication of the final results; and
                                                                                            6
b. establish the ICP Friends of the Chair group to carry out the evaluation of the 2011
   round of the ICP.




                                                                                      7
ANNEX: DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE UNITED NATIONS STATISTICS
COMMISSION FRIENDS OF THE CHAIR EVALUATION OF THE 2011 ROUND OF THE ICP

       A. Background
The International Comparison Program (ICP) is a worldwide statistical initiative aimed
at estimating Purchasing Power Parities (PPPs) to be used as currency converters to
compare the economic situation of economies around the world. The primary purpose
of the ICP is to generate relevant PPP data to convert the Gross Domestic Product - and
its sub-aggregates reported in different currencies - into a standard common currency
that equalizes the real purchasing power of each of the currencies.
Following the successful completion of the ICP 2005 round under the World Bank
management, the United Nations Statistical Commission requested the Bank to take on
the global coordination of the 2011 Round. This new round leveraged the successful
implementation of the 2005 round. This, together with a concerted effort by
international and national statistical agencies, meant that the 2011 round was better
planned, managed and coordinated. The ICP Global Office, hosted by the World Bank,
worked to broaden the scope of the program, streamline quality assessment processes,
improve the poverty relevance of PPP statistics, ensure the sustainability of PPP
delivery, and enhance statistical capacity building activities related to the generation of
ICP basic data with a specific focus on price statistics and the implementation of the
System of National Accounts.
One of the biggest challenges related to the scope of the program which was enlarged
to accommodate as many as 199 countries/economies: 50 from Africa; 23 economies in
Asia-Pacific; 9 countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States (including
Russia that also participates in the Eurostat -OECD program); 17 in Latin America; 12
in Western Asia (including Sudan and Egypt that also participate in the Africa
program); 22 in the Caribbean; 21 Pacific Islands countries and territories (including
Fiji that also participates in the Asia -Pacific program); 47 in the Eurostat -OECD
program; as well as Georgia and Iran.
Another challenge arises from the cumulative effect of the two ICP rounds, which
takes the ICP from a one -time “snapshot” created by each solitary benchmark into a
time series-like environment. Improving the time consistency of ICP indicators is
crucial for meeting users’ needs. In this regard, the World Bank is investigating the
possible use of information technology to enhance price data collection methods and is
exploring new approaches to improve the extrapolation method currently used in the
World Development Indicators.
At its meeting in October 2013, the ICP Executive Board discussed possible modalities
for the evaluation of the 2011 round of the ICP, and concluded that the Friends of the
Chair group is the preferred modality for the evaluation. The ICP report to the 45th
United Nations Statistical Commission will request the Commission to create a Friends
of the Chair group consisting of representatives of participating countries to evaluate
the 2011 round of the ICP with respect to its scope and activities and make a proposal


                                                                                          8
on the desirability of a new round taking into consideration lessons learned from the
evaluation.


      B. Purpose, Objective and Scope
The purpose of evaluating the ICP 2011 round is to highlight what was achieved and
measure how the achievements compare to the goals set forth in the initial plan. The
objective of the evaluation is to provide intrinsic feedback that may be used to foster
future ICP work. The scope entails a thorough review the following:
   a. Governance framework and the implementation of the distinct governance
      bodies’ roles;
   b. Technical aspects and methodological improvements;
   c. Quality of data and metadata;
   d. Timeliness of targets and publication of results;
   e. Meeting user’s needs;
   f. Composition and allocation of the ICP budget; and
   g. ICP challenges, achievements, and lessons learned for the future of the ICP.

      C. Existing information sources
Relevant sources and documentation for the evaluation include, but are not limited to
the following:
   a. ICP Book, “Measuring the Real Size of the World Economy”
   b. ICP “Operational Guidelines and Procedures for Measuring the Real Size of the
      World Economy”
   c. ICP 2011 governance framework
   d. Minutes of governance meetings (Executive Board, Technical Advisory Group,
      Regional Coordinators)
   e. Progress Reports to the ICP Executive Board, United Nations Statistical
      Commission and donors
   f. DFID project memorandum and logical framework for funding the ICP
   g. Quality Assurance Framework questionnaires
   h. Survey Framework questionnaires
   i. National Accounts metadata
   j. ICP Quarterly Updates
   k. ICP Website and Portal

      D. Methodology
The Friends of Chair group will agree on the evaluation methodology to be followed,
which may include:
   a. Reviewing the existing information sources;
   b. Carrying out a survey of stakeholders’ views (national statistical offices,
      regional coordinating agencies, Global Office, donors, etc.); and
   c. Conducting interviews with major users.

                                                                                      9
        E. Outputs
The Friends of Chair group is to prepare and provide a report of its findings and
recommendations to the United Nations Statistical Commission by mid November
2014. The report will include the results of the evaluation of the ICP 2011 round,
which will assess the scope, activities and lessons learned. It will provide
recommendations where actionable improvements can be made and a proposal
concerning the future of the program.
The evaluation report may include but is not limited to the following suggested
elements:
   a.   Executive summary
   b.   Introduction
   c.   ICP background
   d.   Experiences from the ICP 2011 round
           i.  Governance structure
          ii.  Technical aspects and methodologies
         iii.  Capacity -building
         iv.   Quality of data and metadata
          v.   Timeliness of targets and publication of results
         vi.   Meeting user’s needs
        vii.   Composition and allocation of the ICP budget
   e.   ICP challenges
   f.   ICP achievements
   g.   Future of the ICP
   h.   Concluding remarks

        F. Considerations for Composition
Given that the ICP is a very broad program encompassing both developing and
developed countries; it is advisable to have two co -chairs for the Friends of the Chair
group – a developed country National Statistical Office, which is part of
Eurostat/OECD program, and a developing country National Statistical Office. The
membership of the Friends of the Chair should encompass representatives from all
participating regions.
The co -chairs of the Friends of the Chair group would be expected to provide
contribution -in-kind in the form of staff time. In order to save on cost, the modality
should primarily entail deskwork to minimize travel and its associated costs.
The Friends of the Chair group will coordinate closely with the World Bank’s
Development Data Group, which holds the institutional memory of the program.


        G. Tentative Timing
It is expected that the work program will have the following activities and timetable:
   a. Setting up the Friends of the Chair group by the United Nations Statistical
      Commission (March 2014)
                                                                                         10
b. Preparation of instruments to be used to collect information, if needed (April
   2014)
c. Reviewing existing information sources, conducting surveys and interviews,
   and analysis of the information collected (May - September 2014)
d. Draft report of findings and recommendations (October 2014)
e. Submission of final report to the United Nations Statistical Commission
   (November 2014)
f. Presentation of final report at the 46th United Nations Statistical Commission
   (March 2015)




                                                                               11
