                                            91007
International Comparison Program




Findings of the 2nd ICP Results Review Group
                   Meeting




             11th Executive Board Meeting
                     March 2, 2014
                     New York, NY
                     2011 International Comparison Program

                      2nd Meeting of the Results Review Group

                                     The World Bank
                                     Washington, DC
                                   February 10-11, 2014


    1. Introduction

The purpose of the meeting was to review the results from the final computations of the
global level PPPs and real expenditures. The data review included an assessment of the
effect of changes in methodology between 2005 and 2011, a final review of the linking
methods and the resulting tables of ICP 2011 results, and a discussion regarding the
publication of China’s results.

The Review Group also discussed issues regarding the use of PPPs for establishing
international poverty lines as affected by the level differences between the 2005 and 2011
PPPs. There was also a discussion of how to reconcile benchmark PPPs with time series
PPPs based on GDP growth rates.

    2. Effect of Linking Methodological Changes between 2005 and 2011

A number of new techniques were introduced in the 2005 ICP, and the detailed data
available from that round enabled an in-depth analysis to be undertaken of not only the
results but also the impact of various methods that were employed, particularly those
used to link the PPPs for the six “regions”1 to provide consistent estimates for all 146
countries. The benefits of implementing new methods to overcome shortcomings in
previously-used procedures are fairly clear, particularly as regards ensuring that the 2011
inter-country comparisons are as sound as possible. However, the downside of improving
the methods is that it introduces inconsistencies between the successive sets of
benchmark results for 2005 and 2011. A review of the impact of using new linking
methods follows.

Instead of 18 countries pricing a separate list (called the ring list) of products to link
household consumption PPPs across regions (approach used in the 2005 round), all
countries priced in the 2011 round a set of global core prices that were also imbedded in
the regional lists. The result was that basic heading linking factors were based on all
countries in 2011 instead of 18 countries subjectively selected in 2005.

The Review Group was presented with three sets of analysis. One was to examine
whether the prices from the ring list in 2005 overstated price levels in poorer countries,
1
 The six regions were Africa, Asia/Pacific, Commonwealth of Independent States, Eurostat/OECD, Latin
America, Western Asia.

                                                  1
the second to examine results for 2011 using all countries or only 18 as done in 2005. The
third set of computations was to compare the revised method to aggregate basic heading
PPPs to the GDP (Country Aggregation with Redistribution-CAR).

The World Bank (2013)2 noted that when validating the 2005 ring prices, there were
some countries with relative price structures significantly different from other Ring
countries and also from the within region results. The dilemma was that these countries
likely provided prices for items only available in specialty shops in their country, but
which were more widely available in richer countries. These countries were labeled as
“outliers” and were subjected to additional data validation. In order to not add another
layer of subjectivity to the process, the data from the outlier countries were included in
the calculations of the ICP 2005 between region linking factors.

The Review Group was presented analysis to determine whether ring prices were over
stated in some ring countries in 2005. The analysis was based on examining inflation
rates for the 18 Ring countries between 2005 and 2011 from national CPI’s compared to
the inflation shown by household consumption PPPs. The results point out that the prices
were overstated in more poor countries than those labeled as outliers in 2005. Two
methods to quantify the impact of the overstated prices were discussed. One was to adjust
the prices from the poor ring countries to the levels of the richer countries and recompute
the linking factors. The other was to remove the countries labeled as outliers and
recompute linking factors. Both methods involve a degree of subjectivity, but should
provide results helpful to explain differences between 2005 and 2011.

The second analysis presented to the review group was to determine the impact of having
all countries pricing items for linking purposes instead of the 18 used in 2005. The
linking factors for ICP 2011 using prices only from the 18 ring countries were computed.
The impact on the final PPPs was minimal. The biggest impact is on Asia (1.3%) which
means that in Asia the GDPs of the countries would be 1.3% higher in ICP 2011 if only
18 countries were used in the linking exercise instead of all countries.

A new method of aggregation coined the CAR method (Country Aggregation with Re-
distribution) was used to aggregate PPPs to the GDP. The impact of the CAR method can
be simulated; the impact was to raise the real expenditures in Asia 9 percent for 2005 and
6 percent for 2011. It is not possible to assess the use of the core list by all countries vs.
18 countries pricing a separate list because the data required are not available for 2005.

It is difficult to directly quantify the impact of the different methodologies. However,
three issues probably contributed the most to differences between 2005 and 2011
outcomes. The use of the core vs. the ring greatly improved the quality of the linking
process. Analysis suggests that adopting the global core list approach and the use of the
importance classification would raise real expenditures in 2011 in Asia and Africa against
the other regions, compared with the outcomes if the ring approach continued to be used.


2
  World Bank (2013). “Measuring the Real Size of the World Economy, Chapter 8:      The Ring
Comparison—Linking the Regions” Washington, DC , World Bank

                                              2
Analysis also points out that an adjustment for urban/rural prices in China would have
raised its real expenditures in 2005 by as much as 10 percent.

   3. Productivity Adjustments

While essentially the same set of salaries data by occupation were obtained for the 2005
and 2011 rounds for government compensation PPPs, there were differences in which
regions adjusted their data for productivity. In 2005, Africa, Asia, and Western Asia
adjusted the compensation rates for productivity, but inter-regional linking factors were
not adjusted. In 2011, the linking factors applied to all regions were adjusted for
productivity, thus improving the comparability of government compensation.

The Review Group was provided a comparison of volume per capita indices for the GDP,
Actual Individual Consumption, Collective Consumption, and Health aggregates with
and without the use of productivity adjustments. The analysis showed that the
productivity adjustments have only a moderate impact at the GDP and Actual Individual
Consumption levels, but can significantly impact the collective consumption and health
aggregates, which is why they are being used.

   4. Housing

The Review Group was provided analysis used to determine the choice of methods to link
housing across regions. It was noted that the calculation of linking factors for housing
services is complicated because the methods used within regions differ across regions, no
comparable rental data are available to link Eurostat-OECD countries, and in general the
quality of the rental and housing quantity data are weak. There are inconsistencies
between expenditures from the national accounts and the rental and quantity data
furnished.

Because of the limitations of the data within regions, each decided on the best method to
suit their situation. Africa, Latin America, and Western Asia calculated PPPs using rents
collected for the global list of dwelling types. Asia, after in-depth analysis resorted to the
same method used for ICP 2005 which was a “reference volume” approach. Eurostat-
OECD uses a combination of rental and dwelling stock data.

The Review Group was provided a description of input data used for linking and the
resulting limitations. Because of the limitations of the data, the linking was done in
stages. Africa, Latin America, and Western Asia were linked using the same data that
went into the estimation of within region PPPs. For Asia and Eurostat-OECD, dwelling
stock data were used to link them to each other and then to the rest of the world. Because
of data gaps, only data from countries for which plausible estimates for both quantity and
quality indicators were included in the linking process.
It was concluded that the use of a simple, though robust, linking method was appropriate
given the data available.

   5. Construction Methodology - Markups


                                              3
Difficulties with implementing the method used for construction in ICP 2005 led the
TAG to recommend a simplified input method for use in ICP 2011. The input method
makes use of prices of basic materials, labor, and machinery. The initial proposal
included making adjustments to the input prices for mark-ups (profits etc.) and
professional fees. However, the data collected on these components were patchy and
incomplete. Many countries did not provide these estimates and the data that were
supplied proved to be so inconsistent that they could not be used. At its meeting in May
2013, the TAG recommended that the input prices should not be adjusted for mark-ups
and professional fees, given the poor quality of the data collected.

However, China in its representations to the Executive Board stated that PPPs for
construction are too low because the mark-ups for China would be higher than in other
countries, given the high level of construction activity in China in 2011. China suggested
that a mark-up of 30 percent be applied to their construction prices. Since the ICP is a
global exercise, it is not possible to make such an adjustment to one country without
considering adjustments for other countries within the region and again for the linking
exercise. However, to understand the impact of such an adjustment, simulations were run
to test the sensitivity of China’s construction PPPs to different percentage mark-ups
applied to all countries in the Asian region and then to China only, to estimate the effect
of construction PPPs on the GDP PPPs.

In the simulations, the mark-ups were applied directly to PPPs of construction, to each of
the construction basic headings. Different mark-ups applied to all Asian countries and
again but only to China and are shown in the following table.


 Changes to                       Mark-up applied to all Asian countries
 China’s PPP
                          10%           20%          30%           40%           50%
 (relative to base)
 Construction            10.0%         20.0%         30.0%         40.0%        50.0%
 GDP                      1.5%          2.9%          4.2%          5.3%          6.4%
 Changes to                           Mark-up applied only to China
 China’s PPP
                          10%           20%          30%           40%           50%
 (relative to base)
 Construction            10.0%         20.0%         30.0%         40.0%        50.0%
 GDP                      1.9%          3.7%          5.3%          6.8%          8.2%

In the extreme case where a markup of 50% is applied only to China, the GDP PPP
increases by 8.2 %. In the more realistic case where a markup of 20% is applied to all
Asia countries, the effect at the GDP level for China is an increase of 2.9%.

The reason is because of the multi-lateral nature of the index number used in the ICP
process (EKS) in which the overall index is computed on the basis of multiple binary
comparisons. Thus, even though the share of construction is rather high in China, it is not

                                            4
so in almost all other countries involved, and so the effect of China’s share of
construction to GDP is diluted when the GDP PPP is estimated.

The conclusion is that the impact of including construction mark-ups in the construction
PPPs on China’s GDP PPP would be relatively small (around 1.5 percent) once the
relevant mark-ups are included for other countries.

   6.   Publication of China results

The Review Group discussed the dilemma resulting from China’s reluctance to accept the
final PPPs. The Review Group expressed its disappointment that the UN Principles of
Official Statistics are being ignored as is the fact that a PPP is not a country number but
the outcome of a multilateral process involving all other countries in the world. However,
in the spirit of international harmony, the Review Group provided the Global Office two
options for the Executive Board’s consideration regarding the inclusion of China when
ICP 2011 results are released. The Review Group also concluded that the current results
are stable and that the effect of the various simulations would change the results only
marginally and within the margins of error associated with ICP estimates.

   7. Poverty and PPPs

The Review Group was provided a review of how ICP results affect global poverty
estimates. One issue is how the international poverty line is computed as an unweighted
average of the national poverty lines of 15 of the poorest countries which exclude India
and China. These national poverty lines are converted to the dollar using PPPs resulting
in the dollar a day line. The other issue is that the 2005 ICP made the poor world poorer
relative to the US than previously thought, and the 2011 PPPs will do the opposite
resulting in decreases in poverty if the dollar value of the global line is held constant.
Alternatively, if the poor country lines are held constant, world poverty will likely not
change by much, but the global line expressed in international dollars will rise. Either
way, the results will be hard to explain. Some suggestions were offered to the WB
regarding the calculation of the global poverty line. One was to continue to use the
average of poor country lines, but compute a weighted average using the number of poor
people in each country as weights. This would prevent the exclusion of countries such as
India. A second was not to change the construction of the poverty line at the same time as
using a new ICP, because the interpretation of the outcome becomes very difficult. The
Global Office was encouraged to be more proactive in explaining the use of PPPs for
poverty analysis.

   8. Results review

The Review Group was provided a detailed review of the linking methods for housing,
construction, and productivity adjustments. The dual participation of Egypt and Sudan in
the Africa and Western Asia comparisons and the steps to link the Pacific and Caribbean
islands and Iran were also reviewed. The Eurostat-OECD comparison used methods for
education, construction, and housing specific to their region; so the Review Group
examined the linking methods to link them to the rest of the world.
                                            5
The Review Group noted that the process has become increasingly complicated with near
heroic steps taken to include as many countries as possible while allowing each region
flexibility for their own comparison. Given the complexity, the Global Office was
commended for forming the Computational Task Force to ensure the computational steps
were correct and transparent.

Some final comments regarding the results review are:

      The final results for 2011 are of significantly better quality than the 2005 results because
       of the use of improved methodology. Not to be overlooked is the fact that the global
       office, regional coordinators, and country representatives had the benefit of experience
       gained from the previous round which was reflected in more thorough data validation and
       implementation of the more complicated estimation methods.
      It was noted that Russia, Egypt, and Sudan each appear in two regions. The
       summations to aggregate totals across regions need to exclude the duplicative
       numbers with appropriate footnotes for the data users.
      The term “international dollar” can be confusing and needs to be more carefully
       explained.

   9. Conclusions

The Results Review Group has evaluated the technical decisions that underlie the results
of the 2011 International Comparison Program (ICP), the simulations and analysis of
changes in methodology, and the final results. The conclusion is that there are no further
steps or computations that would have any substantive impact on the final results.




                                                6
