OCTOBER 2014 | VOLUME 10

                                                              91207



                           An analysis of issues shaping Africa’s economic future




                                    u 	 Growth remains stable in Sub-
                                        Saharan Africa. Some countries
                                        are seeing a slowdown, but the
                                        region’s economic prospects
                                        remain broadly favorable
                                    u 	 The Ebola outbreak is exacting
                                        a heavy human and economic
                                        toll on affected countries and,
                                        if not rapidly contained, the risk
                                        of wider contagion grows
                                    u 	 In Sub-Saharan Africa, growth in
                                        agriculture and services is more
                                        effective at reducing poverty
                                        than growth in industry


                                    AFRICA’S PULSE TEAM:
                                    Punam Chuhan-Pole and
                                    Francisco H. G. Ferreira (Team Leads),
                                    Luc Christiaensen, Gerard Kambou,
                                    Manka Angwafo, Camila Galindo Pardo,
                                    Vijdan Korman, Anna Popova,
                                    Mapi Buitano

                                    With contributions from
                                    Kathleen Beegle, Cesar Calderon,
                                    Aparajita Goyal, Eugenia Suarez Moran,
                                    Jos Verbeek




                                        This document was produced by
                                        the Office of the Chief Economist
                                        for the Africa region
               Summary
               u	Global growth has been weak, with divergent trends in high-income countries, and below long-run
                   growth levels in developing countries.
               u	Sub-Saharan Africa is growing at a moderate pace, reflecting in part a slowdown in some of the
                   region’s large economies. Public infrastructure investment, a rebound in agriculture, and a buoyant
                   services sector are key drivers of growth in the region.
               u	Prospects for the region remain favorable, despite headwinds. External risks of higher global financial
                   market volatility and lower growth in emerging market economies weigh on the downside. In
                   several Sub-Saharan African countries, large budgetary imbalances are a source of vulnerability to
                   exogenous shocks and underscore the need for rebuilding fiscal buffers in these countries.
               u	A key risk on the domestic side is a contagion of the Ebola outbreak.      Without a scale-up of effective
                   interventions, growth would slow markedly not only in the core countries (Guinea, Liberia, and
                   Sierra Leone), but also in the subregion as transportation, cross-border trade, and supply chains are
                   severely disrupted.
               u	Sub-Saharan Africa is lagging sharply in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs); for
                   example, the region has achieved only a third of the poverty target of halving the proportion of
                   people living under $1.25 a day, while globally this target has already been met. In addition, there is
                   considerable variation across countries in how much progress is being made on the MDGs.
               u	The region’s pattern of growth and economic transformation has implications for poverty reduction.
                   In Sub-Saharan Africa, growth in agriculture and services has been more effective at reducing
                   poverty than growth in industry.
               u	Structural transformation has a role to play in accelerating poverty reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa.
                   Increasing agricultural productivity will be critical to fostering structural transformation. Boosting
                   rural income diversification can facilitate this transformation, as well. Investments in rural public
                   goods and services (for example, education, health, rural roads, electricity and ICT), including in small
                   towns, will be conducive to lifting productivity in the rural economy.
               u	Although Sub-Saharan Africa’s pattern of growth has largely bypassed manufacturing, growing
                   the region’s manufacturing base, especially by improving its fundamentals—lower transport cost,
                   cheaper and more reliable power, and a more educated labor force—will benefit all sectors.




2   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Section 1: Recent Developments and Trends
  u	Following  weaker-than-expected growth in the first half of 2014, a modest pickup in global growth is
     expected in the second half of the year, lifting growth to around 2.6 percent in 2014, to 3.2 percent in
     2015, and to an average yearly rate of 3.3 percent during 2016–17.
  u	Despite  headwinds, medium-term growth prospects for Sub-Saharan Africa remain favorable.
     Regional gross domestic product (GDP) growth is projected to strengthen to an annual rate of 5.2
     percent during 2015–16 from 4.6 percent in 2014, and to rise to 5.3 percent in 2017.



GLOBAL ECONOMY
Global growth has been weaker than expected, amid mixed performance in a number of major
countries (figure 1). In the United States, the Euro Area, and Japan, it averaged 0.6 percent in the first
half of 2014, but growth across these countries has diverged considerably. Growth in the United States
has been gathering momentum, but the Euro Area and Japan appear to be stagnating. Supported by
rising employment and investment growth, a still accommodative monetary policy, and easing fiscal
consolidation, U.S. growth recovered strongly in the second quarter from a sharp contraction in the first
quarter. The recovery in the U.S. economy is expected to gather pace in the second half of 2014 as better
employment prospects support real income growth and confidence, fiscal consolidation pressures ease,
and investment rises in line with strong profits and favorable financing conditions. GDP growth for 2014
is projected at about 2.1 percent, rising above trend in 2015 to around 3.0 percent.

Meanwhile, growth appears to have
stagnated in the Euro Area and Japan. With              FIGURE 1: Global GDP growth                                          A modest
the strength of the recovery continuing to                                                                                   pickup in
                                                        Real GDP growth, percent                                             global growth
be impaired by weak domestic demand,                    10.0                                                                 is expected
ongoing balance sheet adjustments,                       8.0                                                                 in the second
                                                                                                                 Forecasts
and a fragmented banking sector, Euro                    6.0                                                                 half of 2014,
Area GDP was flat in the second quarter,                                                                                     lifting growth
                                                         4.0
                                                                                                                             to 2.6 percent
following a small uptick in the first                    2.0
                                                                                                                             for the year
quarter. A slow improvement in credit                    0.0
and labor market conditions should                      -2.0
provide some momentum ahead, but                        -4.0
investment prospects remain subdued and                 -6.0
                                                              2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
precautionary savings still high. Exports                                   World High income   Developing countries
should gradually pick up, supported by                  Source: World Bank.

strengthening demand from the United
States and a weakening euro. Growth is
expected to resume in the second half of the year, with overall growth for 2014 projected to reach about
1.0 percent. In Japan, a sales tax hike in April caused a more significant contraction in activity than initially
expected, while exports failed to pick up despite a weak yen. Monetary policy accommodation and
reform commitments will provide ongoing support, but fiscal consolidation is expected to keep domestic
demand subdued throughout 2015, with exports recovering only slowly. Real GDP growth is projected to
average 1.0 percent in 2014, down from 1.5 percent in 2013.


                                                                                                          A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   3
               In developing countries, growth is expected to remain below long-run average levels in most regions.
               This is partly due to weak external demand and withdrawal of fiscal stimulus, especially in major
               emerging market countries. In China, growth is expected to slow from 7.7 percent in 2013 to 7.4 in 2014
               and to an average of 7.1 percent during 2015–17, as it makes the transition away from an investment-led
               growth strategy toward greater emphasis on domestic consumption. However, developing countries
               are expected to benefit from the projected pickup of economic activity in high-income countries in the
               second half of 2014, which is expected to lift trade growth modestly. This should provide some impetus
               to developing countries, particularly those for which the United States is a major trading partner. In
               addition, still accommodative U.S. monetary policy and the European Central Bank’s announced policy
               measures to ease credit are supporting capital flows to most developing regions.

               Overall, a modest pickup in global growth is expected in the second half of 2014 to raise annual
               growth to around 2.6 percent for the year. Growth is expected to strengthen to 3.2 percent in 2015
               and to an average yearly rate of 3.3 percent during 2016–17. High-income country growth is expected
               to come in at 1.8 percent in 2014, up from 1.3 percent in 2013, and to average 2.3 percent a year
               during 2015–17. Developing-country growth is expected to edge lower to 4.4 percent in 2014 before
               rebounding to 5 percent in 2015, and to average 5.4 a year during 2015–17.

               Monetary policy tightening in the United States, deflation in the Euro Area, and geopolitical tensions
               in a number of regions present risks to the global outlook. Monetary policy in high-income countries
               is expected to diverge. The U.S. Federal Reserve is projected to start raising policy rates in mid-2015,
               which carries the risk of financial market volatility. In contrast, in the Euro Area, where inflation
               continues to drift downward, deflation risks are increasing, and the European Central Bank has
               announced additional easing measures to begin in October. In Japan, where inflation expectations
               are still weakly anchored, loose monetary policy is projected to continue. Developing countries and
               emerging market economies are especially vulnerable to bouts of financial market disruptions and
               volatility as a result of changes in monetary policy in high-income countries or weakening investor
               sentiment if geopolitical tensions (for example, in Russia or Iraq) or health concerns (for example, from
               the Ebola virus in West Africa) escalate. Such disruptions can trigger a sharp withdrawal of funds from
               these countries and place strong downside pressure on domestic currencies.


               RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
               Growth has moderated in Sub-Saharan Africa, reflecting in part a slowdown in some of the region’s
               largest economies. Growth slowed notably in South Africa, the region’s second-largest economy,
               due to structural bottlenecks, labor unrest and low investor confidence. The South African economy
               expanded a modest 1.0 percent year-on-year in the second quarter of 2014, its lowest growth rate
               since the 2009 financial crisis, slowing from an already weak 1.6 percent expansion in the first quarter
               as strikes in the platinum sector dragged mining and manufacturing output down. In Angola, oil
               production declined with mature oil fields coming off stream, causing a marked deceleration in
               growth. By contrast, economic activity strengthened in Nigeria, the region’s largest economy. GDP
               advanced 6.5 percent year-on-year in the second quarter, up from a 6.2 percent expansion in the first
               quarter. Growth also remained robust in many of the region’s low-income countries including, notably,
               Cote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Mozambique, and Tanzania. However, the Ebola outbreak severely disrupted
               economic activity in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, causing growth to slow in these countries.


4   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Overall, GDP growth in the region is
                                                     FIGURE 2: GDP growth in Sub-Saharan Africa                                GDP growth
projected to be 4.6 percent in 2014, the
                                                                                                                               in the region
same as in 2013 (figure 2). Excluding                Real GDP growth, percent                                                  is projected to
                                                     9.0                                                                       be 4.6 percent
South Africa, average GDP growth for
                                                     8.0                                                                       in 2014,
the rest of the region is expected to hold                                                                                     strengthening
                                                     7.0                                                      Forecasts
steady at 5.6 percent, a faster pace than            6.0                                                                       to an average
                                                                                                                               annual pace
other developing regions excluding                   5.0
                                                                                                                               of 5.2 percent
China. GDP per capita growth is expected             4.0                                                                       during 2015-16
to hold steady at 2.1 percent in 2014.               3.0
                                                     2.0
Public infrastructure investment, a                  1.0
rebound in agriculture, and a buoyant                0.0
                                                           2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
services sector were key drivers of                                 Sub-Saharan Africa   Sub-Saharan   Developing countries,
growth in the region. Substantial                                   excl. South Africa   Africa        excl. China
                                                     Source: World Bank.
infrastructure investment, including
in ports, electricity capacity, and
transportation continued to be undertaken across the region, helping to sustain high growth rates
in many countries. In Cote d’Ivoire, a strong increase in cocoa production and rice output boosted
agriculture growth, and Ethiopia’s robust growth continued to be supported by the agriculture sector
and public investment, particularly in infrastructure. Services sector expansion, led by transport,
telecommunications, financial services, and tourism, is spearheading overall economic growth in
countries such as Nigeria, Tanzania, and Uganda. However, the region is seeing a slowdown in foreign
direct investment (FDI) flows, an important source of financing of fixed capital formation: FDI is expected
to be around $29 billion in 2014, down from nearly $32 billion in 2013. The slowdown reflects subdued
global demand and weaker commodity prices, especially of metals. Overall, net capital inflows to the
region are projected to amount to 4.3 percent of regional GDP in 2014 compared with 5.1 percent in 2013
as FDI and portfolio investment flows register significant declines.

The fiscal policy stance remained expansionary across the region during 2014, resulting in large budgetary
imbalances. The fiscal deficit for the region as a whole is projected to widen to 3.6 percent of GDP from
3.1 percent of GDP in 2013, with significant variations among countries. The fiscal position of many
countries deteriorated due to increasing current and capital expenditures, but also to declining revenues,
notably among oil-exporting countries facing both declining production and lower oil prices. In Angola,
for example, the overall fiscal balance is projected to deteriorate sharply from a surplus of 0.3 percent of
GDP in 2013 to a deficit of 4.1 percent of GDP in 2014, with declining oil revenues and an increase in the
wage bill as the main factors behind the deficit. At the same time, several countries took measures to
control expenditures that are helping to stabilize or reduce their fiscal deficits. Nigeria’s overall deficit is
projected to narrow to 2.9 percent of GDP in 2014, driven in part by higher oil and gas revenues, but also
by expenditure restraint, including a decline in subsidies as a percent of GDP. In Senegal, the overall fiscal
deficit is projected to decline to 5.1 percent of GDP in 2014 from 5.5 percent in 2013, mainly on the back
of expenditure restraint as the authorities implement measures aimed at streamlining less productive
spending, including on wages and salaries and goods and services.


                                                                                                        A F R I C A’ S P U L S E    >   5
                  Notwithstanding ongoing efforts to control spending, strengthen revenue administration, and undertake
                  tax policy reforms, the widening fiscal deficit for the region as a whole suggests uneven progress in
                  rebuilding fiscal space, and underscores the need for countries in the region to take advantage of the
                  benign global financial conditions to rebuild depleted fiscal buffers. This will entail curbing current
                  spending, which has contributed to the expansionary fiscal stance, and focusing on quality and efficiency
                  of investment spending. Fiscal consolidation measures would help contain the rising primary fiscal
                  deficits, which were a major factor behind the buildup in debt-to-GDP ratios observed in 2013, notably
                  among frontier market countries.

                  Inflation edged up in the region, but was not a major concern in most countries (figure 3). Overall, inflation
                  rose from 6.2 percent (y/y) in the beginning of 2014 to 6.9 percent (y/y) in July. The uptick in inflation was
                  most visible in the frontier market countries that also sustained large currency depreciations—notably
                  Ghana, where inflation was in double digits. In some countries, inflation remained above the upper limit
                  of the central bank target range for 2014, prompting a tightening of monetary policy (figure 4). In South
                                                                                                                                                                               Africa, the reserve bank hiked the repo rate
Inflation          FIGURE 3: Inflation trends                                                                                                                                  by an additional 25 basis points to 5.75
inched higher
                   Percent, y/y                                                                                                                                                percent in July following a 50-basis-point
across the
                   18                                                                                                                                                          increase in January; and in Ghana, the
region, but is
                    16                                                                                                                                                         central bank raised the monetary policy
not a major
                    14
concern for                                                                                                                                                                    rate by 100 basis points to 19.0 percent in
a majority          12
                                                                                                                                                                               July. Reduced real disposable income and
of African          10
countries            8                                                                                                                                                         higher borrowing costs weighed on investor
                     6                                                                                                                                                         sentiment and kept household consumption
                     4                                                                                                                                                         subdued, putting a brake on economic
                     2                                                                                                                                                         activity in these countries.
                     0
                         2010MO1                      2011MO1                         2012MO1                              2013MO1                          2014MO1
                                         Sub-Saharan Africa                                 Sub-Saharan Africa                                  Sub-Saharan                    Current account deficits remained
                                         oil exporters                                      oil importers                                       Africa
                                                                                                                                                                               elevated across the region, reflecting the
                   Source: World Bank.
                                                                                                                                                                               expansionary fiscal policy stance, declining
Inflation          FIGURE 4: Policy interest rates                                                                                                                             commodity prices, and rising investment-
exceeded           Percent                                                                                                                                                     related imports. The current account deficit
central bank
                   20                                                                                                                                                          for the region as a whole is expected to
targets
in some            18                                                                                                                                                          widen from an estimated 2.4 percent of GDP
countries,         16                                                                                                                                                          to 2.7 percent of GDP in 2014. Commodity
prompting          14                                                                                                                                                          prices weakened further in 2014, with oil
an increase in
                   12                                                                                                                                                          marginally down from a year earlier, and
policy interest
                   10
rates                                                                                                                                                                          agriculture and metals down 2.5 percent
                    8
                                                                                                                                                                               and 4 percent, respectively, reflecting
                    6
                                                                                                                                                                               increased supply and weakening demand,
                    4
                                                                                                                                                                               all of which is expected to weigh on exports,
                     2011.01
                               2011.04
                                         2011.07
                                                    2011.10
                                                              2012.01
                                                                        2012.04
                                                                                  2012.07
                                                                                             2012.10
                                                                                                       2013.01
                                                                                                                 2013.04
                                                                                                                            2013.07
                                                                                                                                      2013.10
                                                                                                                                                 2014.01
                                                                                                                                                           2014.04
                                                                                                                                                                     2014.07




                                                                                                                                                                               especially from oil and metal-producing
                                                   Ghana                 Nigeria                       South Africa                      Zambia
                                                                                                                                                                               countries (figure 5). In contrast, spurred
                    Source: World Bank.
                                                                                                                                                                               by infrastructure investment projects and


  6   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
private consumption growth, the
                                             FIGURE 5: Global commodity prices                                                           Commodity
demand for imports has remained
                                                                                                                                         prices
strong across the region. In this            Index 2010=100
                                                                                                                                         weakened
                                             150
environment, reducing the twin fiscal                                                                                                    further in
                                             140                                                                                         2014, with
and current account deficits remains
                                             130                                                                                         agriculture
a major policy challenge for several of                                                                                                  and metals
                                             120
the region’s frontier market countries,                                                                                                  down 2.5
                                             110
                                                                                                                                         percent and
such as Ghana and Kenya, and for South       100                                                                                         4 percent,
Africa, which is exposed to capital           90                                                                                         respectively
outflow volatility due to its heavy           80
reliance on portfolio capital flows           70
(figure 6).                                   60
                                                   2010MO1           2011MO1           2012MO1             2013MO1            2014MO1
                                                                           Energy           Agriculture              Metals
In a context of benign global financial
                                             Source: World Bank.
conditions, most of these countries
have, however, been able to tap
                                             FIGURE 6: Current account and fiscal balances in selected                                   Elevated fiscal
international financial markets again.       countries                                                                                   and current
Renewed investor interest in the                                                                                                         account
                                             Percent of GDP
region, following a sharp contraction          8                                                                                         deficits leave
                                                                                                                                         countries
in the first quarter of 2014, enabled a        6
                                               4                                                                                         vulnerable
strong increase in Eurobond sovereign                                                                                                    to shifts in
                                               2
issuances, including a maiden issuance         0                                                                                         external
by Kenya. Year-to-date, total issuance        -2                                                                                         conditions
                                              -4
for the region including South Africa,
                                              -6
amounted to US$6.9 billion, exceeding         -8
the US$6.5 billion issued in 2013 (figure    -10
                                             -12
7). Several countries made a successful                Angola         Ghana         Kenya        Nigeria     South Africa     Zambia
return to the international bond markets.                       Current account balance (2013)        Overall ﬁscal balance (2013)
Zambia’s $1.0 billion sale of 10-year        Source: World Bank.

dollar denominated government bonds
in April 2014 was followed by those          FIGURE 7: Sovereign bond issuance by Sub-Saharan                                            At $6.9 billion
of the governments of Cote d’Ivoire          Africa, year-to-date                                                                        to date,
                                                                                                                                         sovereign
($750 million) and Senegal ($500             $ million
                                                                                                                                         bond issuances
million) in July, and Ghana ($1.0 billion)   8,000
                                                                                                                                         have already
                                             7,000
in September. Many of the issuances                                                                                                      surpassed
                                             6,000                                                                                       last year’s
were highly oversubscribed, with             5,000
orders reaching $8 billion in the case       4,000
of Kenya and nearly $5 billion for Cote      3,000
d’Ivoire. Moreover, sovereign spreads        2,000
                                             1,000
fell across the board, although they
                                                   0
remain relatively high for Ghana and                   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2006 2007 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Zambia, suggesting that investors were       Source: World Bank.


differentiating between countries on the


                                                                                                                     A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   7
                  basis of macroeconomic imbalances and the pace of reforms (figure 8). This highlights some of the risks
                  inherent in borrowing in global financial markets. Some of the region’s countries are turning to the sukuk
                  market as a source of long-term financing for infrastructure needs (box 1).


Sovereign           FIGURE 8: Sovereign bond spreads
bond spreads
fell across the      Basis points
board, but           1,400
they remain
relatively           1,200                                                       Africa Region Spread(bps)           Kenya
high in some                                                                     EMBI Global Spread(bps)             Nigeria
                                                                                 Cote d Ivoire                       Senegal Strip Spread(bps)
countries                                                                        Ghana                               South Africa
                     1,000


                      800


                      600


                      400


                      200


                        0
                             09/19/2011   02/19/2012   07/19/2012   12/19/2012    05/19/2013            10/19/2013          03/19/2014           08/19/2014


                     Source: Bloomberg.




BOX 1:            Sub-Saharan African countries are turning to sukuk bonds for financing infrastructure. A sukuk
Sub-Saharan
                  (Islamic bond) is a financial instrument representing a risk-sharing way to provide capital, typically to
African
countries are     governments. Through this mechanism, sukuk (bond) holders own shares of assets relating to specific
tapping the       projects or investments for which the capital was provided. Sukuk holders are entitled to revenue
sukuk market
                  generated from these assets. Global sukuk issuance was $120 billion in 2013, down 21 percent from
                  2012, yet still over five times the 2008 total (Gelbard et al. 2014). Most sukuk activity is concentrated in
                  the Gulf Cooperation Council countries and Malaysia, but African countries are beginning to access this
                  source of funds.

                  Earlier this year, Senegal issued the continent’s first major sovereign sukuk at 100 billion Senegal francs
                  (US$208 million). The nation’s sukuk will be used to invest in infrastructure for improved water and
                  power distribution. While Senegal might have issued Sub-Saharan Africa’s largest sukuk, the popularity
                  of Islamic financing as a source for government debt has increased across the region. In July 2012,
                  Sudan raised 955 million Sudanese pounds (US$165 million) through this bond instrument, and Gambia
                  routinely sells this financial instrument. This September, South Africa issued a US$500 million sukuk.
                  The nation’s five-year sukuk was priced at 3.9 percent. Other countries in the region have expressed an
                  interest in issuing this financial instrument, as well.

                  Through sukuk, African countries can diversify their investor base, while deepening local capital markets.
                  Since funds from sukuk can be used only to finance projects reflecting real economic activity, most such
                  instruments are used to fund infrastructure projects. Thus, sukuk provides an important mechanism for
                  long-term financing of large public projects.



  8   >    A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
The region’s main currencies have generally stabilized (figure 9), following significant volatility early in the
year, which could help contain inflationary pressures going forward. The Zambian kwacha continued to slide
in the first half of the year, weakening by over 20 percent, before rebounding. Concerns about loose fiscal
stance and low external reserves led to bouts of renewed pressure on the Ghanaian cedi, which depreciated
by more than 40 percent against the U.S. dollar in the first nine months of the year.


   FIGURE 9: Nominal exchange rates for selected countries                                                                                                     With some
                                                                                                                                                               exceptions,
   LCU/US$ % change
       10.0                                                                                                                                                    exchange
                                                                                                                                                               rates have
         5.0                                                                                                                                                   stabilized in
         0.0                                                                                                                                                   the region

        -5.0

       -10.0

       -15.0

       -20.0

       -25.0

       -30.0                   Ghana             Kenya
                               Nigeria           South Africa
       -35.0                   Uganda            Zambia

       -40.0

       -45.0
               01/01/2014 01/24/2014     02/18/2014    03/13/2014   04/07/2014   04/30/2014   05/23/2014   06/17/2014   07/10/2014   08/04/2014   08/27/2014

   Source: World Bank, Bloomberg.




ECONOMIC OUTLOOK FOR SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Despite headwinds, medium-term growth prospects for Sub-Saharan Africa remain favorable. Regional
GDP growth is projected to strengthen to an average annual pace of 5.2 percent during 2015–16, from 4.6
percent in 2014, and to rise to 5.3 percent in 2017. Under this baseline scenario, GDP per capita will rise
steadily from an estimated 2.1 percent in 2014 to 2.6 percent in 2015, reaching 2.8 percent in 2017.

Public investment in infrastructure, increased agricultural production, and a buoyant services sector are
expected to continue to support growth in the region. The growth pickup is expected to occur in a context
of reduced support from commodity prices and net FDI flows as global demand remains subdued. Overall,
Sub-Saharan Africa is forecast to remain one of the fastest-growing regions. Private consumption in the
region is expected to remain strong during 2015–17. Reduced imported inflation, aided by a benign
global inflationary environment and stable exchange rates, and adequate local harvests are expected to
help contain inflationary pressures in most countries, which should allow for some gains in real disposable
incomes. However, currency-induced price pressures, which could weigh on consumer sentiment and
slow private consumption growth, remain a concern for countries with a heavy reliance on portfolio flows,
including Ghana and South Africa.

Government consumption is projected to grow at a moderate pace as governments across the
region strive to restrain current expenditures, allowing for some fiscal consolidation to take place. The


                                                                                                                                          A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   9
                expansionary fiscal policy stance that has led to budgetary imbalances has been found to be linked more
                systematically to current expenditures than to capital spending, with insignificant correlation to capital
                expenditures. Ongoing efforts to contain wages and salaries and streamline less productive expenditures
                on goods and services are therefore important consolidation steps. In this context, steps by Ghana and
                Zambia to control spending will be key to correcting their large fiscal and external imbalances.

                Net exports are again projected to make a marginal contribution to GDP growth in the region over
                the forecast horizon. The contributions of net exports will be constrained by lower commodity prices,
                which could be exacerbated by low output in countries such as Angola, where production is stagnating.
                In metal-exporting countries, increased output would mitigate the weakness of metals prices. On the
                import side, the demand for capital goods is projected to remain strong, as governments continue to
                frontload infrastructure investments and private consumption remains strong. Reflecting these trends
                and the weakening of commodity prices, the current account deficit in the region is projected to widen
                from an estimated 2.4 percent of GDP in 2013 to an average of 3.0 percent of GDP in 2015 and 2016.

                At the country level, growth is expected to remain robust in Nigeria, supported by the continued expansion
                of nonoil sectors, particularly the services sector, which now accounts for more than 50 percent of GDP.
                South Africa is expected to experience steady but slow economic growth as gradually improving net
                exports help mitigate the drag from monetary and fiscal policy tightening; and infrastructure bottlenecks,
                especially in the electricity sector, are progressively alleviated in the coming years and help to lift investment
                sentiment. Among other middle-income countries, high interest rates and rising inflation due to currency
                depreciation are expected to slow economic activity, including notably in Ghana.

                In low-income countries, political stability and continued investment in infrastructure should keep
                growth rates high. The Ebola outbreak is expected to severely disrupt activity in key economic sectors
                in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone and to slow growth in these countries in 2014. Economic spillovers
                are, however, expected to be modest and contained to Ghana and Nigeria, the main transportation
                hubs in the West Africa subregion, provided further contagion can be controlled rapidly. The economic
                dislocation will be more adverse under a pessimistic scenario of containment.


                RISKS TO THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
                The outlook is subject to significant downside risks stemming from both domestic and external factors.
                Key domestic risks include a more widespread extension of the Ebola outbreak, a deterioration of the
                security situation in a number of countries, and risks associated with expansionary fiscal policy and
                currency weaknesses. A sudden increase in volatility in financial markets and lower growth in emerging
                markets are among the major external risks to the region’s outlook.

                Domestic risks
                Widespread contagion of the Ebola outbreak: Without a scale-up of effective interventions, the virus could
                spread more rapidly than assumed in the baseline, and become harder to control as it reaches large
                urban centers and new countries with a weak public health infrastructure and low institutional capacity
                to deal with the outbreak. In addition to the loss of lives, affected countries would suffer a sharper
                decline in output, with growth slowing markedly not only in the core countries but also in the subregion
                as transportation, cross-border trade, and supply chains are severely disrupted. See box 2.


10   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
The 2014 outbreak of Ebola in West Africa is exacting a heavy humanitarian toll. Beyond the tragic              BOX 2:
loss in human lives and suffering, the Ebola epidemic is already having a measurable economic                   The economic
                                                                                                                impact of the
impact in terms of foregone output, higher fiscal deficits, rising prices, and lower real household
                                                                                                                Ebola epidemica
incomes and greater poverty. These economic impacts include the costs of health care and foregone
productivity of those directly affected but, more important, they arise from the aversion behavior of
others in response to the disease.

Channels of impact
The impact of the Ebola epidemic on economic well-being operates through two distinct channels.
First are the direct and indirect effects of the sickness and mortality themselves, which consume
health care resources and subtract people either temporarily or permanently from the labor supply.
Second are the behavioral effects resulting from peoples’ fear of contagion, which in turn leads to a
fear of association with others and reduces labor force participation, closes places of employment,
disrupts transportation, and motivates some government and private decision makers to close
seaports and airports.

Short-term impact on economic activities
Since the escalation of the Ebola outbreak in July 2014, there has been a sharp disruption of economic
activities across sectors in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. The largest economic effects of the crisis
are those resulting from changes in behavior (driven by fear), which have resulted in generally lower
demands for goods and services and consequently lower domestic income and employment.
The services sector has been hit particularly hard across all three countries. In Liberia, where services
comprise approximately half of the economy and employ nearly 45 percent of the labor force,
wholesale and retail traders have reported a 50 to 75 percent drop in turnover relative to the normal
amount for the trading period. The domestic transport sector has been severely affected, with
gasoline and diesel sales down by 21 and 35 percent, respectively. Average hotel occupancy across
the three countries has fallen from 60 to 80 percent year-round before the crisis to 13 to 40 percent,
resulting in many layoffs of hotel workers. In Sierra Leone, a sharp reduction in international flights
servicing the country has increased its isolation from global markets.
Significant impacts have also been felt in agriculture, which is the mainstay of much of the
population in these countries. In Guinea, which is among the poorest countries in West Africa,
agriculture in Ebola-affected areas has been hit by an exodus of people from these zones, affecting
the production of key export commodities, such as coffee, cocoa, and palm oil. Although robust
price data are not yet available, reports indicate rice price spikes of up to 30 percent in Ebola-
affected areas in Sierra Leone. A Food and Agriculture Organization rapid assessment in the district
of Kailahun, Sierra Leone, indicates that at least 40 percent of farmers have either abandoned their
farms and moved to new, safer locations or have died. In the most productive agroecological areas,
about 90 percent of the plots have not been cultivated. This is due in part to current restrictions on
movement, and to an expressed fear by farmers of meeting or even sharing working tools.
Mining has not yet been severely affected by the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, and companies have
indicated they intend to maintain their originally planned production levels to the extent possible.
Nonetheless, in Liberia, investments to expand capacity to 15 million tons per year have been put
on hold, and one major mining company closed its operation in August, contributing to an expected
contraction in the mining sector of 1.3 percent in 2013 compared with an initial projection for growth
above 4 percent.



                                                                                             A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   11
BOX 2:          Preliminary estimates indicate that GDP growth in 2014 could be sharply lower in Guinea (from 4.5
Continued
                percent to 2.4 percent) and Liberia (from 5.9 percent to 2.5 percent), with a loss of over 3 percentage
                points for Sierra Leone (from 11.3 percent to 8.0 percent). In terms of foregone output, this amounts
                to a total of US$359 million across the three countries, already a major loss. The fiscal impact of the
                crisis has also been enormous, emanating from the combination of revenue shortfalls from reduced
                economic activities and increased expenditures, particularly for health and social protection. Financing
                gaps in 2014 for the three core countries range from US$80 million to US$120 million, totaling over
                US$290 million. Slow containment and exponential growth of the disease will lead to even greater
                financing gaps in 2015.

                Medium-term impacts
                In light of the considerable uncertainty about the future trajectory of the epidemic, two
                epidemiological scenarios were used to estimate the medium-term economic impact, extending to the
                end of 2015. One scenario corresponds to rapid containment within the three most severely affected
                countries, while a second scenario corresponds to slower containment in the core three countries, with
                some broader regional contagion.

                The likely economic impact of the Ebola epidemic will be significant for the affected countries in any
                plausible scenario. However, the scenario in which the epidemic is not swiftly contained promises
                to leave a much deeper adverse economic impact. Even in the absence of broad epidemiological
                contagion, those countries in the region with tourism are already feeling the economic impact.
                For example, in Gambia—where tourism accounts for nearly 11.5 percent of GDP—an estimated
                65 percent of hotel reservations have been cancelled since the beginning of the crisis. Economic
                modeling suggests that the economic impact for the region as a whole is likely to run into the billions
                and potentially into the tens of billions.
                a.	This section is adapted from The World Bank Group, “The Economic Impact of the 2014
                   Ebola Epidemic: Short- and Medium-Term Estimates for West Africa,” September 17, 2014.




                Deterioration of the security situation: The conflict in South Sudan and security concerns in northern
                Nigeria could deteriorate further, with significant regional spillovers. Since the outlook for a political
                settlement remains poor, the South Sudan conflict could escalate further and significantly disrupt trade
                in the subregion, including in Kenya and Uganda. An intensification of the Boko Haram insurgency
                in Nigeria could further disrupt agricultural production in northern Nigeria and spur violence in the
                subregion, prompting governments in neighboring countries, including Cameroon, to divert additional
                budgetary resources to security-related expenditures.

                Heightened fiscal vulnerabilities: Budgetary concerns and currency weaknesses will remain sources of
                vulnerability for many countries in the region. Notably, a continuation of loose fiscal policy could lead to
                a further deterioration of already weak fiscal positions in some countries. Fiscal buffers would be further
                depleted, increasing the vulnerability of the countries concerned to exogenous shocks. In Ghana and
                Zambia, budget risks will remain salient given public sector wage pressures. In Zambia, for example, 37
                percent of the 2014 budget is allocated to the public wage bill, thanks to the 2013 public sector wage
                award. Currency concerns are also likely to continue. A combination of weak export growth, high import
                demand, and negative investor sentiment could cause the currencies of frontier market economies
                to weaken significantly against the dollar, contributing to inflation in these countries. While moderate


12   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
food prices and prudent monetary policies have seen inflation remain low in many countries in 2014,
currency-induced price pressures will pose a persistent threat.


External risks
Higher market volatility: A sudden increase in risk premia and volatility in global financial markets from
their current low levels remains a significant downside risk for the region. It would not only adversely
affect South Africa, which depends heavily on portfolio capital flows to finance its current account
balance, but also frontier market countries such as Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia, which have increased
their reliance on external market financing. Recent episodes of capital market volatility suggest that
countries with large macroeconomic imbalances would face strong downward pressure on the
exchange rate and high currency-induced inflation.

Lower growth in emerging market economies represents another significant downside risk to the regional
outlook. A sharper slowdown in economic activity in emerging markets, particularly in China, would
most likely lead to a lower demand for commodities, which could see a significant decline in their
price, especially where supply is abundant. A further decline in the already depressed price of metals,
particularly iron ore, gold, and copper, will severely affect a large number of countries in the region.
In countries such as Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Tanzania, and Zambia, metals account for a large
percentage of exports, while their extraction has led to significant FDI flows. A protracted decline in
metals prices could lead to a significant decline in exports and cause foreign investors to scale down
their operations in these countries, which could adversely affect their growth momentum. Actual
outcomes will, of course, depend upon other growth opportunities. For example, in Tanzania, the
development in the gas sector could well mask a potential declining trend in metals in the country in
the long run.

Simulation results suggest that the income effects of a sharper decline of commodity prices on Sub-
Saharan African economies could be significant. A scenario is considered where the prices of metals
(aluminum, copper, gold, iron ore, and silver) and agricultural commodities (cocoa, coffee, cotton tea,
and tobacco) decline by 15 percent
from the baseline in 2014. Sub-Saharan
                                                      FIGURE 10: Simulation results of a commodity                                                   A sharper-
Africa would be affected the most, with               price decline by region                                                                        than-expected
the trade balance deteriorating by 0.7                                                                                                               decline in
                                                             East Asia and Paci c
                                                                                                                                                     commodity
percent of GDP (figure 10). Naturally, this
                                                                       South Asia                                                                    prices would
aggregate result hides significant variations                                                                                                        affect Sub-
                                                     Middle East and North Africa
at the country level. Among commodity                                                                                                                Saharan Africa
                                                          Europe and Central Asia                                                                    the most
exporters, countries where metals or
                                                     Latin America and Caribbean
agricultural products represent a large
share of total exports will see their terms                   Sub-Saharan Africa

of trade deteriorate sharply. Mauritania,                                             -0.7 -0.6 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1           0.0   0.1   0.2

Cote d’Ivoire, Tanzania, Togo, Guinea, and                                                           Change in Trade Balance (%GDP)
the Democratic Republic of Congo will be              Source: World Bank staff estimates.
                                                      Note: Results are for a 15 percent decline in non-energy commodity prices.

particularly affected (figure 11).


                                                                                                                              A F R I C A’ S P U L S E    >   13
                                                                                                                                                               SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Countries          FIGURE 11: Simulation of a commodity price                                                                                                  AND THE MILLENNIUM
with the least     decline by country
                                                                                                                                Percent of GDP                 DEVELOPMENT GOALS
diversified
                          Botswana
commodity                                                                                                                                                      Sub-Saharan Africa is the region whose
                        Congo, Rep.
exports would              Namibia
                              Sudan
                                                                                                                                                               progress is lagging the most on the MDGs.
experience
the most                    Gambia                                                                                                                             The region has achieved only 35 percent of
                          Cameroon
terms of trade         Mozambique                                                                                                                              the poverty target of halving the proportion
deterioration          South Africa
                         Zimbabwe                                                                                                                              of people whose income is below US$1.25
                            Zambia                                                                                                                             a day (2005 purchasing power parity basis),
                   Congo, Dem. Rep.
                             Guinea                                                                                                                            while globally this target has already been
                               Togo
                           Tanzania                                                                                                                            met (figure 12). Progress on other MDGs is
                       Cote d'Ivoire
                         Mauritania
                                                                                                                                                               lagging as well, with only 52 percent of the
                                                           -8.0     -7.0      -6.0       -5.0       -4.0      -3.0       -2.0      -1.0    0.0                 target met on undernourishment, and 35
                                                                                     Change in Trade Balance (%GDP)                                            percent of progress made on the primary
                   Source: World Bank staff estimates.
                   Note: Results are for a 15 percent decline in non-energy commodity prices.
                                                                                                                                                               completion rate. Substantial gains have
                                                                                                                                                               been made on the health MDGs, but child
                                                                                                                                                               mortality rates remain high in Sub-Saharan
                  Africa. For the health MDGs, only eight countries have met the under-five mortality rate target, and only four
                  countries have made sufficient progress on meeting the target by 2015, while not a single country has met
                  the target for infant mortality, and only one country has made enough progress to meet the target by 2015.
                  Sixty-five percent of the maternal mortality target has been met, with regional progress outpacing global
                  progress. Nevertheless, women in Sub-Saharan Africa face a lifetime risk of maternal death that is about 90
                  times greater than for women in high-income countries.


Progress on         FIGURE 12: Global and Sub-Saharan Africa Progress toward the MDGs
achieving                                                  100%                                                      100% 100%                                                                                   100%
                                              100%
the MDGs is                                                                                                                               92%                   92%                  92%
lagging the                                   90%                           88%                  88%                                                                                                       88%                  88%
                                                      84%
most in Africa;                               80%                                 80%
the largest gap                                                                                                                                                       74% 73%
                                              70%                                                                                                70%
is in access                                                                                                                                           65%                                       65%                    64%
                   Distance to 2015 goal, %




                                                                                                                                                                                           60%                                        62%
to improved                                   60%                                                      58%
sanitation                                                                              52%
                                              50%
facilities                                                                                                                        43%
                                              40%                 35%                                        35%
                                              30%
                                              20%                                                                                                                                                                                            15%
                                              10%
                                               0%
                                                     1a-Extreme poverty    1.9 - Prevalence of  2a-Primary         3a-Ratio of girls to   4a-Mortality rate,   4a-Mortality rate, 5a-Maternal mortality 7c-Access to safe       7c-Access to basic
                                                      (population below    undernourishment completion rate, total boys in primary        infant (per 1,000         under-5           ratio (modeled    drinking water (% of   sanitation facilities
                                                     1.25 day, 2005 PPP)    (% of population)  (% of relevant        and secondary           live births)         (per 1,000)     estimate, per 100,000      population         (% of population
                                                                                                age group)           education (%)                                                      live births)        with access)           with access)

                                                                            Corresponding target (%)               Distance to the goal achieved globally (%)            Distance to the goal achieved SSA (%)
                   Source: World Bank staff estimates.
                   Note: A value of 100 percent means that the respective MDG has been reached. Corresponding target indicates progress currently needed to reach the goal by 2015. Latest available value
                   denotes current progress as illustrated by the most recent available data.




14   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
The water and sanitation targets remain a problem for people in most developing countries. Sub-Saharan
Africa is lagging the most, with 36 percent of its population lacking access. Access to improved water
sources and improved sanitation facilities is correlated with wealth. In Sub-Saharan Africa, almost 90
percent of the richest fifth of the population use improved water sources, while only 35 percent of the
poorest fifth of the population do (WHO and UNICEF 2013). However, this region also had the worst
starting position, with an even worse situation in rural areas, where only 23 percent of the population has
access to improved sanitation; in urban areas the access rate is 20 percentage points higher. This large
disparity in Sub-Saharan Africa is the principal reason the MDG sanitation target is unlikely to be met.

Sub-Saharan Africa’s fragile states are further behind on achieving the MDGs than other countries in
the region. Among fragile states, no countries are likely to meet the 2015 target on prevalence of child
malnutrition and infant mortality. Only two countries (Comoros and Liberia) are making enough progress
to meet the MDG education target of primary completion rate by 2015, and only three countries (Eritrea,
Liberia, and Madagascar) are making enough progress to meet the under-five mortality rate.

Within-country progress on the MDGs is uneven, with considerable inequity in outcomes. For example,
on the primary school completion rate, many children that start school drop out before completing the
primary stage, discouraged by cost, distance, physical danger, and failure to progress. Access to primary
education has also been inequitably distributed across households. The result is unequal outcomes on
the education MDG. For example, in Mali, Niger, and Uganda, primary completion rates for children in
the lowest two quintiles of the income distribution are between 20 and 30 percent, while for the highest
quintiles, primary completion rates range between 60 and 100 percent (figure 13).


  FIGURE 13: Primary completion rate by income group (% of relevant age group)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Primary school
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               completion
  140                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rates are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               correlated to
  120                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bottom 40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wealth: The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Top 60%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               bottom 40
  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               percent of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Africans have
   80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               completion
   60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rates between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20 and 30
   40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          percent,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               compared to
   20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60 and 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               percent for
    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the top 60
                Kenya


                                  Sao Tome and Principe




                                                                                                                                                                         Malawi


                                                                                                                                                                                            Madagascar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ethiopia
                        Namibia


                                                          Zimbabwe
                                                                     Swaziland
                                                                                 Congo, Rep.
                                                                                               Sierra Leone
                                                                                                              Zambia


                                                                                                                                 Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                                                                                                                                    Nigeria
                                                                                                                                                              Cameroon


                                                                                                                                                                                  Lesotho


                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mali
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Benin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Liberia


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Niger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Uganda


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Burkina Faso
        Ghana




                                                                                                                       Senegal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Guinea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               percent




  Source: World Bank staff estimates based on Edstats, World Bank.
  Note: The completion rate can exceed 100 percent if there are many overage students in the last grade of primary school.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A F R I C A’ S P U L S E                          >   15
                Section 2: Economic transformation and poverty
                reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa

                   u	Nearly two decades of strong growth are transforming the structure of Africa’s economies, but not as
                      expected.
                   u	Sectoral  composition of output has shifted in favor of services, with this sector’s growth outpacing
                      that of agriculture and industry: Between 1995 and 2011, annual per capita growth in the services
                      sector averaged 2.6 percent compared to 1.7 percent in industry and less than 1 percent in agriculture.
                   u	While  agriculture’s share in output has declined, so has that of industry. However, there are divergent
                      trends within industry, with extractives gaining output share and manufacturing’s share declining.
                   u	Export   diversification has been limited, as well; primary commodities continue to account for three-
                      fourth of Sub-Saharan Africa’s total goods exports, and the share of the region’s top five exports in
                      total exports has climbed to 60 percent in 2013 from 41 percent in 1995.
                   u	Labor   shifts reflect sectoral changes, but almost 60 percent of Africa’s jobs and 78 percent of its poor
                      workers continue to have a foot in agriculture, the sector with the lowest productivity. The extent of
                      reallocation of labor to high-productivity, nontraditional activities has been limited; the movement of
                      workers has been out of agriculture and into services, not manufacturing.
                   u	The   pattern of growth and economic transformation has implications for poverty reduction. In Africa,
                      growth in agriculture and services has been more poverty reducing than growth in industry. In the
                      rest of the world, by contrast, industry and services have a larger impact on reducing poverty.
                   u	Structural  transformation has a role to play in accelerating poverty reduction in the region. Increasing
                      agricultural productivity will be critical to fostering structural transformation. Boosting rural income
                      diversification can facilitate this transformation, as well. Investments in rural public goods and services
                      (for example, education, health, rural roads, electricity, and ICT), including in small towns, will be
                      conducive to lifting productivity in the rural economy.
                   u	Although   Sub-Saharan Africa’s pattern of growth has largely bypassed manufacturing, growing the
                      region’s manufacturing base, especially by improving its fundamentals—a better business climate,
                      lower transport cost, cheaper and more reliable power, and a more educated labor force—will benefit
                      all sectors.




                AFRICA’S GROWTH AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
                African countries have seen a dramatic turnaround in economic expansion beginning in the mid-1990s.
                Between 1995 and 2013, economic growth averaged 4.5 percent per year in real terms, comparable to
                the rate in the rest of the developing world and more than double the pace of growth of the previous
                20 years. On a per capita basis, output growth has been more modest at 1.7 percent a year (figure 14).
                Most of the region’s countries have participated in the surge in growth, though there is considerable
                variation in the extent of the rebound. Previous editions of Africa’s Pulse have documented the region’s
                impressive growth performance and analyzed the link between growth, poverty, and inequality.
                This edition examines how the sectoral composition of this growth has impacted poverty reduction
                in the region and what the role of structural change could be. The latter is of particular interest, given


16   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
rising concerns about the sustainability of
Africa’s solid growth.2                                                                            FIGURE 14: Growth in GDP per capita in Sub-Saharan                                                                           GDP per capita
                                                                                                   Africa by country groups, 1995–2013                                                                                          growth in Sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Saharan Africa
Economic transformation. The pattern of                                                                                              2.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                averaged 1.7
Africa’s growth over the last two decades has                                                                                                                                                                                   percent per
                                                                                                                                      2
transformed the economic structure of the                                                                                                                                                                                       year from




                                                                                                  Cumulative growth index (1995=1)
                                                                                                                                     1.8                                                                                        1995 to 2013,
region’s economies and shifted the sectoral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                but there was
composition of output. Decomposing output                                                                                            1.6                                                                                        considerable
growth by sector shows that the fastest-                                                                                                                                                                                        heterogeneity
                                                                                                                                     1.4                                                                                        across country
growing sector was services, with industry and,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                groupings
in particular, agriculture, growing at a slower                                                                                      1.2

pace. Between 1995 and 2011, per capita
         3
                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                           1995    1997    1999    2001     2003      2005    2007      2009    2011     2013
growth averaged 2.6 percent in the services
                                                                                                                                                       Sub-Saharan Africa                 Resource-rich
sector and 1.7 percent in industry. Agricultural                                                                                                       Non resource-rich                  Rest of Developing Countries
growth lagged substantially at 0.9 percent.
                                                                                                  Source: World Bank.
Overall, services accounted for 62 percent of                                                     Note: The index presented in this figure depicts the cumulative growth in
                                                                                                  real GDP per capita from 1995 to 2013 in Sub-Saharan Africa and subgroups.

cumulative growth in GDP per capita from 1995                                                     GDP is in U.S. dollars at 2005 prices.


to 2011, compared to 24 percent for industry                                                       FIGURE 15: Average growth in GDP per capita by sector,                                                                       The services
and 13 percent for agriculture (figure 15).                                                        1995–2011                                                                                                                    sector
                                                                                                   Percent                                                                                                                      accounted for
                                                                                                   5.0                                                                                                                          62 percent of
This differential growth performance is
                                                                                                                                                                                              Avg. growth: 4.3%                 GDP growth
reflected in the declining share of agriculture                                                                                                                                                                                 per capita in
                                                                                                     4.0
in GDP over the same period, with the average                                                                                                                                                                                   Sub-Saharan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Africa during
share falling from 17.5 percent to around 15
                                                                                                     3.0                                                                                                                        1995-2011,
percent (figure 16). Industry’s share in GDP                                                                                                                                                                                    compared to
dipped as well, falling to 30 percent from                                                           2.0                                          Avg. growth: 1.9%                                                             24 percent for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                industry and
33 percent. Trends within industry diverged
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13 percent for
widely, however. The share of other industry                                                         1.0                                                                                                                        agriculture
(which includes mining) rose sharply, led
                                                                                                     0.0
by Sub-Saharan Africa’s boom in natural                                                                                                           Sub-Saharan Africa                     Other Developing Countries
resources. At the same time, the share of                                                                                                                   Agriculture            Industry          Services
manufacturing shrank to under 10 percent.                                                         Source: World Bank.


In the region’s economic transformation,
the services sector has been the big gainer,
growing its share in GDP from 49 percent in 1995 to 55 percent in 2011.

The sectoral trend in other developing countries differs from that of Sub-Saharan Africa in important
ways. A notable difference is that per capita growth in industry in other developing countries is
much higher (4.8 percent) than in Sub-Saharan Africa, and matching the pace of growth in services.
Consequently, industry’s share in output has climbed from 36 percent in 1995 to 39 percent in 2011


2	 Country groupings used in this section of the report are listed in the Appendix.
3	 Agriculture includes cultivation of crops, livestock production, fishing, forestry, and hunting. Industry includes manufacturing, mining, construction, and utilities. Services includes wholesale
   and retail trade, transport, banking, and public services.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       A F R I C A’ S P U L S E       >   17
                                                                                                             in the former group. And unlike Sub-
In Sub-Saharan            FIGURE 16: Sectoral composition of GDP in Sub-Saharan Africa                       Saharan Africa, manufacturing has
Africa, services
have grown                                60                                                                 maintained its share in output in other
as a share of                             50
                                                                                                             developing countries. There are also
output over                                                                                                  some similarities in sectoral changes
                     Value added (%GDP)


the last two                              40
decades, while
                                                                                                             between these two groups of countries.
                                          30
agriculture and                                                                                              For example, in both groups, the
manufacturing                             20
                                                                                                             services sector has gained share in
have declined                             10
                                                                                                             output and agriculture’s share has
                                          0                                                                  fallen (figure 17).
                                               1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2011

                                                                Agriculture       Manufacturing
                                                                Services          Other industry
                                                                                                             A country-level perspective shows that
                                                                Industry                                     African countries generally mirrored
                                                                                                             the regional pattern of growth and
                     FIGURE 17: Sectoral composition of GDP in other                                         sectoral change. Thus, the region’s
                     developing countries
                                                                                                             countries saw an increase in the share
                                          60                                                                 of the services sector in GDP and a
                                          50                                                                 decline in the corresponding shares
                     Value added (%GDP)




                                          40                                                                 of agriculture and industry (figure 18).
                                          30                                                                 Notable exceptions to the regional
                                          20                                                                 trends include resource-rich countries
                                          10
                                                                                                             such as Mauritania, the Republic of
                                                                                                             Congo, and Guinea, where industry
                                          0
                                               1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2011   (includes extractives) accounted for an
                                                                Agriculture       Manufacturing              overwhelming majority of cumulative
                                                                Services          Other industry
                                                                                                             growth since 1995; and Burundi Liberia,
                                                                Industry
                                                                                                             and the Central African Republic, where
                    Source: World Bank.
                    Note: Industry comprises manufacturing and other industry.                               agriculture has remained the largest
                                                                                                             driver of growth).

                   The evolution of labor shares has reflected the shift in sectoral composition of GDP. Using census data
                   as well as Demographic and Health surveys, de Vries et al. (2012) and McMillan and Harttgen (2014) find
                   that the labor share in agriculture has declined and that the movement of workers has been out of this
                   sector and into services, not manufacturing.

                   Clearly, Africa is undergoing a process of structural change, but not the kind of transformation that was
                   generally expected. According to the standard literature on structural transformation, as economies develop,
                   there is a reallocation of resources across sectors, causing shifts in the labor force. Workers shift from low-
                   productivity jobs to high-productivity jobs. For low-income countries, this has typically been interpreted as a
                   shift out of traditional sectors and activities such as agriculture to modern sectors such as manufacturing—
                   as in East Asia’s growth take-off. The 2012 World Development Report (World Bank 2012) notes that the
                   creation of millions of higher-productivity, better-paying jobs in labor-intensive manufacturing, especially
                   in Asia, has contributed importantly to the decline in poverty in the developing world. The experience of


18   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
  FIGURE 18: Sectoral contribution to total growth by country, 1995–2011                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sub-Saharan
                                                      3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     African
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            countries
  Sectoral contribution to total growth (1995-2011)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            generally
                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mirrored
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the regional
                                                      1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pattern of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            growth and
                                                      0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sectoral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            change

                                                      -1
                                                           Mauritania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Seychelles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rwanda



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cape Verde
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lesotho
                                                                                                                                                                   Mozambique




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Swaziland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Gambia, The
                                                                                                                         Sudan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kenya


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Botswana




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Senegal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sierra Leone
                                                                        Congo, Rep.
                                                                                      Guinea
                                                                                               Burundi
                                                                                                         Chad
                                                                                                                Angola


                                                                                                                                 Liberia
                                                                                                                                           Zambia
                                                                                                                                                    Burkina Faso


                                                                                                                                                                                Mali
                                                                                                                                                                                       Ethiopia
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Namibia
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Malawi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tanzania


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nigeria


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Uganda


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ghana




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mauritius
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     South Africa



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Central African Republic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Niger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Togo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gabon
                                                      -2



                                                                                                                                                                                                  Agriculture                           Industry                       Services
             Source: World Bank.




Sub-Saharan African countries diverges from this; although the share of agriculture in GDP is declining,
so is that of manufacturing. The (informal) and formal services sectors have been absorbing workers and
capital, respectively, in most countries, and their share in economic activity is on the rise broadly across the
continent. But much of the growth in services has been in low-productivity activities.

The lack of industrialization in Africa’s boom has fueled a debate on whether sustainable growth requires
a shift in favor of manufacturing (McMillan and Rodrik 2011; McMillan, Rodrik, and Verduzco-Gallo 2013)
or whether moving up the quality ladder in sectors where countries can exploit and build on their
current patterns of comparative advantage can sustain growth (Hausmann and Hidalgo 2011). India’s
growth pattern suggests that a shift into high-productivity services, bypassing manufacturing, represents
another path to sustainable growth (Ghani, Goswami, and Kharas 2012). Modern services, such as
software development, call centers, and outsourced business processes, represent high value-added
activities (similar to manufactured products) that can be important drivers of growth for innovative
and technology-savvy countries. Similar opportunities may exist in staple and nonstaple agriculture by
moving up the value chain as in Nigeria (cassava flour) and Kenya (flowers).

Diversification of exports: Diversification of exports away from raw materials and commodities and toward
better quality of existing products or new products often supports structural transformation in low-
income countries. There is some evidence that in the early stages of development, at per capita income
levels below US$10,000, a country’s basket of exports tends to diversify as it exports a wider product
range—that is, diversification along the extensive margin (Klinger and Lederman 2009). At much higher
incomes (such as in industrial economies), specialization leads to a smaller basket of exports—that is,
specialization along the intensive margin (IMF 2014).

Sub-Saharan Africa’s overall pattern of trade shows little export diversification during two decades of
rapid growth, and exports remain concentrated in a narrow set of products. The share of the top five
exports in the region’s total merchandise exports increased from 41 percent to 60 percent between 1995


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A F R I C A’ S P U L S E                                 >   19
                and 2013. Petroleum, iron ore, bituminous minerals, gold, and natural gas comprised the top five exports
                in 2013, with petroleum and bituminous minerals also being in the top five export products in 1995. The
                number of new products that have been exported has been low, as well. The composition of the region’s
                exports reflects the pattern of growth, with the rising importance of the resource sector evident in the
                pattern of exports. Indeed, the region remains heavily reliant on resource-based exports, and the share of
                primary commodities in total exports is high, at 75 percent (table 1). Within primary commodities, fuels
                and metals have gained share and agricultural commodities have declined.

                Bucking the regional trend, some countries have made progress in diversifying into nontraditional
                exports. According to the African Center for Economic Transformation’s (ACET’s) 2014 index, Benin and
                Rwanda have shown strong progress. In Rwanda, nontraditional exports, particularly vegetables and
                beverages, have contributed to gains in diversification. In Ethiopia, progress on diversification has been
                helped by horticulture and leather exports. By contrast, Burkina Faso, Ghana, and Nigeria have seen some
                slippage on the diversification front, with declining shares of manufacturing and services in exports.


                   TABLE 1: Sub-Saharan Africa’s exports of manufacturing and primary commodities

                     Median Value (% of merchandise exports)                               1990–00   2001–10       2011–13
                     Manufacturing Commodities                                                 22        22           14
                     Primary Commodities                                                       72        74           75
                     Fuel and Metals                                                           48        59           64
                     Agricultural Commodities                                                  24        15           11
                   Source: WITS 2014.
                   Note: Data are for nominal value of exports.




                Evidence shows that several countries have been successful in growing the share of manufacturing in
                total goods exports. Among these are Senegal, Togo, and Uganda. In Uganda, the share of manufacturing
                exports has risen from an average of 3 percent of exports during 1990-2000 to 11 percent during 2001-
                12. The improvement reflects growth of both basic manufacturing goods and more technology-intensive
                products such as steel and iron rods and plastic tubes and pipes. In Senegal, chemicals and manufacturing
                products have played a role in lifting the country’s share of manufactured exports in total exports to
                33 percent from 16 percent over the same period. Other strong performers are Kenya, Madagascar, and
                Rwanda. Intraregional trade has contributed to the boost in manufacturing exports.

                Trade in services offers an important path for diversification, as well. Modern services, such as software
                development, call centers, and outsourced business processes, are high value-added activities that
                hold the potential to be an important driver of growth in technology-savvy countries. Favorable global
                trends, such as the rising shares of services in global trade, and of modern services in total services,
                provide opportunities for export diversification. Some African countries, such as Kenya (with its successful
                expansion of mobile banking) and Mauritius (which has grown its tradable business and financial services),
                are well positioned to benefit from this global trend.

                Change in sectoral composition of labor: What has this transformation meant for employment and jobs?
                Although agriculture’s output share has fallen to well under a fifth of GDP, 59 percent of the labor force
                continues to be employed in this sector (figure 19). Moreover, agriculture employs more poor people than


20   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
any other sector in Africa. After nearly
                                                                                  FIGURE 19: Sectoral composition of labor (percent)                                                         Despite a
two decades of economic growth, most                                                                                                                                                         declining share
Africans continue to earn livelihoods in                                                                                                                 16.4
                                                                                                                                                                                             in GDP, nearly
                                                                                                                                                                                20.8         60 percent of
the traditional economy or the informal                                                   32.1                                                            5.4
                                                                                                                   39.8
                                                                                                                                                                                18.6         the labor force
sector. In short, the majority of African                                                    8.7                                                                                             continues to be
workers are engaged in nonwage                                                                                     23.5                                                                      employed in
                                                                                                                                                         78.2                                agriculture. Of
employment—namely, farming and                                                            59.2                                                                                  60.5
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sub-Saharan
                                                                                                                   36.7
nonfarm small household enterprises. By                                                                                                                                                      Africa’s poor
                                                                                                                                                                                             workers, 78
contrast, labor is more evenly distributed                                          Sub-Saharan Africa     Other developing                       Sub-Saharan Africa     Other developing
                                                                                                              countries                                                     countries        percent rely
across sectors in other developing                                                                 Total working                                                 Working poor                on agriculture
countries, with agriculture accounting                                                                                                                                                       for their
                                                                                                                      Agriculture    Industry    Services
                                                                                                                                                                                             livelihoods
for 37 percent of employment;
                                                                                  Source: Staff estimates based on International Income Distribution Database.

manufacturing for 24 percent; and                                                 Note: The numbers correspond to working-age (15–65) population-weighted averages of the most
                                                                                  recent surveys between 2002 and 2012. For the working poor, the averages were calculated for a
services for 40 percent, representing the                                         subset of countries with data available on welfare indicators (income or consumption).


largest share.

Moreover, agriculture employs more poor people than any other sector in Africa. While just 5 percent of
the poor are employed in industry and 16 percent in services, 78 percent of the poor rely on agriculture
for their livelihoods (figure 19). In other developing countries, the distribution of labor is similar among
the poor, albeit with a higher proportion working in industry and services than is the case in Sub-
Saharan Africa.

Where people work is largely correlated with a country’s level of development. Figure 20, shows that the
share of labor in agriculture declines with increasing GDP. The opposite is true of employment in services,
which rises as GDP per capita rises (figure 21). This is consistent with the agricultural sector employing
more of the poor across countries, as well as within them (box 3). Controlling for income levels, the


   FIGURE 20: Employment share in                                                                   FIGURE 21: Employment share in services                                                  In Sub-Saharan
   agriculture by GDP per capita                                                                    by GDP per capita                                                                        Africa and other
                                                                                                                                                                                             developing
   Percent                                                                                          Percent                                                                                  countries, the
   100                                                                                              100                                                                                      employment
                                                                                                                                                                                             share in
   80                                                                                                80                                                                                      agriculture falls
                                                                                                                                                                                             with higher
   60                                                                                                60                                                                                      GDP per capita,
                                                                                                                                                                                             and that of
   40                                                                                                40                                                                                      services rise

   20                                                                                                20

     0                                                                                                0
         5               6             7               8                 9              10                5                6             7               8               9              10
                         Log GDP per capita (constant 2005 US$)                                                            Log GDP per capita (constant 2005 US$)

                       Sub-Saharan Africa               Other Countries                                                   Sub-Saharan Africa            Other Countries

   Source: Staff estimates based on International Income Distribution Database and World Development Indicators (2014).
   Note: The numbers correspond to the most recent surveys between 2002 and 2012.




                                                                                                                                                                      A F R I C A’ S P U L S E     >   21
                   pattern of employment shares in agriculture and services in Sub-Saharan Africa is comparable to that in
                   other developing countries.


BOX 3: Shifts      Between 2002 and 2012, the majority of poor households in Sub-Saharan Africa depended on
in the sectoral
                   agriculture for their livelihoods (figure 19). This fact, however, is derived from looking at a snapshot
composition
of labor at        of the composition of labor by sector. To understand the drivers of poverty reduction and sectoral
different points   transformation, it is also essential to look at the movements in the composition of labor over time and
of the income
                   across the income distribution. Ideally, this would mean analyzing the employment trajectory of the
distribution
                   poor (and nonpoor) using panel data to obtain estimates by country. Given the scant availability of
                   such surveys in the region, an alternative is to track income ventiles instead of individuals, using cross-
                   sections from the Survey-Based Harmonized Indicators Program (SHIP).

                   To observe shifts in the sectoral composition of labor at different points in the income distribution,
                   ventiles were constructed by dividing the total distribution of per capita monthly food and nonfood
                   consumption expenditure (2005, purchasing power parity), with each group containing 5 percent of
                   the population. Labor composition was categorized into that in the agriculture (agriculture and fishing),
                   industry (mining, manufacturing, electricity, and construction), and services (commerce and transport,
                   financial, insurance and real state, public administration, and other services) sectors. Rwanda (2005–10)
                   and Senegal (2001–05) were selected for the analysis, because both these countries have experienced
                   substantial reductions in poverty over the last decade. In Rwanda, the poverty headcount at US$1.25 a
                   day decreased by almost 10 percentage points, from 72.1 percent in 2005 to 63.2 percent in 2010 (figure
                   22). A reduction of nearly the same magnitude was observed for Senegal between 2001 and 2005 (with
                   44.2 percent and 33.5 percent poverty headcount, respectively) (figure 23).

                   Figures 22 and 23 show the percentage of the population by sector (agriculture, industry, and
                   services) on the vertical axis, against the income ventiles. In Rwanda (figure 22), the lower end
                   of the income distribution is still mostly comprised of agriculture, which accounts for at least 80
                   percent of households up to the seventh ventile. However, there has been an increase in the fraction
                   of households engaged in the services sector at all segments of the distribution. Moreover, more
                   households below the poverty line were engaging in the services sector in 2010 than in 2005. Labor
                   movements from agriculture to services, and complementarities between the two sectors, could
                   be responsible for driving transitions out of poverty. Senegal (figure 23) shows a similar pattern,
                   with more people below the poverty line deriving a livelihood from services in 2005 than in 2001.
                   For example, one notable jump can be seen at the third ventile in 2005, where the services sector
                   accounted for 23 percent of employment, compared to 16 percent in 2001. The agriculture sector also
                   accounts for the highest share of employment at the lower end of the income distribution, with this
                   share declining at higher income ventiles.




22    >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
                                                                                                                                                                        BOX 3:
FIGURE 22: Sectoral composition of the distribution of income for Rwanda, 2005 and 2010
                                                                                                                                                                        Continued
                                                                                                                             72% Poverty Line
                             Percent                                               2005
                             100                                                                                                                                        More people
                                                                                                                                                                        below the
        Working population




                                   75
                                                                                                                                                                        poverty line in
                                   50                                                                                                                                   Rwanda and
                                                                                                                                                                        Senegal derive
                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                        livelihoods
                                    0                                                                                                                                   from services
                                         1   2   3   4   5   6    7      8        9      10       11    12       13     14    15   16    17     18   19    20
                                                                                                                                                                        than they
                                                                                                                                                                        did before
                             Percent                                               2010                        63% Poverty Line
                             100
        Working population




                                   75
                                   50
                                   25
                                    0
                                         1   2   3   4   5   6    7      8        9      10       11    12      13      14    15   16    17     18   19    20
                                                                              Consumption ventile

                                                                 Agriculture           Industry          Services
Source: Staff estimates using SHIP data.




FIGURE 23: Sectoral composition of the distribution of income for Senegal, 2001 and 2005

                                                                                    2001
                                   Percent                                               44% Poverty Line
                                   100
              Working population




                                   75

                                    50

                                    25

                                     0
                                         1   2   3   4   5   6     7      8        9     10       11    12       13     14    15   16    17     18   19    20


                                                                                       2005
                                   Percent                              33% Poverty Line
                                   100
              Working population




                                    75
                                    50
                                    25
                                     0
                                         1   2   3   4   5   6     7      8        9     10        11   12       13     14    15    16   17     18    19   20

                                                                              Consumption ventile

                                                                  Agriculture           Industry             Services
Source: Staff estimates using SHIP data.




                                                                                                                                                     A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   23
                 HOW DOES THE PATTERN OF GROWTH MATTER
                 FOR POVERTY REDUCTION IN AFRICA?
                 Economic growth has a central role to play in moving people out of poverty. Recent trends in Sub-
                 Saharan Africa point to progress in the fight against income poverty. Between 1990 and 2010, the share
                 of people living on less than US$1.25 a day in Sub-Saharan Africa declined from an estimated 57 percent
                 to 48 percent. The broad picture emerging from the data is that the region’s robust growth is helping to
                 bring poverty down, but not fast enough. At 48 percent in 2010, the poverty rate is sharply behind the
                 desired progress needed by this date to achieve the target by 2015 (figure 24). The depth of poverty,
                 measured by the poverty gap, has also declined at a steeper rate in other developing countries (from
                 13 percent in 1990 to 4 percent in 2010) than in Sub-Saharan Africa (25 percent in 1990 to 21 percent in
                 2010) (figure 25).


The MDG           FIGURE 24: Poverty headcount (US$1.25 a day)                                             FIGURE 25: Poverty gap (US$1.25 a day)	
target of
                  Percent
halving
                  75                                                                                 0.3
extreme
poverty by        60
2015 has been
                                                                                                     0.2
met globally,     45
but Sub-
                  30
Saharan Africa                                                                                       0.1
continues to      15
lag on this
target             0                                                                                  0
                       1990       1993      1996       1999      2002        2005      2008   2010          1990   1993     1996       1999    2002      2005        2008   2010
                                     Sub-Saharan Africa                Rest of the world                                  Sub-Saharan Africa     Rest of the world
                                     Sub-Saharan Africa                Rest of the world
                                     path to MDG 2015                  path to MDG 2015

                  Source: Staff estimates based on PovcalNet (2014).




                 Indeed, the conversion of growth into poverty reduction has been slower in Africa than in the rest of
                 the developing world, with average growth elasticities of poverty reduction of -0.7 and -2, respectively
                 (Christiaensen, Chuhan-Pole, and Sanoh 2013). Beyond the broad trends and averages, there is
                 considerable diversity of experience. The growth elasticity of poverty reduction measured as changes
                 in poverty headcount over changes in mean per capita income is illustrated in figure 26 for a subset
                 of Sub-Saharan African countries. There is substantial heterogeneity in this indicator across countries;
                 for example, a 1 percent increase in GDP in Cameroon is correlated with a reduction in poverty more
                 than twice that seen in Zambia. In Burundi, the poverty-reducing effect of growth is only half that of
                 the regional average. The growth elasticity of poverty reduction is positive in some cases, meaning
                 that upward or downward movements in income are associated with poverty movements in the same
                 direction. Data quality issues and lack of availability of recent estimates may be affecting these results
                 but, more important, this reflects the fact that poverty reduction also depends on other conditions,
                 such as inequality, both levels and changes, and sectoral and geographic patterns of growth.


24   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
           FIGURE 26: Growth elasticity of poverty reduction, latest available data, 2000–10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The growth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             elasticity of
                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             poverty in most
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sub-Saharan
                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Africa countries
  Growth elasticity of poverty reduction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             is much
                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             smaller than
                                           -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                that of other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             developing
                                           -2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                countries


                                           -3

                                           -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Central African Republic
                                                Cameroon


                                                                   Other developing countries




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gambia, The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Swaziland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rwanda
                                                                                                                                                                                             Uganda
                                                                                                Mauritania
                                                                                                             Niger
                                                                                                                     Zambia
                                                                                                                              Ethiopia
                                                                                                                                         Burkina Faso
                                                                                                                                                        Ghana
                                                                                                                                                                Guinea


                                                                                                                                                                                   Nigeria


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Togo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Malawi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tanzania


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Burundi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mali
                                                           Kenya




                                                                                                                                                                         Senegal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sierra Leone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             South Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sub-Saharan Africa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Madagascar
           Source: Staff estimates based on PovcalNet (2014); Christiaensen, Chuhan-Pole and Sanoh (2013).
           Note: Figures calculated using the most recent spell between 1997 and 2010 for selected countries.




An issue that arises is whether the pattern of growth has implications for poverty reduction. Namely,
does poverty respond differently to growth in different sectors? There are several reasons why there
could be differential impacts of sectoral growth on poverty reduction. One obvious reason is due to
differences in size of sectors. Thus, even if two sectors have similar growth rates, the effect on poverty
can vary because of differences in sector size. But there are also other reasons. Importantly, for output
growth to lift people out of poverty, poor people need to be able to participate in the growth—either
by contributing to it directly, or by benefiting from it through redistribution. But poor people often
face constraints to moving to places where the growth takes place (such as, the capitals), and the
political economy constraints to redistribution are typically equally challenging. Thus, poor people are
more likely to participate in and benefit from growth if it happens in the activities and areas where
they work or live. Consequently, the geographic and sectoral patterns of growth are likely to matter in
reducing poverty.

Since poor people are generally engaged in agriculture and concentrated in rural areas, responsiveness
of poverty reduction to agricultural growth and rural economic growth is likely to be higher than to
growth in other sectors. Another reason is that poor people usually have low labor skills. Growth in
sectors with a higher intensity in the employment of unskilled labor is more poverty reducing than
growth in other sectors (Loayza and Raddatz 2010). Differences in inequality of assets across sectors can
also impact the poverty-reducing effects of sectoral growth. For example, unequal distribution of land
ownership may constrain the poverty-reducing effect of agricultural growth (Christiaensen, Demery, and
Kuhl 2011). In sum, the pattern of growth matters for poverty reduction because of heterogeneity in the
participation of the poor by sector.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A F R I C A’ S P U L S E                                      >   25
                                                                                                                            There is a sizable literature on the
In China,                              FIGURE 27: Evidence from Brazil, China, and India on sectoral                        inclusiveness of different types of
growth in the                          growth and poverty reduction
agricultural
                                                                                                                            growth at the country level. Some well-
sector                                                    4    Brazil                 China                   India         known studies examining this issue at
has been
                  Eﬀect of growth on poverty reduction

                                                          2                                                                 the subnational level are Ravaillion and
exceptionally
propoor; in                                               0                                                                 Datt (1996) in India; Ferreira, Leite, and
Brazil and                                                -2                                                                Ravallion (2010) in Brazil; and Montalvo
India, growth                                                                                                               and Ravallion (2010) in China. A
                                                          -4
in services
has been                                                  -6                                                                comparison of the experiences of Brazil,
most poverty                                              -8
                                                                                                                            China, and India shows substantial
reducing                                                                                                                    differences in the sectoral impact of
                                                         -10
                                                                        Agriculture     Industry   Services                 growth on lowering poverty (Ravallion
                                                                                                                            2010) (Figure 27). In China, growth
                  Sources: Data for Brazil from Ferreira et al. (2010), for China from Ravallion and Chen (2007), and for
                  India from Ravallion and Datt (1996).
                                                                                                                            in the agricultural sector has been
                  Note: The results refer to time periods of analysis from 1985 to 2004 for Brazil, 1981-2001 for China,
                  and 1951 to 1991 for India. National poverty lines are used for all countries. Solid bars represent
                  statistically significant coefficients.
                                                                                                                            exceptionally propoor. Ravallion and
                                                                                                                            Chen (2007) find that access by poor
                                                                                                                            farmers to agricultural land facilitated
                the participation of the poor in agricultural growth. This has translated into a four times greater impact
                of agricultural growth on national poverty than manufacturing and services growth. In Brazil (where it
                is unequally distributed) and India (where many of the poor are landless), by contrast, it is service sector
                growth that has been most poverty reducing.

                The importance of agriculture in reducing poverty in low-income countries, especially in Africa, stems
                from the fact that a majority of the poor—three-quarters of the world’s poor live in rural areas—depend
                on agriculture for their livelihoods (Filmer and Fox 2013; World Bank 2007). It follows, therefore, that
                growth in this sector will be more beneficial for the poor than growth in sectors in which the poor
                exhibit lower participation. Christiaensen, Demery, and Kuhl (2011) find that agricultural growth has a
                greater impact on reducing poverty than nonagricultural growth. Diao, Thurlow, and Fan (2012) find (for
                six Sub-Saharan African countries) that the impact on the poverty rate of a 1 percent annual increase in
                GDP per capita driven by agricultural growth is between 53 percent to 127 percent larger than from an
                equivalent increase in GDP fueled by nonagricultural growth.

                But there is also evidence to suggest that not all agricultural growth is equally poverty reducing. For
                example, growth that positively affects smallholder staple crop productivity, as opposed to export crops,
                has been found to be more poverty reducing (Diao, Thurlow, and Fan 2012). This follows from the larger
                multiplier effects and growth elasticities of poverty for such crops—1 percent growth in agriculture
                driven by cereal or root/tuber productivity growth generates a larger decline in national poverty than a 1
                percent growth in agriculture driven by growth in export crops. While export crops typically have higher
                value and growth potential than food crops, the latter are usually more effective at generating economy-
                wide growth and reducing national poverty.




26   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
                                Sectoral composition of growth and poverty reduction
                                Country-level results show substantial differences in the sectoral impact of growth on reducing poverty.
                                We want to examine from a regional perspective how the sectoral composition of growth has mattered
                                for Africa’s poverty reduction. Using cross-country analysis, the link between the composition of growth
                                and poverty reduction during 1990-2010 is studied.4 Three consumption-based measures of poverty are
                                examined: the poverty headcount, which is the proportion of the population living under US$1.25 a day
                                (2005 purchasing power parity [PPP] basis); the poverty gap, which shows the depth of poverty; and the
                                squared poverty gap, which incorporates the degree of inequality among the poor. All three poverty
                                measures are included in the analysis to see how conclusions vary by poverty measure. Consumption-
                                based poverty measures are from PovcalNet and are based on household survey data.5 Poverty data are
                                available at three-year intervals beginning from 1981 to 2008 and with a two-year gap between 2008
                                and 2010 (this does not necessarily represent successive surveys, but years for which data or estimates
                                are available in PovcalNet).

                                GDP is disaggregated into three broad output sectors: agriculture, industry, and services.6 This level of
                                disaggregation allows us to include 29 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and 31 in the rest of the world
                                in our analysis. Sectoral output is value added in GDP by sector, and is from the World Development
                                Indicators database. A finer disaggregation, especially of the manufacturing sector, would be desirable,
                                but issues of data quality are a concern. Data quality issues suggest that results need to be interpreted
                                cautiously.

                                The empirical analysis confirms that in addition to overall growth of GDP per capita, what matters for
                                poverty reduction is where growth comes from—that is, agriculture, industry, or services (table 2).
                                Growth in the agricultural and services sectors is strongly associated with aggregate poverty reduction,
                                but growth in industry does not have a significant effect on lowering poverty. Statistical tests reject the
                                hypothesis that the sectoral composition of growth does not matter.7 The impact of GDP originating in
                                the agricultural and services sectors (controlling for size) on national poverty is fairly comparable. A 1
                                percent increase in GDP per capita led by agricultural growth reduces poverty by 0.67 percent, and the
                                same increase led by services reduces it by 0.96 percent. These poverty-reducing effects come from two
                                sources: sectoral growth in GDP per capita, and the share of each sector in total GDP per capita. If, on
                                average, the share of agriculture in the Sub-Saharan Africa sample were half of what it is, the agricultural
                                sector would have to grow twice as fast to achieve a 0.67 percent reduction in poverty. Likewise, if the
                                services sector share is increased, it would require a correspondingly smaller growth rate to achieve
                                the same reduction in poverty. Larger shares of GDP per capita compensate for lower growth rates, or
                                demand less of growth, for poverty reduction than in sectors with declining shares such as agriculture.

                                                                                                                      !               !      ! !                 !      ! !                 !
                                                                                             Δ ln !" =  ! !"            !" +  !"!! Δ ln 
                                                                                                                         !! Δ ln                                                      !! + ! + !" 	  
                                                                                                                                                               !" +  !"!! Δ ln 
                                                                                                                                                       	  
                                                                                                                                                Δ ln !" ,	  
                         !               ! 4	 ! For  !    the empirical !            ! ! analysis      !      the following model, from Ferreira et                                    al.! (2010), was estimated separately for headcount, poverty gap, and poverty gap squared using a standard OLS:
Δ ln !" =  ! !"            !" +  !" !! Δ ln 
                            !! Δ ln                                !" +  !" !! Δ ln   !! + ! + !" 	                                                        (!" !! )	  
                                                                                    !
                                                           	   !" =  ! !"              !      ! !                  !       ! !                  !
                                                      Δ ln                                        !" +  !"!! Δ ln 
                                                                                       !! Δ ln                                                         !! + ! + !" 	  
                                                                                                                               !" +  !" !! Δ ln                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                             Δ ln !" =  ! !"              !      ! !                 !      ! !                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !" +  !"!! Δ ln 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !! Δ ln                                                      !! + ! + !" 	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !" +  !"!! Δ ln 
                                                   Δ ln !" ,	                                                   	                                                                    	                                                          	  
                                	  The dependent variable, Δ ln !" ,	   is the growth rate in the poverty measure. The explanatoryΔvariables       ln !" ,	  
                                                                                                                                                                          were included as the share of the sector in total GDP per capita in the previous period
                                         !
                                    (!"!! )	   multiplied by growth in GDP per capita of the sector (Δ ln  ! 	  , where i represents country, t year, and J sector [A: agriculture, I: industry, and S: services])
                                                                               !                                          !"
                                                                          (!"!! )	                                                                   !
                                5	 The	   data are under revision              as a result of newer surveys.                                        (!"!! )	  
                                                                    	  
                                                                                 	  
                                6	 As noted   !
                                                      earlier, agriculture includes       cultivation of crops, livestock production, fishing, forestry, and	          hunting; industry includes manufacturing, mining, construction, and utilities; and
                                   (Δ ln !" 	   includes wholesale and! retail trade, transport, banking, and public services.
                                   services                              (Δ ln  	  
                                                                                     !"                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (Δ ln !" 	  
                  	            7	 This is supported by the results of a statistical test where the null hypothesis is that the sector-specific betas are equal ( ! =  ! =  ! )	  . The test also compares sector and country-specific
                                   betas. This hypothesis was rejected with 99 percent    	   confidence.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   27
                   TABLE 2: Cross-country regression of sectoral growth and poverty

                                                                         Sub-Saharan Africa                                                       Other Developing Countries
                                                                                    Poverty                Sq. Poverty                                                                      Sq. Poverty
                         VARIABLES                    Headcount                                                                         Headcount                Poverty Gap
                                                                                     Gap                       Gap                                                                              Gap
                     Agriculture                         -0.668***                  -1.025***                 -1.322***                      -1.224                    -0.752                 -2.411*
                                                           (0.209)                    (0.318)                   (0.417)                     (1.268)                   (1.799)                 (1.333)
                     Industry                              -0.086                     -0.078                     -0.115                   -1.864***                 -2.595***                -3.079***
                                                           (0.301)                    (0.371)                   (0.434)                     (0.483)                   (0.624)                 (0.787)
                     Services                            -0.963***                  -1.233***                 -1.493***                   -1.881***                 -1.899***                 -1.195*
                                                           (0.193)                    (0.254)                   (0.310)                     (0.507)                   (0.681)                 (0.683)
                     Observations                            228                        228                        228                         240                       240                   239
                     Countries                                29                         29                         29                          31                        31                    31
                     R-squared                              0.280                      0.309                     0.319                       0.367                     0.344                  0.377

                     Source: Staff estimates based on PovcalNet and World Development Indicators (2014).

                     Notes: Regression coefficients are elasticity of poverty reduction with respect to aggregate GDP growth originating from a particular sector (controlling for size).
                     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                But the larger relative size of services also means that the growth elasticity of poverty reduction of
                this sector is over four times larger than that for agriculture. An increase of 1 percent in per capita GDP
                growth in agriculture is associated with a decline in poverty of 0.12 percent, while the same increase in
                services reduces poverty by 0.47 percent (table 3). The regression results for the effect on the squared
                poverty gap measure show that agriculture and services are more effective in reducing poverty among
                the poor than industry. The above results are robust to the inclusion of controls.

                The empirical results also show that differences in the impact of growth originating in agriculture and
                services mostly disappear when looking at the effects of the poorest of the poor (as captured by the
                poverty gap squared measure), underscoring that growth in agriculture is especially beneficial for the
                poorest. Overall, given limited growth in agricultural GDP over the past two decades (0.9 percent per
                capita per year), the somewhat muted reduction in poverty does not surprise. Most of it has likely been
                driven by the service sector (not unlike in India in the 1980s and 1990s (Ravallion and Datt, 1996). It
                also highlights the enormous potential for accelerating poverty reduction if the performance of the
                agricultural sector can be boosted. Higher world food prices, increased domestic demand for food
                following solid economic growth and urbanization and increased investment both by the public and
                private sector should well position Africa for harnessing this opportunity. Ethiopia’s and Rwanda’s
                experiences are illustrative.




28   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
  TABLE 3: Growth elasticity of poverty reduction by sector8

                                                         Sub-Saharan Africa                                                            Other Developing Countries
                                                                                             Sq. Poverty                                                                         Sq. Poverty
        Elasticity                  Headcount                  Poverty Gap                                                Headcount                  Poverty Gap
                                                                                                 Gap                                                                                 Gap
    Agriculture                         -0.119                       -0.187                       -0.245                       -0.140                       -0.081                    -0.279
    Industry                            -0.007
                                           !
                                                                     -0.012                       -0.034                       -0.676                       -0.946                    -1.109
                                          ( )	  
    Services                            -0.472                       -0.635                       -0.795                      -0.958                        -0.971                    -0.585
                                              	  

          ( ! )
  Source: Staff     	  
                  estimates              ( ! )	   (2014) and World Development Indicators (2014).
                            based on PovcalNet


                  	                              	  
  8	 The growth elasticity of poverty reduction is equal to the coefficient of the OLS regression ( ! )	  described in footnote 2, multiplied by the weighted average share of
                   !                           !
         GDP ( )	  for each sector J	  (℮ =  ! ∗  ! )	  .
                                                                                                       	  
                  	  
                                                                                                  ( ! )	  
    J	  (℮ ! =  ! ∗  ! )	  
Cross-country evidence from the rest of the world also shows that the sectoral composition of growth   	  

matters for poverty reduction. For countries outside
                                                   J	  (℮the
                                                           !
                                                                     ∗  ! )	   region, industry and services growth
                                                             = Africa
                                                                   !



exerts a much stronger poverty response than agricultural growth. For both services and industry,
an increase of 1 percent in the growth in GDP per capita led by each of these sectors decreases the
poverty headcount by almost 2 percent. The gap between the poverty-reducing effects of these two
sectors is uneven for poverty gap and poverty gap squared, with industry having larger impacts. The
growth elasticity of poverty reduction of the services sector is 40 percent larger than that for industry.
The link between agricultural growth and poverty reduction in the rest of the world is weak for poverty
headcount and poverty gap, but significant for squared poverty gap. Overall, the results for other
developing countries differ substantially from that for Sub-Saharan Africa, where agricultural growth is
more effective in reducing poverty.

One striking result is that industrial sector growth does not have a significant effect on poverty reduction
in Africa, while it has larger and significant effects in the rest of the developing world. One key point to
bear in mind is that the share of poor
labor in industry is low compared to                                                        FIGURE 28: Growth elasticity of poverty reduction by sector,                                                   The growth
agriculture and services (figure 19). One                                                   by poverty line                                                                                                elasticity
possible explanation could then be that                                                                                                                               Poverty line (US$ per day)           of poverty
                                                                                                                                                                                                           reduction in
industry can have an impact on those                                                                                                                                                                4      agriculture
who are well above the US$1.25 poverty                                                                                                                                                                     and services
line. To see this, figure 28 shows the                                                                                                                                                              2.5    decreases as
                                                                                                                                                                                                           income rises,
growth elasticity of poverty reduction at                                                                                                                                                                  while the
different levels of income per day. The                                                                                                                                                             2      opposite is true
growth elasticity of services decreases                                                                                                                                                                    for industry
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.25
as the income per day increases. The
                                                                                              0    -0.05    -0.1      -0.15     -0.2      -0.25      -0.3     -0.35      -0.4      -0.45     -0.5
same pattern holds for agriculture, but
                                                                                                                                Growth elasticity of poverty reduction
this sector also loses its significance                                                                                   Agriculture             Industry            Services
at higher income per day. Industry,
                                                                                            Source: Staff estimates based on PovcalNet (2014) and World Development Indicators (2014).Note: The
however, increases in effect, exceeding                                                     solid bars represent significant effects at 10 percent of significance or lower. Industry is not significant
                                                                                            and agriculture loses its power as the poverty line increases (not significant for US$4 a day).

the elasticity of agriculture at an



                                                                                                                                                                                  A F R I C A’ S P U L S E       >   29
                income of US$4 a day, but it is still not statistically significant. The above analysis shows that subsectors,
                like manufacturing, can lift incomes, but they would have to increase dramatically in size to have a
                substantial impact on lowering poverty in the region. Recent analysis by Rodrik (2014) suggests that
                African growth in the coming years is in fact much more likely to stem from agriculture or services than
                from manufacturing. If this pattern of growth materializes, combined with the observed higher growth
                elasticities of poverty reduction with respect to aggregate GDP growth originating in these sectors, it
                may provide a window of opportunity for poverty reduction in Africa.


                Two case studies
                Country-specific poverty analyses can provide detailed insights on the importance of the sectoral
                composition of growth in reducing poverty. The alignment of findings with those from the cross-
                country analysis will vary by country. For example, results from a country study on Ethiopia find
                support for the importance of agricultural growth in reducing poverty, but not of services. Hill and
                Tsehaye (2014) examine the poverty-growth links in the context of Ethiopia. Ethiopia has grown rapidly
                for over a decade, registering annual average per capita growth rates of over 8 percent. The country’s
                growth has been accompanied by a sharp drop in the poverty rate. The study examines zone-level
                variations in sectoral growth and provision of public goods to explain the reduction in poverty
                between 1996 and 2011.9 The aim is to see whether the sectoral composition of growth mattered for
                poverty reduction in Ethiopia.

                They find that agricultural growth is significantly related to the decline in poverty in Ethiopia. Thus, zones
                with the fastest increase in agricultural production experienced the largest decline in poverty. Growth
                in agricultural output per capita lowered the average poverty rate, with a 1 percent increase in growth
                reducing poverty by 0.9 percent. Controlling for other variables raises the growth elasticity of poverty
                reduction to 2 percent. The impact of agriculture is especially found close to urban centers (50,000),
                                                                                                                                  pointing to the role of improved access
                                                                                                                                  to markets. By contrast, growth in
Recent          FIGURE 29: Sectoral contribution to poverty reduction in Ethiopia
agricultural
                                                                                                                                  manufacturing and services has not
growth in                                                                                                                         exerted a statistically significant impact
                                                        -10
Ethiopia has                                                                                                                      on poverty reduction (figure 29). In
                 Sectoral contribution to poverty reduction




reduced                                                       -8
poverty 1:1
                                                                                                                                  Ethiopia, growth in rural and small non-
                                                              -6                                                                  farm town services is closely related to
                                 (% points)




                                                              -4                                                                  agricultural growth, with the majority
                                                              -2                                                                  of these businesses (64 percent)
                                                                                                                                  established on the back of earnings
                                                              0
                                                                                                                                  from agricultural production (Jolliffe
                                                              2
                                                                    1996-2000               2000-2005             2005-2010       et al., 2014). Given this correlation
                                                                   Agriculture   Manufacturing   Construction   Service   Other   between activities, it is possible that the
                                                                                                                                  coefficient on agricultural growth also
                Source: Hill and Tsehaye 2014.
                                                                                                                                  captures some of the poverty-reducing


                9	 Panel data for 50 zones between 1996 to 2011, four observations over this 15-year period.




30   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
effects of services sector growth. The study does find that in more recent periods, manufacturing growth
has started to contribute to lowering poverty in urban areas.

A recent poverty assessment of Rwanda (World Bank 2014b) examines the contribution of various factors to
growth in consumption. Rwanda experienced a period of exceptionally strong growth and poverty reduction
during the last decade, with an average GDP growth of 8 percent per year since 2001, placing it among the
fastest-growing economies in the world. Over the period as a whole, each 1 percent increase in consumption
was associated with only a 0.8 percent decrease in poverty. Since 2006, however, growth in Rwanda became
markedly more propoor, as reflected in a higher growth elasticity of poverty reduction of -1.25. This latter
period also coincided with a period of rapidly increasing agricultural productivity and production, as well as
diversification into nonfarm activities, rapidly falling fertility rates, and rising remittances.

Using a statistical decomposition method, they examine which factors can explain the change in mean
household consumption at various points of the income distribution. For the period 2001 to 2011, the
analysis reveals that much of the growth in consumption (median) in Rwanda can be explained by
underlying trends such as the boom in agricultural production, the increase in non-farm activities, declining
dependency ratio, and transfers and remittances. Through increased production and commercialization (the
increased shares of harvests sold on the market), agriculture accounted for nearly one-third of the national
consumption growth during this period. Another important correlate of the change in consumption is
the increased activity in nonagricultural household businesses, which explains 15 percent of consumption
growth. The importance of agriculture
is not surprising. Agriculture is the                 FIGURE 30: Contribution of various factors to growth in                    Agriculture
backbone of the Rwandan economy:                      consumption in Rwanda, 2001-11, in percent                                 accounted for
                                                                                                                                 one-third of
Although the share of agriculture in
                                                                                            Increased Agricultural Production    consumption
GDP fell from 45 percent in 2001 to 34                             17%                      & Commercialization                  growth in
percent in 2011, agriculture remains the                                          32%
                                                                                            Decreased Dependency Ratio           Rwanda
                                                                                            Non-Farm Self Employment             between 2001
primary occupation for over 70 percent of                   12%
                                                                                                                                 and 2011
                                                                                            Non-Farm Wage Employment
working Rwandans. Along with boosting
                                                                12%
                                                                                            Transfers and Remittances
agricultural performance, increasing rural                                        12%
                                                                          15%               Other Factors and Unexplained Part
income diversification will be important
to sustaining the pace of poverty
                                                      Source: World Bank 2014b.
reduction and economic growth.



SO WHAT IS THE ROLE FOR STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION
IN ACCELERATING AFRICA’S POVERTY REDUCTION?
The evidence reviewed so far suggests a strong continuing role for increasing productivity within sectors
in accelerating Africa’s poverty reduction, especially in the so-called low-productivity sectors (agriculture
and services). But would a sole focus on the fundamentals to foster sectoral growth not ignore key
features of the historical patterns of development, that is the reallocation of activities and labor from
low- to high-productivity sectors as countries develop?




                                                                                                              A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   31
                The realization that low- and high-productivity sectors often co-exist and the opportunities this offers
                for fostering growth (and poverty reduction) by moving people from low- to high-productivity sectors
                (at least in an accounting sense) has long formed the basis for the dual economy models of economic
                growth (going back to Arthur Lewis in the 1950s). Following concerns about the sustainability of Africa’s
                recent growth path, they have recently also seen a revival over the one sector neoclassical growth
                models.10 Which view of the world is taken also matters for policy. While the latter models emphasize
                incentives to save, accumulate human and physical capital, and innovate (that is, the fundamentals), the
                former emphasize the removal of barriers to (labor) movement across sectors instead (Rodrik, 2014).

                Reallocation of labor out of agriculture over time is consistent with long-term trends in demand
                behavior, that is, the long-term proportional decline in spending on food as income increases (Engel’s
                Law). Nonetheless, dual economy models have simultaneously also emphasized the need to meet food
                subsistence needs in the early stages of development, before labor can be released productively (Gollin,
                Parente, and Rogerson 2002).

                Within the spirit of the dual economy models, growth in overall labor productivity can thus be
                achieved in two ways11: 1) by increasing labor productivity within existing economic activities (through
                technological change (increasing total factor productivity), capital accumulation, or shifts in the terms
                of trade; and 2) by moving labor from low- to high-productivity sectors (the structural transformation).
                Contributions of the latter depend on the labor productivity gap between both sectors, and the speed
                with which labor is reallocated. These considerations have not been fully captured in the cross-country
                analysis presented above. So, what is the role of structural transformation in accelerating Africa’s poverty
                reduction?


                Sectoral productivity gaps are real, and there
                is also huge heterogeneity within sectors
                Estimating labor productivity differences across sectors and the contribution of structural change to
                overall labor productivity growth is methodologically and empirically challenging.12 This holds even more
                in data-constrained environments like Africa, where solid empirical evidence is scarce. Two recent studies
                shed some new light. Taking agriculture and nonagriculture as the low- and high-productivity sectors,
                and using data on their value added and employment shares from the International Labour Organization
                and the United Nations National Account Statistics, Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014) calculate the labor
                productivity gap across 72 countries (figure 31). They find that the value added per worker is on average
                3.5 times larger in nonagriculture than in agriculture; the median ratio is 3.1.




                10	 See for example the 6th international conference organized by the Global Development Network, in Accra, 2014, fully devoted to the theme of Structural transformation in Africa in Accra 2014.
                11	 Growth in labor productivity can be decomposed as:
                                                                                           !"              ! !!             ! !!       [! ! ! ! ! ]
                                                                                                =  !          + !          +                  ! 	                   (1)
                                                                                            !              !!               !!              !

                	   with y denoting overall labor productivity and yi labor productivity in sector i= T,M (traditional and modern sector respectively), πi the share of sector i in the economy and Si, the share of
                    employment. Increasing labor productivity within existing economic activities is captured by the first two components of the equation. The third component captures productivity change
                    by moving labor into higher productivity sectors.
                12	 Sectoral employment shares are often based on outdated records/censuses and occupational status of the household head. Yet households typically allocate time across different activities
                    making it hard to calculate the sectoral returns. In addition, labor productivity are partial measures of productivity and are also affected by the amount of human and physical capital
                    allocated. Systematic differences in human and physical capital applied across sectors may artificially raise the gap.




32   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
When accounting for sectoral
                                                                                      FIGURE 31. Agricultural productivity gap (APG)13                                                                Average
differences in human capital and hours                                                                                                                                                                nonagricultural
worked, the gap declines by about 50                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      labor
percent to a factor 2.2 (or 1.9 for the                                                                                                                                                               productivity is
                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      twice as high
median).14 As expected—marginal labor                                                                                                                                                                 as average
productivities across sectors should                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      agricultural
equalize in a competitive world—the                                                                                                                                                                   labor
                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      productivity
average gap further decreases with the
overall level of development. Ranking                                                  0
                                                                                           Raw APG            All                       Richest       Second          Third        Poorest
                                                                                                         adjustments                                  quartile       quartile
countries by their 2005 purchasing
power parity GDP per capita and                                                       Source: Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh, 2014.


moving from the poorest to the richest                                                13	 Adjusted APG takes into account the average hours worked per worker and average human capital per worker.

quartiles, the (adjusted) gap declines
from 3 to 1.7. Overall, these results would suggest substantial gains from moving labor out of agriculture
(in an accounting sense). Yet, they do not tell how to bring the structural transformation about or why
such gaps persist.

Before digging deeper into the policy implications, it is worth highlighting that the comparisons are
based on differences in average (as opposed to marginal) productivity. This hides a lot of insightful
heterogeneity across households. For example, using detailed information about time spent and net
income earned across activities by each household member from a nationally representative household
survey, Christiaensen and Kaminski (2014) estimate the average labor productivity gap between
farming and urban self-employment in Uganda 2009/10 at a factor of 1.9 (751/390). This is not unlike
the gaps reported by Gollin, Lagakos and Waugh. Yet, they also show that the percentile distributions
of labor productivity (net incomes per hour worked) in farming, rural self-employment and urban self-
employment display a wide and diverging variation around the means.

While the urban self-employed enjoy the largest labor productivity on average, this is mostly driven by
high earnings at the top end of the distribution. This also holds for the larger average returns among the
rural self-employed, even though the distribution is less skewed than among the urban self-employed.
Net earnings among the bottom 5 percentile are even negative for both groups. Labor productivity
among farmers is less dispersed, though net earnings among the 75 percentile household are still more
than 4 times higher than those among the 25 percentile household. Also, the median (50th percentile)
farmer earns amounts per hour worked similar to the median rural self-employed, and more than the
median urban self-employed.

Three insights emerge. First, despite substantial labor productivity gaps on average between agriculture
and nonagriculture, low- and high-productivity sectors do not nicely coincide with agriculture and
nonagriculture respectively. This was recognized early on by Lewis, and is also increasingly recognized
within the literature (Gollin 2014). Yet it remains largely ignored within the macro-policy dialogues.



14	 Many households or household heads who have agriculture as their primary activity, also work outside agriculture. This leads to an overestimation of the number of agricultural workers
    and an underestimation of their labor productivity when expressed in terms of persons as opposed to hours.




                                                                                                                                                                        A F R I C A’ S P U L S E            >   33
                                                                                                                                    Second, the large within sector
Labor            FIGURE 32: Gross labor productivity by type of household
                                                                                                                                    heterogeneity suggests that substantial
productivity     enterprise, rural Ethiopia 2011
measures are                                                                                                                        scope remains for growth from bringing
                 Density
partial and                                                                                                                         low-productivity laborers up to the
                  4
also reflect
                                  Agribusiness & sales                                  Transport & bar / restaurant                level of those at the higher end of the
capital inputs
                   3                                                                                                                distribution, that is, by modernization
                                                                                                                                    within sectors. In agriculture, this still
                   2
                                                                                                                                    holds especial promise for poverty
                   1                                                                                                                reduction, as shown by the evidence
                                                                                                                                    reviewed above.
                   0
                       0                                        5                                       10
                                                                                                                                    Finally, the move from low-productivity
                                                         Productivity (In logs)
                                                                                                                                    jobs in agriculture to high-productivity
                                  Non-Ag Business                   Agribusiness                 Trade
                                  Sales                             Prof. Services               Transport                          jobs in the city, which is often implicitly
                                  Bar and Restaurant                Other                                                           assumed in the analysis of structural
                 Source: Nagler and Naude, 2014.                                                                                    transformation, is far from obvious.
                                                                                                                                    These differences in labor productivity
                 ignore the contribution of physical capital. The larger (gross) labor productivity among rural household
                 enterprises observed in Ethiopia, in rural transport enterprises, bars, and restaurants, all which are more
                 capital intensive, does thus not surprise (figure 32). Yet, it is especially these larger capital requirements
                 (including human capital) that often make the more productive jobs less accessible to the poor
                 (Barrett, Reardon, and Webb 2001). As a result, income diversification among the poor (and structural
                 transformation) is often in the less remunerative nonfarm sector, consistent with the limited decline in
                 poverty reduction despite substantial growth.


                 African migrants are mainly in search of better public amenities, not better wages
                 Clearly, obtaining reliable estimates of marginal labor productivity gaps that account for differences in
                 human and physical capital, as well as hours worked, remains challenging in practice. Taking a more
                 indirect approach, the empirical evidence on labor productivity gaps presented above would suggest
                 substantial migratory pressures. Surprisingly, de Brauw and Mueller (2014) find rural-urban migration
                 rates in many Sub-Saharan African countries to be low—1.07 percent per annum on average (population
                 weighted) during 1990-2000, despite clear indications of gains from migration.15 Many practical and
                 policy barriers can still be invoked to explain this (for example, capital market failures, land tenure
                 policies, implicit discriminatory policies against rural (secondary) education). Yet, it is less obvious why
                 wage gaps do not play a more important role in motivating migration (ex ante).

                 In a novel recent study, Dustmann and Okatenko (2014) examine individuals’ intentions to move away
                 from their area of current residence over the next 12 months using data from the Gallup World Poll
                 2005-6.16 Overall, 19 percent of respondents in Asia and Latin America and 29 percent in Sub-Saharan


                 15	 De Brauw and Mueller define the rural-urban migration rate as the difference between rural and urban population growth and find it to be 1.07 percent on average (population weighted)
                     for Sub-Saharan Africa during 1990-2000, with few countries experiencing rural-urban migration rates exceeding 2 percent.
                 16	 While this does not represent actual migration, intentions often represent the best point estimates of respondents’ future behavior (Manski, 1990).




 34   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Africa reported that they would likely move away over the next 12 months. This confirms the existence
of strong migratory pressures in Sub-Saharan Africa. Strikingly, in Sub-Saharan Africa, dissatisfaction
with personal living standards (a proxy for the wage gap) explains only one-fifth of the overall variation
in migration intentions. In contrast, it is discontentment with local public services17 that accounts for
the bulk of the variation of migration intentions (60 percent, compared with 38 percent in Asia and 36
percent in Latin America).

This calls attention to the existence of an important rural-urban gap in public amenities (in addition to a
wage gap) (see also Ferre, Ferreira and Lanjouw 2012). From an efficiency point, it suggests that people
may be moving for the wrong reasons (World Bank 2009), that is, mainly in search for better public
amenities, as opposed to higher marginal labor productivity. It highlights the need for spatially neutral
investment in rural public goods, instead.


Rural income diversification holds additional promise,
especially for poverty reduction
So, what has been the contribution of structural transformation in Sub-Saharan Africa’s recent history?
Decomposing growth in labor productivity across 16 Sub-Saharan African countries during 1995-2009,
using the national accounts and sectoral employment data from population censuses, McMillan and
Harttgen (2014) find that labor reallocation across sectors accounted on average for about half of overall
labor productivity growth (recorded at 21.8 percent) (figure 33). This is substantial.


     FIGURE 33: Structural change and labor productivity growth in Sub-Saharan Africa during the 2000s                                                                                                  Structural
                                                                                                                                                                                                        transformation
     Percent                                                                                                                                                                                            contributes
      8                                                                                                                                                                                                 to growth,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        with large
       6                                                                                                                                                   Structural                  Within sector    variation across
                                                                                                                                                                                                        countries
       4

       2

       0

      -2

      -4
            Angola

                       Cameroon

                                  Ethiopia

                                             Ghana

                                                      Kenya

                                                                 Malawi

                                                                           Mali

                                                                                      Mauritius

                                                                                                  Mozambique

                                                                                                               Nigeria

                                                                                                                         Rwanda

                                                                                                                                  Senegal

                                                                                                                                            South Africa

                                                                                                                                                            Tanzania

                                                                                                                                                                        Uganda

                                                                                                                                                                                    Zambia

                                                                                                                                                                                              Average




     Source: McMillan and Harttgen, 2014.




17	 An index of contentment was constructed using polychoric principal component analysis applied to respondents’ opinions on the availability of public services such as health care, schools,
    and air quality in the residence area.




                                                                                                                                                                                 A F R I C A’ S P U L S E     >   35
                There was also substantial heterogeneity across countries. The contribution was small, but positive, for
                example, in higher-income and well-diversified economies such as Mauritius (2000-07), where agriculture
                and manufacturing were already much smaller and where the highly productive services sector has
                managed to absorb labor. In resource-rich Nigeria (1999-2009), however, structural change contributed
                a lot more. Further inspection shows that this largely resulted from big shifts of labor out of agriculture
                (and to a lesser extent, services) into manufacturing, since the productivity differences between the
                three sectors were rather small, probably due to the high degree of informality in all three sectors.

                This contrasts with the experience of resource-poor Malawi (1998-2005), which displayed little structural
                change and even a decline in labor productivity within its sectors. Finally, structural change contributed
                substantially to labor productivity growth in resource-poor, but emerging, Uganda (1999-2009), with the
                contribution of structural change resulting both from large labor shifts out of agriculture and large initial
                differences in labor productivity across sectors (see below).

                But what about the contribution of structural transformation to poverty reduction? Analyzing this
                requires micro household panel data. Consistent with the notion of high productivity growth potential
                outside agriculture, Christiaensen and Kaminski (2014)18 find that about two-thirds of Uganda’s
                2.7 percent annual consumption growth during 2005-09 can be explained by consumption growth
                among nonagricultural households that stay in nonagriculture (table 4). Half of this came from people
                in rural nonagriculture staying in rural nonagriculture; the other half came from Kampala, each
                contributing about 30 percentage points of overall consumption growth.

                Yet, 70 percent of the 4-percentage-point decline in the poverty headcount resulted from raising agricultural
                incomes among people staying in agriculture. The other one-third came from rural nonfarm diversification,
                which also contributed disproportionately to consumption growth—it accounted for one-fifth of overall
                consumption growth, even though the number of households that diversified out of agriculture into rural
                nonfarm activities made up only 13 percent of the population. Put differently, fostering nonagriculture (both
                in rural and urban areas) appears disproportionally good for growth, and fostering agricultural productivity
                appears disproportionally good for poverty reduction. Structural transformation into the rural economy (rural
                nonfarm income diversification) benefited both poverty and growth.




                18	 Households are classified in different groupings based on the time they spent in a sector (agriculture and nonagriculture) and location (rural, other urban, city). Households spending
                    more than 75 percent of their labor time in agriculture in each survey period are classified as staying in agriculture. Those who spend less than 75 percent of their time in agriculture in the
                    second period, while staying in rural areas, are considered to switch to rural nonagricultural activities, etc.




36   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
  TABLE 4: Occupational changes and poverty reduction in Uganda, 2005-09

                                                                                                                                  Share on
        Dynamic                                                                           Share on                     Annual
                                 Population                 Poverty                                      Consumption              national
      occupational                                                                    National Poverty                 growth
                                  share (%)              Headcount (%)                                      2005                consumption
        changes                                                                        reduction (%)                     (%)
                                                                                                                                 growth (%)
                                                          2005            2009                    
   Stayed in
                                        49                  36              31                  70          509         1.4         18
   agriculture
   Moved from
   agriculture to                       13                  27              17                  35          691          4          20
   non-agriculture

   Moved from
   non-agriculture                       9                  21              28                  -16         742         -4.6        -14
   to agriculture

   Stayed in
                                        17                   9              10                  -2          1146        5.9         66
   non-agriculture

   Total                              100                   28              24                  100         697         2.7        100

  Source: Christiaensen and Kaminski, 2014.
  Notes: Consumption is adult equivalent (2000 constant UG SH). Residual category is omitted.




In addition to re-emphasizing the continuing role of within-sector productivity increases for poverty
reduction (agriculture) and growth (nonagriculture), the findings also call attention to the spatial aspects
of the structural transformation for poverty reduction. Structural transformation can contribute to
poverty reduction, but especially if the non-farm jobs are nearby, in the rural economy. The importance
of rural development (especially in agriculture, but also in the rural nonfarm sector) is also borne out by
other cross-country micro-econometric evidence (Imai, Gaiha and Garbero, 2014) and is consistent with
the insights about people’s migratory intentions discussed above (Dustmann and Okatenko, 2014).


INCREASING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY IS AN IMPORTANT DRIVER OF
STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION
Many of the results about the contributions to sectoral growth and structural transformation presented
so far hold only in an accounting sense; they abstract from the “knock on effects of sectoral growth
in one sector, on structural transformation or the other sector, and do not tell how to bring about the
structural transformation. Yet the origins for structural transformation may lie both with short- and long-
run policies to foster sectoral growth as well as with the removal of barriers to labor movement. And
the latter may also benefit sectoral growth. Increasing land tenure security can for example help release
labor for the non-agricultural sector while also fostering investment in land productivity increasing
measures such as agro-forestry and erosion control.




                                                                                                                                 A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   37
                Given the complex and dynamic nature of these processes, solid evidence on the actual drivers of
                structural transformation is hard to come by. One crude, initial attempt by Gollin, Lagakos and Waugh
                (2014) explores how their adjusted measure of the (average) agricultural productivity gap relates to
                measures of labor mobility (such as restrictions on domestic movement19 and ethnic fractionalization),
                measures of institutional quality (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi’s rule of law index) and geographic
                features (such as terrain ruggedness, a proxy for physical productivity in agriculture,20 the fraction of land
                categorized as fertile and tropic, and the share of fuels and minerals in merchandise exports).

                When looking at each of the factors separately, the results accord with expectations.21 When looking
                at all of them simultaneously, only the coefficient on ruggedness is statistically significant and largely
                unchanged from when looking at the different factors independently. The findings underscore the
                critical role of agricultural productivity in fostering the structural transformation. In analyzing the
                factors affecting the share of the labor force in agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa, McMillan and Harttgen
                (2014) also find a negative correlation with agricultural productivity, providing further support for the
                proposition that the road out of agriculture very much runs through it. They also find small declines in
                the agricultural labor force with rural schooling and with population growth, hinting at the emergence
                of land scarcity.


                WAYS FORWARD
                Investments and policies to foster growth in the rural economy (that is, close to where the people
                work and are) emerge as critical for accelerating poverty reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa and fostering
                inclusive growth. This will also help move people out of agriculture over time. It is difficult to imagine
                how large amounts of labor can be productively released with cereal yields still standing at historical
                lows of 1.4 ton/ha. Even China and Vietnam already enjoyed cereal yields well above 2 ton/ha when their
                institutional reforms unleashed a boost in agricultural productivity and poverty reduction (Ravallion and
                Chen, 2007).

                Africa’s rising urbanization and solid economic growth are also generating substantial domestic demand,
                both for staples and for more protein-rich foods (meat, dairy) and higher value products (vegetables,
                fruits). As of now, much of these stand to be met by imports,22 but could be produced locally, generating
                important import substitution and employment opportunities (for example, rice in West Africa and
                poultry around urban centers). Designing institutional arrangements and policies that help poorer
                smallholders benefit maximally from these opportunities, directly through production as well as
                indirectly through the labor market, is the key challenge moving forward.


                19	 Taken from Cingranelli and Richards (2010), who rely on U.S. State Department country human rights reports to categorize a country as having restrictions on internal mobility.
                20	 The ruggedness index measures the average variability in elevation within a country. It can be seen as a measure of physical productivity in agriculture, with more ruggedness associated
                    with lower productivity (Nunn and Puga, 2012).
                21	 Countries with restrictions on domestic movement have larger adjusted agricultural productivity gaps, as do countries with more ethnic fractionalization. Similarly, countries that lack rule
                    of law have larger gaps, with a 1 standard deviation decrease in the rule of law associated with a 16 percent higher residual gap. Finally, countries with lower agricultural productivity also
                    have higher gaps, with a 1 standard deviation increase in ruggedness associated with an 18 percent higher gap. A one standard deviation in export dependence on fuel or minerals also
                    increases the gap by 18 percent.
                22	 The latest agricultural Outlook from OECD-FAO predicts that net food imports for Sub-Saharan Africa will rise dramatically over the next 10 years (by an additional 6.8 million tonnes of
                    wheat to 20.8 million tonnes net import in 2023 and an additional 6.2 million tonnes of rice to 17 million. But Sub-Saharan Africa is also projected to become a net importer of coarse grains
                    (4.8 million tonnes in 2023) (maize/ millet/sorghum) and there are increasing imports of poultry (1.8 million tonnes in 2023) and pork (0.7 million tonnes). With this, Sub-Saharan Africa
                    stands to become the world’s major rice importer. Large importers include, for example, Nigeria (5 million tonnes net rice imports by 2023), South Africa (1.7 million tonnes), but also Ghana,
                    Tanzania and Mozambique with between 0.5 and 1 million tonnes each. This is projected to happen despite increasing production (by 35 to 40 percent over the next decade for rice and
                    meat; 28 percent for coarse grains, and 20 percent for wheat).




38   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
But boosting agricultural productivity alone will not suffice. Investments in rural public goods (for
example, education, health, rural roads, electricity, and ICT) and services (including in small towns) will
be equally important to boost the rural economy and facilitate the structural transformation through
rural income diversification, while also equipping the next generation for migration to the cities. While
Africa’s urbanization rate is still relatively low compared to that in other continents, Africa has been
urbanizing at a rate similar to that of Asia during 1960-2010. Yet, its urban population has been growing
much faster (that is, the rate at which its urban population expands), exceeding Asia’s urban growth
by 1.5 to 2 percentage points, due to much higher urban fertility. To put this in perspective, when the
population in urban centers grows at 3.5 percent per year (as in Asia during 1960-2010), it doubles every
20 years; when it grows at 4.9 percent per year (as in Sub-Saharan Africa during 1960-2010), it doubles
every 14 years. As a result, urban centers struggle to keep up the necessary infrastructure base and
congestion sets in. This may in turn erode some of the agglomeration benefits from urbanization.

Finally, while manufacturing may not provide a panacea, Sub-Saharan Africa should also expand its
manufacturing base, especially by boosting its fundamentals (business climate, macroeconomic stability,
lower transport cost, cheaper and more reliable power, and a more educated labor force ), which will
benefit all sectors. When support is targeted, it should not crowd out investments in the building blocks
for inclusive growth.




                                                                                                A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   39
Appendix: Country groupings
                     Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                          Other developing countries+
         Resource-rich          Non-resource-rich
Angola i                           Benin*                                 Albania*                                     Kyrgyz Republici
Botswana*          i
                                   Burkina Faso*             i
                                                                          Algeria*                                     Lao PDRi
Chad*i                             Burundi*i                              Argentinai                                   Lebanon
Congo, Dem. Rep.                   Cameroon                               Armenia         i
                                                                                                                       Macedonia, FYRi
Congo, Rep.*i                      Cape Verde*                            Azerbaijani                                  Malaysiai
Equatorial Guinea                  Central African Republic*     i
                                                                          Bangladesh*                 i
                                                                                                                       Mexico*i
Gabon*                             Comoros                                Belarusi                                     Moldova
Guineai                            Côte d’Ivoire*i                        Belize*i                                     Mongoliai
Liberia                            Eritrea                                Bhutan*     i
                                                                                                                       Morocco*i
Mauritania*i                       Ethiopia*i                             Bolivia*i                                    Nepal*i
Namibiai                           Gambia*i                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                       Nicaragua
Niger*i                            Ghana*i                                Brazil*                                      Pakistan*i
Nigeria*       i
                                   Guinea-Bissau                          Bulgaria                                     Palau
Sierra Leone           i
                                   Kenya*    i
                                                                          Cambodia                                     Panama*i
South Sudan                        Lesotho*i                              China*i                                      Paraguay
Sudan*     i
                                   Madagascar                             Colombia*               i
                                                                                                                       Perui
Zambia*i                           Malawi*i                               Costa Rica*i                                 Philippines*i
                                   Mali*                                  Cubai                                        Romania
                                   Mauritius     i
                                                                          Dominica            i
                                                                                                                       Samoa
                                   Mozambique*i                           Dominican Republic*i                         Sri Lanka*i
                                   Rwanda*i                               Ecuador*i                                    St. Lucia*i
                                   São Tomé and Príncipe                  Egypt, Arab Rep.*i                           Vincent and the Grenadinesi
                                   Senegal*i                              El Salvadori                                 Suriname*i
                                   Seychelles        i
                                                                          Fiji*   i
                                                                                                                       Tajikistani
                                   Somalia                                Georgia                                      Thailand*i
                                   South Africa*i                         Grenada                                      Tongai
                                   Swaziland*            i
                                                                          Guyana*         i
                                                                                                                       Tunisia*i
                                   Tanzaniai                              Honduras*i                                   Turkey*i
                                   Togo*i                                 Hungary*                                     Turkmenistan
                                   Uganda*i                               India*i                                      Ukraine
                                   Zimbabwe                               Indonesia*              i
                                                                                                                       Uzbekistan
                                                                          Jamaica                                      Vietnami
                                                                          Jordani                                      West Bank and Gaza
                                                                          Kazakhstan
+
    Subset of the 92 developing countries outside of Sub-Saharan Africa that were used throughout the report
Countries in italics do not have data for sectoral shares (agriculture, industry, and services)
for all the years between 1990 and 2011 and are not included in the analysis.
i
    Countries with data available on sectoral shares (agriculture, industry, and services)
    and where industry can be decomposed into manufacturing and other industry.
* Countries included in the regressions.




                                                                                                                                       A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   41
References
Barrett, Reardon, and Webb. 2001. “Nonfarm Income          Dustmann, C., and A. Okatenko. 2014. “Out-migration,
  Diversification and Household Livelihood Strategies       Wealth Constraints, and the Quality of Local
  in Rural Africa: Concepts, Dynamics and Policy            Amenities.” Journal of Development Economics
  Implications.” Food Policy, 26, No. 4.                    110: 52–63.
  http://ssrn.com/abstract=1847711
                                                           Férre, C., F. Ferreira, and P. Lanjouw. 2012. “Is There
Christiaensen, Luc, and Jonathan Kaminski. 2014.             a Metropolitan Bias? The Relationship between
  “Structural Change, Economic Growth and Poverty            Poverty and City Size in a Selection of Developing
  Reduction, Micro Evidence From Uganda.” World              Countries.” World Bank Economic Review
  Bank, Washington, DC. Unpublished.                         26 (3): 351–82.

Christiaensen, Luc, Lionel Demery, and Jesper Kuhl.        Ferreira, Francisco H. G., Phillippe G. Leite, and Martin
  2010. The (Evolving) Role of Agriculture in Poverty        Ravallion. 2010. “Poverty Reduction without
                                                             Economic Growth?” Journal of Development
  Reduction: An Empirical Perspective. WIDER
                                                             Economics 93 (1): 20–36. Elsevier B.V.
  Working Paper 2010/36, UNU-WIDER, Helsinki.
                                                           Filmer, Deon, and Louise Fox. 2013. Youth Employment
Christiaensen, Luc, Punam Chuhan-Pole, and Aly
                                                              in Sub-Saharan Africa Youth Employment.
  Sanoh. 2013. Africa’s Growth, Poverty and Inequality
                                                              Washington, DC: World Bank.
  Nexus – Fostering Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC:
  World Bank.                                              Gelbard, E., M. Hussain, R. Maino, Y. Mu, and E. Yehoue.
                                                            2014. Islamic Finance in Sub-Saharan Africa: Status
Cingranelli, David L., and David L. Richards. 2010. The
                                                            and Prospects. Washington, DC: International
  Cingranelli-Richards Human Rights Dataset. http://
                                                            Monetary Fund.
  www.humanrightsdata.org.
                                                           Ghani, Ejaz, Arti Grover Goswami, and Homi
de Brauw, and Mueller. 2014. “The Role of Rural–
                                                            Kharas. 2012. “Service with a Smile.” World Bank,
  Urban Migration in the Structural Transformation of       Washington, DC.
  Sub-Saharan Africa.” World Development 63: 33-42.
  Elsevier B.V.                                            Gollin, D. 2014. “The Lewis Model: A 60-Year
                                                            Retrospective.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
de Vries, Gaaitzen J., Abdul A. Erumban, Marcel P.          28 (3): 71–88.
  Timmer, Ilya Voskoboynikov, and Harry X. Wu.
  2012. “Deconstructing the BRICs: Structural              Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, M. Waugh. 2014. “The
  Transformation and Aggregate Productivity                 Agricultural Productivity Gap.” The Quarterly
                                                            Journal of Economics. 2014: 939–93.
  Growth.” Journal of Comparative Economics 40 (2):
  211–27. Association for Comparative                      Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson. 2002. “The Role
  Economic Studies.                                         of Agriculture in Development.” American Economic
                                                            Review Papers and Proceedings 92.
Diao, Xinshen, James Thurlow, and Shenggen
  Fan, eds. 2012. Strategies and Priorities for African    Hausmann, Ricardo, and César A. Hidalgo. 2011.
  Agriculture: Economywide Perspectives from Country         “The Network Structure of Economic Output.”
  Studies. International Food Policy Research Institute,     Journal of Economic Growth 16 (4): 309–42.
  Washington, DC.                                            doi:10.1007/s10887-011-9071-4.


                                                                                                     A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   43
                Hill, Ruth Vargas, and Eyasu Tsehaye. 2014. “Growth,         McMillan, Margaret S., and Kenneth Harttgen. 2014.
                  Safety Nets and Poverty: Assessing Progress in              “What is Driving the African Growth Miracle?” NBER
                  Ethiopia from 1996 to 2011.” Background paper               Working Paper 20077, National Bureau of Economic
                  for the Ethiopia Poverty Assessment, World Bank,            Research, Cambridge, MA.
                  Washington, DC.
                                                                             McMillan, Margaret S., Dani Rodrik, and Íñigo
                Imai, K., R. Gaiha, and A. Garbero. 2014. “Poverty            Verduzco-Gallo. 2013. “Globalization, Structural
                  Reduction during the Rural-Urban Transformation:            Change, and Productivity Growth, with an Update
                  Rural Development Is Still More Important than              on Africa.” World Development 63: (November):
                  Urbanization?” Brooks World Poverty Institute               11–32. DOI: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2013.10.012
                  Working Paper 204, Brooks World Poverty Institute,
                                                                             Montalvo, Jose G., and Martin Ravallion. 2010. “The
                  The University of Manchester, Manchester, England.
                                                                              Pattern of Growth and Poverty Reduction in China.”
                IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2014. “Sustaining          Journal of Comparative Economics 38 (1): 2–16.
                  Long-run Growth and Macroeconomic Stability                 Association for Comparative Economic Studies.
                  in Low-income Countries—The Role of Structural
                                                                             Nagler, P., and W. Naude. 2014. “Nonfarm Enterprises
                  Transformation and Diversification.” IMF Policy
                                                                              in Rural Africa – New Empirical Evidence.” World
                  Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington,
                                                                              Bank, Washington, DC. Unpublished.
                  DC, March 5.
                                                                             Nunn, Nathan, and Diego, Puga. 2012. “Ruggedness:
                I2D2 (International Income and Distribution
                                                                              The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa.” Review of
                  Database). 2014. World Bank, Washington, DC.
                                                                              Economics and Statistics 94: 20–36.
                Jolliffe, D., G. Oseni, I. Seff, A. Ambel, J. Kowalski, A.
                                                                             PovcalNet. 2014. World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Lipcan, K. McIntosh, R. Smida, and S. Sørensen.
                  2014. “Nonfarm Enterprises in Rural Ethiopia:              Ravallion, Martin. 2004. “Pro-Poor Growth : A Primer.”
                  Improving Livelihoods by Generating Income                   Policy Research Working Paper, World Bank,
                  and Smoothing Consumption.” Background Paper                 Washington, DC.
                  prepared for the Ethiopia Poverty Assessment,
                  World Bank, Washington, DC.                                ———. 2010. “A Comparative Perspective on Poverty
                                                                              Reduction in Brazil, China, and India.” The World
                Loayza, Norman V., and Claudio Raddatz. 2010.                 Bank Research Observer 26: 71–104.
                  “The Composition of Growth Matters for Poverty
                  Alleviation.” Journal of Development Economics 93          Ravallion, Martin, and Gaurav Datt. 1996. “How
                  (1): 137–51. Elsevier B.V.                                   Important to India’s Poor Is the Sectoral
                                                                               Composition of Economic Growth?” The World
                Manski, C. F. 1990. “The Use of Intentions Data to             Bank Economic Review 10 (1): 1–25.
                 Predict Behavior: A Best-case Analsysis.” Journal of
                 the American Statistical Association 85 (412): 934–40.      Ravallion, Martin, and Shaohua Chen. 2007. “China’s
                                                                               (uneven) Progress against Poverty.” Journal of
                McMillan, Margaret S., and Dani Rodrik. 2011.                  Development Economics 82 (1): 1–42.
                 “Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity
                 Growth.” NBER Working Paper 17143, National
                 Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA,
                 June. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17143.

44   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Rodrik., Dani. 2014. “An African Growth Miracle?”   ———. 2008. World Development Report 2009:
  NBER Working Paper 20188, National Bureau of       Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington, DC:
  Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, June.            World Bank.
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w20188.pdf.
                                                    ———. 2012. World Development Report 2012:
WHO and UNICEF (World Health Organization and        Gender Equality and Development.
 United Nations Children’s Fund). 2013.              Washington, DC: World Bank.
 Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water –
                                                    ———. 2014. “Rwanda Poverty Assessment.”
 2013 Update. Geneva: World Health Organization
                                                     Washington, DC: World Bank. Forthcoming
 and UNICEF. http://www.unicef.org/wash/files/
 JMP2013final_en.pdf.                               ———. 2014. “The Economic Impact of the 2014
                                                     Ebola Epidemic: Short and Medium Term Estimates
WITS (World Integrated Trade Solution). 2014.
                                                     for West Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC,
 Washington, DC: World Bank. http://data.
                                                     September.
 worldbank.org/data-catalog/wits.
                                                    ———. 2014a. Global Monitoring Report, 2014:
World Bank. 2000. World Development Report
                                                     Ending Poverty and Sharing Prosperity.
 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty. Washington, DC:
                                                     Washington DC: World Bank.
 World Bank.
                                                    ———. 2014b. World Development Indicators.
———. 2007. World Development Report 2008:
                                                     Washington, DC: World Bank.
 Agriculture for Development. Washington, DC:
                                                     http://data.worldbank.org/products/wdi.
 World Bank.




                                                                                         A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   45
W W W. W O R L D B A N K . O R G / A F R I C A S P U L S E
