                                                   91215

                           Japan World Bank Partnership Program
                                   for Universal Health Coverage




Universal Health Coverage for Inclusive and
        Sustainable Development

  Country Summary Report for Ethiopia


           Huihui Wang and G.N.V. Ramana



    Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice
               World Bank Group Report
                     August 2014
                                      Acronyms
AMDD     Averting Maternal Death and Disability, Columbia University
CBHI     Community-based health insurance
CNHDE    Center for National Health Development in Ethiopia
CSA      Central Statistical Agency
EDHS     Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey
ECSHE    Essential Services for Health in Ethiopia
FMOH     Federal Ministry of Health
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GNI      Gross National Income
GTP      Growth and Transformation Program
HEP      Health Extension Program
HEW      Health Extension Worker
HRH      Human Resources for Health
HSDP     Health System Development Project
MDG      Millennium Development Goals
MDGPF    MDG performance fund
MEFF     Medium Term Federal Government Finance Forecast
MOFED    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
NGO      Non-governmental organization
ODI      Overseas Development Institute
OOP      Out of pocket health spending
PBS      Protection/Promotion of Basic Services
PPP      Purchasing power parity
SSA      Sub-Saharan Africa
SHI      Social Health Insurance
THE      Total Health Expenditure
UHC      Universal Health Coverage
UNICEF
UNFPA    United Nations Population Fund



                                           i
                                            Preface
In 2011, Japan celebrated the 50th anniversary of achieving universal health coverage (UHC). To
mark the occasion, the government of Japan and the World Bank conceived the idea of
undertaking a multicountry study to respond to this growing demand by sharing rich and varied
country experiences from countries at different stages of adopting and implementing strategies
for UHC, including Japan itself. This led to the formation of a joint Japan World Bank research
team under The Japan World Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage. The
Program was set up as a two-year multicountry study to help fill the gap in knowledge about the
policy decisions and implementation processes that countries undertake when they adopt the
UHC goals. The Program was funded through the generous support of the Government of Japan.
This Country Summary Report on Ethiopia is one of the 11 country studies on UHC that was
commissioned under the Japan World Bank Partnership Program. The other participating
countries are Bangladesh, Brazil, France, Ghana, Indonesia, Japan, Peru, Thailand, Turkey, and
Vietnam.
                                                                                             :
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/uhc-japan.
These reports are intended to provide an overview of the country experiences and some key
lessons that may be shared with other countries aspiring to adopt, achieve, and sustain UHC.
The goals of UHC are to ensure that all people can access quality health services, to safeguard all
people from public health risks, and to protect all people from impoverishment due to illness,
whether from out-of-pocket payments or loss of income when a household member falls sick.
Although the path to UHC is specific to each country, it is hoped that countries can benefit from
the experiences of others in learning about different approaches and avoiding potential risks.




                                                ii
                                   Acknowledgments
This study was supported through the PHRD Grant (Japan) as a joint Partnership Program
between the government of Japan and the World Bank. The Program was steered by the
Program Coordination Committee, co-chaired by Keizo Takemi, Member of the House of
Councilors of the National Diet of Japan, and Timothy Grant Evans, Director of Health, Nutrition
and Population Network of the World Bank.
The Program was led by a team comprising Akiko Maeda, Lead Health Specialist and Task Team
Leader for the World Bank, and co-Team Leaders, Professor Naoki Ikegami, Department of
Health Policy and Management, Keio University School of Medicine and Professor Michael Reich,
Taro Takemi Professor of International Health Policy, Harvard School of Public Health.
This Country Summary Report was prepared by a World Bank team comprising Huihui Wang,
Senior Health Economist, and GNV Ramana, Lead Health Specialist, World Bank Group.
The report was edited by Jonathan Aspin.


Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this work are entirely
those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank Group, its
Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.




                                               iii
                         Country Summary Report for Ethiopia

                                              Overview
A low-income country, Ethiopia has made impressive progress in improving health outcomes.
The Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation reported that Ethiopia has achieved
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 4, three years ahead of target, with under-5 mortality at 68
per 1,000 live births in 2012. Significant challenges remain, however, with the maternal
mortality ratio at 420 out of 100,000 live births1.
The government has introduced a three-tier public health care delivery system to deliver
essential health services and ensure referral linkages, with level three as specialized hospitals
(one per 3.5 million 5 million population), level two as general hospitals (one per 1 million 1.5
million), level one as primary hospitals (one per 60,000 100,000) with satellite health centers
(one per 15,000 25,000) and health posts (one per 3,000 5,000).
One initiative contributing greatly toward universal health coverage (UHC) is the Health
Extension Program (HEP) that provides free primary care services at health posts and
communities. The country is at its early stage initiating insurance schemes to provide financial
protection for its citizens: Social Health Insurance (SHI) for formal sector employees and
Community-Based Health Insurance (CBHI) for rural residents and informal sector employees.
Public facilities are expected to provide exempted services for free, and there is a fee-waiver
system for the poor.


Table 1. Data overview
    Population                                       84.7 million (2011)
    Gross domestic product (GDP)                     $31.71 billion (2011)
    Gross national income per capita, Atlas          $370 (2011)
    method (current $)
    Total health expenditure (THE) as % of GDP       4.65% (2011)
    THE per capita (in current exchange rate         $16.6 (2011)
    dollars)
    Out-of-pocket spending as % of THE               33.8% (2011)
    Public expenditure on health as % of THE         57.7% (2011)
    Life expectancy at birth                         59.2 (2011)
    Hospital beds per 1,000 population               6.3 (2011)
Source: * World Development Indicators, The World Bank, 2013.




1
 Trends in maternal mortality 1990-2013, Estimates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, The World Bank and the
United Nations Population Division, 2014. ISBN 978 92 4 150722 6
                                                 1
          PART I.        Universal coverage—status and sequencing

A.     Overview of current status

1.     Legal and statutory basis
The National Health Policy gives strong emphasis to fulfilling the needs of the less privileged
rural population, which constitutes about 83 percent of Ethiopia s total population. The Health

into actions (FMOH 2010). It covers the period from 1997/98 to 2014/15 through consecutive
multiyear plans. In the current HSDP IV (2010/11-2014/15), the mission of health sector is stated

Ethiopian people through providing and regulating a comprehensive package of promotive,
preventive, curative and rehabilitative health services via a decentralised and democratised



                                                             -income country soon after the MDG

to attain its objectives of reaching every section of the population with effective health
                                         review meeting of HSDP are key stakeholders of the
health sector including representatives from the FMOH, regional health bureaus, woreda
(district) health bureaus, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), academia, and development
partners.
Ethiopia has one of the most ambitious decentralization programs in Africa. It has a federal
system of governance where powers and mandates are devolved first to regional states, and
then to woreda authorities and kebele (village) authorities. The decentralized levels receive block
grants from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MOFED) based on mutually
agreed resource allocation criteria.
The FMOH formulates national health policy. Its responsibilities include expanding health
services; establishing and operating national referral hospitals and national-level study and
research centers; determining standards and operational protocols; regulating health services
and professional education in public health; and preventing, controlling, and eradicating
communicable diseases. It sets policies, strategies, and guidelines for improving services for
underserved populations, and the regions adapt these guidelines to their needs. The FMOH also
supports regions to develop their health systems by mobilizing additional resources to improve
service delivery and by establishing appropriate platforms for mutual accountability, information
flow, and efficient use of resources.
The nine regional health bureaus and two city administrations are responsible for plans and
programs in their areas to deliver health services based on the national health policy and health
service delivery capacities within the region (including all types of hospitals). They are also
responsible for licensing of health facilities, and ensuring adequate supply of safe and affordable
medicines and supplies. The woreda health offices, which fall under the administrative control of
woreda councils, manage and coordinate the primary health care units (health centers and health
posts) and are responsible for planning, financing, and monitoring the health progress and


                                                2
service delivery within the woredas. The regional health bureaus provide technical support to
woreda health offices (FMOH 2010).
A proclamation to provide SHI was approved by Parliament in 2010 (No. 690/2010). It indicates
that the objective of the SHI program is to provide quality and sustainable UHC through pooling
risks and reducing financial barriers at the point of service delivery.



2.       What is the current status of coverage along the key dimensions of UHC?

         a. Population
The Health Extension Program (HEP), a leading vehicle developed by the government for
achieving UHC at primary care level, makes basic services available at health posts (village level)
and communities for the entire population. Two female health extension workers (HEWs) are
trained and deployed to each post serving a kebele with a population of 3,000 5,000 (FMOH
2012a).
The government aims to provide financial protection through a combination of two health
insurance programs: SHI among formal sector employees and their family members (around 11
percent of the population); and CBHI among informal sector employees and rural residents

84 million citizens through these two programs by 2015. The FMOH is at the preparation stage
of launching the SHI. The CBHI has been piloted in 13 woredas in four regions, covering more
than 1.6 million people, and is scaling up to 161 woredas.
The government introduced fee-waiver and exemption systems for services at health centers
and hospitals for the poorest of the poor. Eligible beneficiaries are identified by communities and
given a certificate to access free health care. In the Amhara region, where the new fee-waiver
system is fully implemented, an increasing number of poor households have experienced better
access to health services. In 2011, 1,319,114 indigents were selected through community
participation and benefited from free health care services (Purvis et al. 2011). In other regions,
full implementation is yet to start.

         b. Services

                                                                                   . Interventions
include:
        Hygiene and environmental sanitation: Proper and safe excreta disposal system;
         proper and safe solid and liquid waste management; water supply safety measures; food
         hygiene and safety measures; healthy home environment; arthropods and rodent control;
         and personal hygiene.
        Disease prevention and control: HIV/AIDS prevention and control; TB prevention and
         control; malaria prevention and control; and first aid.
        Family health services: Maternal and child health; family planning; immunization;
         adolescent reproductive health; and nutrition.
        Health education and communication: Cross cutting.


                                                3
SHI and CBHI have a defined package of services and a set of excluded services. Under SHI,
essential health service packages and other critical curative services are covered, including
outpatient care, inpatient care, and delivery services in health centers/clinics and hospitals,
surgical services, and prescribed generic drugs and diagnostic tests. A negative list is also
prescribed in the proclamation. The benefit package of CBHI pilot programs includes outpatient
and inpatient services at the health center and hospital level, but tooth implantation, and eye
glasses for ophthalmic cases, are excluded. Although both programs have a defined
comprehensive service package, it remains questionable whether people can access services
effectively given existing supply-side constraints. According to the 2011 welfare monitoring
survey, 64.7 percent of households are within less than 5 kilometers of the nearest health post,
40.1 percent are within 5 kilometers of a health center, and 14.2 percent are within 5 kilometers
of a hospital (CSA 2012b).
Exempted services include family planning, deliveries, pre- and postnatal care, tuberculosis,
leprosy, childhood vaccination, voluntary counseling and testing of HIV, antiretroviral treatment,
and prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV. This list applies to the entire country,
and all public health facilities are expected to post lists of exempted services in the waiting area.

       c. Financial protection
HEWs provide services for free and there is no copayment requirement for CBHI enrollees under
the pilots. Through the fee-waiver and exemption system, a selected list of services at the health
center and hospital are exempted to protect the poorest against user fees.
It is expected that the incidence of unofficial, extra, and balance billing will be minimal for HEP
services and CBHI benefit services, given that communities are well informed about the
characteristics of free services provided by HEWs and zero copayment requirements under
CBHI. However, there is no data available in this regard.
Exempted services are mostly financed through external sources. There are reported
divergences between policy and practice in implementing fee-waiver and exemption systems.
One major reason for the divergence is that service providers need to charge fees to recover
costs of providing the exempted services. For example, due to the lack of financial support in
providing delivery service to women, 17 percent of health centers and 77 percent of hospitals
charged mothers for normal deliveries (FMOH, UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO and AMDD 2010). There is
a continuous and ongoing dialogue to review the financing and list of exempted services.



3.     How is governance structured?

       a. Goal setting
                                       the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) aims
to achieve the MDGs (MOFED 2010). HSDP IV, a key component of the GTP, provides the

commitment to achieving the health MDGs, which is central to all efforts for UHC. For example,
expanding the HEW initiative to urban and pastoral communities and improving quality in the
rural areas is one of the strategic directions envisioned by HSDP IV.
HSDP IV is implemented through the annual budgeting process. This involves both bottom-up
and top-down planning exercises. For the bottom-up planning and budgeting, each woreda
                                           4
health office engages partners and prepares evidence-based plans and consolidated budget
requests with targets aligned to national goals based on indicative budgets. The top-down
process follows the decentralized fiscal arrangement and involves the MOFED preparing the
Medium Term Federal Government Finance Forecast (MEFF)2 which is approved by Parliament
with general- and specific-purpose grants to regional states in accordance with the national
equity formula. The regional states subsequently establish the general purpose grants for
woredas, and woreda councils in turn provide sectoral ceilings. The general- and specific-purpose
grants include external loans and on-budget external grants. There are other external resources
flowing from the federal MOH to the regions and woredas, mostly in the form of in-kind
assistance and support for capacity building.

        b. Financing
The health sector is financed through three sources: government budget (including on-budget
donor support), off-budget donor assistance, and private out-of-pocket expenditures (Figure 1).
Public expenditure is allocated through two harmonized financing arrangements: the MDG
performance fund (MDGPF) channeled through the FMOH; and the block grants provided by
MOFED to regional states. The block grants mainly cover recurrent costs, especially salary and
operational costs at health facilities, including salaries for health extension workers; the MDGPF
supports procurement of equipment and commodities for facilities, construction of health
facilities, capacity building of health extension workers, and establishment of CBHI.




2
 The MEFF is a three-year rolling budgeting tool. The principles are similar to the MTEF. However, the
MEFF provides sectoral projection for federal ministries only. It does not provide aggregated sectoral
projections. Sectoral allocations will only be known at woreda level. The intergovernmental transfer from
federal to regions, and from regions to woredas, is in block grants.
                                                    5
       c. Service delivery
A three-tier health care delivery system has been introduced (Figure 2) to deliver essential health
services and ensure referral linkages. A primary care unit is composed of a primary hospital,
health center, and health post. The secondary level comprises general hospitals. A general
hospital provides inpatient and ambulatory services and serves as a referral center for primary
hospitals. The tertiary care level comprises specialized hospitals and serves as a referral from a
general hospital.




The public sector remains an important source for health care and the major recipient of health
sector resources. According to the latest National Health Accounts (2010/2011) report released
in April 2014, private providers (for-profit and nonprofit) received only 16 percent of total
national expenditure on health. In addition, private providers are concentrated in urban areas,
where less than 20 percent of the population lives.
HSDP IV envisaged that public private partnerships will be enhanced through collaborative
endeavors on selected health sector priority programs and health system issues. Areas identified
for such collaboration include: expansion of health infrastructure, local production of
pharmaceuticals, provision of health services, training of health professionals and mobilization of
resources for the health sector, and partnerships with professional associations on improving
quality of health services and reducing professional malpractice.
The Private Health Sector Program supported by USAID has collected considerable information
on initiatives that include: workplace prevention and treatment services for HIV/AIDS in 84
companies where 46,000 workers were trained; more than 6,000 staff received HIV counseling
and testing while more than 2,000 received treatment for TB; and 90 sites were offering Public-
Private Mix Directly Observed Treatment, Short Course (PPM DOTS). In addition, professional

                                                6
associations are engaged in clinical capacity building, such as provision of essential surgical skills
to health officers.
Service providers are financed through a combination of sources: block grants transferred from
general government revenue, in-kind transfer from the FMOH (mostly donor financing), user fees
collected from service users, and fee-recovery from woredas for providing waivered services to
the poor. User fees are usually carried from history, therefore tend to be outdated and vary
between facilities because of which, revision of user fees has been piloted in some regions.
The share of capital expenditure grew from 21 percent in 2005/06 to 64 percent of total
government expenditure in 2010/11. This shift reflects expanded construction of health facilities
and related capital investment for rural populations.

B.     Current status of health financing

1.     How sustainable is current coverage?

       a. Fiscal space
There has been strong political commitment to achieve MDGs and promising economic
growth in the country; GDP grew by 11 percent on average annually during 2004/05 2009/10
(World Bank 2012). Spending on health (from all sources) as a share of GDP remained
relatively flat at between 4 and 5 percent in 1999 2008. Per capita expenditure increased
from US$5.6 to US$20.8 during a 10-year period from 1999/00 to 2010/11. However, there
has been a shift in mix of the total health expenditures (Figure 4). The fifth-round National
Health Accounts for 2010/11 indicated that only 16 percent of total health expenditure was
directly from government budget. The proportion of external assistance has increased
significantly from 37 in 2004/2005 to 50 percent in 2010/2011, Out-of-pocket financing is
another significant source of health financing, accounting for 33.7 percent of total health
expenditure as of 2010/11 (FMOH and Abt Associates 2010).
Figure 4. Per capita total health expenditures, 1995/96-2010/11




The health sector is facing severe resource constraints, which also apply to UHC initiatives.
HSDP IV used the marginal budgeting for bottlenecks tool to estimate resource needs for
achieving MDGs. The base-case scenario envisages using existing infrastructure and human

                                                  7
resources to provide universal access to health centers with a backup of primary hospitals
providing emergency surgical and obstetric care. The best-case scenario envisages providing
effective clinical care at all levels of the health system. It is estimated that the total budget
required will be $8.8 billion and $10.8 billion respectively for the base- and best-case scenarios.
This requires the current base of $883 million public health expenditure to increase annually by
9 percent for base-case and 13.5 percent for best-case scenarios over 2010/11 to 2014/15
(FMOH 2010).
The planned SHI will collect contributions from both employees and employers (3 percent of
salary respectively as planned), and it is unclear how this may affect overall health financing and
its sustainability, particularly the contribution from government. Analytical work is being
planned to study the fiscal and equity implications of this new development.

       b. Cost management and value for money
Although health resources are low $21 per capita in 2010/11 Ethiopia has achieved impressive
results. An Overseas Development Institute study (ODI 2010) noted that Ethiopia is making the
third-fastest improvements of any country toward reaching the MDGs. The latest Ethiopia
Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS) data show that child mortality fell from 123 per 1,000 in
2005 to 88 in 2010. Ethiopia also reports solid reductions in both stunting among children and
anemia among women. Contraceptive use nearly doubled over this period, contributing to a
reduction in the total fertility rate (Table 2).


      Table 2. Progress in key health indicators
      Health outcome/output                   EDHS         EDHS 2011       Change
                                              2005
      Under-five mortality rate               123          88              Down 28%
      Infant mortality rate                   77           59              Down 23%
      Severe stunting in children under       24           20              Down 17%
      five
      Prevalence of anemia among              27           17              Down 37%
      women
      Total fertility rate                    5.4          4.8             Down 11%
      Contraceptive prevalence rate           15           27.3            Up 83%
Source: CSA and ICF International 2006 and 2012.


The health sector is more efficient than that in other low-income Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA)
countries, and able to deliver better health outcomes at a given level of resources. Taking
Ethiopia as the origin point, the share of total health expenditure in GDP and expected life
expectancy for all SSA countries is plotted in Figure 5. Countries in the second quadrant are
more efficient than Ethiopia given they have lower shares of total health expenditures in GDP,
but higher life expectancy at birth. Countries in the fourth quadrant are less efficient than
Ethiopia because they have higher shares of total health expenditures in GDP, but a lower life
expectancy at birth. Most low-income SSA countries are in the fourth quadrant, reflecting lower
                                               8
efficiency. It is mainly middle- and high-income SSA countries that appear to be more efficient
than Ethiopia: Ghana, Mauritius, Namibia, Sudan, Senegal, and São Tomé and Príncipe.


Figure 5. Percentage of total health expenditures in GDP (X axis) vs. life expectancy at birth (Y
axis), all Sub-Saharan African countries relative to Ethiopia


                     30 _


                                                  Ethiopia
    Quadrant                                                     Quadrant I
                     20 _
    II



                     10 _




               |                   |         |          |         |         |
             -2.5                2.5        5.0        7.5      10.0      12.5

    Quadrant III                                                 Quadrant IV

                     -10 _




The public system of health sector mainly uses line-item budgeting that is inputs-focused. It is
easy from the perspective of financial administration, but not effective for getting value for
money since resources uses are not linked to service outputs or outcomes. With about half of
the external assistance off budget, there is room for potential efficiency gains through
harmonizing fragmented off-budget donor financing. In addition, even with the government
system, better planning and coordination may promote efficiency given recurrent cost and
capital cost are managed by regional governments and the FMOH separately.
The SHI under preparation and CBHI being piloted may increase value for money in that they
intend to increase risk pooling and reduce out-of-pocket spending, which has proved to be least
efficient and equitable mechanism for health financing. For both, however, the government
needs to carefully calibrate benefit package design, provider payment mechanisms, and cross-
subsidization within and between the two programs. The current CBHI pilots use fee-for-service
payment mechanisms to providers. The Ethiopia Health Insurance Agency, an entity responsible
for managing both the SHI and CBHI programs, is working with the health financing reform
working group and development partners to evaluate and distill lessons from these pilots, and
making evidence-based decisions on payment mechanisms.




                                                   9
2.        How equitable is coverage?
To examine whether coverage is equitable, we focus on whether the UHC initiatives have
supported pro-poor actions to narrow the gap between poor and non-poor people, as it is
often not surprising that better-off people have a higher coverage than poor people at a snap
shot.

Figure 6. Concentration curves for selected essential services, 2005-2011




Source:                                         EDHS2005 and EDHS2010/11.


In Figure 6, concentration curves are plotted for a number of essential health interventions3
based on group-level data4 in order to show whether the equity in coverage of these services
have improved over time. Concentration curves plot the cumulative percentage of the
variable of interests (y axis) against the cumulative percentage of the population (x axis),
ranked by wealth status, beginning with the poorest, and ending with the richest. The

3
 These interventions include antenatal care, skilled birth attendance, use of modern contraceptive,
immunization, fever treatment for under-
4 Mean for each wealth quintile in 2005 and 2011.
                                                   10
diagonal line shows the ideal situation where coverage of services is the same across all
groups. The distance between the diagonal line and a concentration curve shows the extent of
inequity; the smaller is the distance, the more equitable is the coverage of services. Results
show that although wealth inequity exists for all these services, there are noticeable
reduction in inequity for all of them except immunization and skilled birth attendance. It is
worth noting that the HEP implementation is indispensable for the improved equity in the
service coverage.

       a. Solidarity and redistribution
The regional block grants from MOFED to regional states, through which the HEP is financed, are
calculated based on an equity formula. The health sector will benefit from this policy when
woredas give enough emphasis to health when allocating block grants between sectors. Analysis
of woreda level recurrent expenditures shows that about 17 percent go on health.
CBHIs are piloted at woreda level, with populations ranging from 34,332 to 206,730 and
enrollment from 11.3 percent to 90 percent. Thus the actual risk pools vary by size, from 15,343
to 66,741 (FMOH 2012b). The premium contribution is fixed for each woreda at $7 10 per
household a year. There is no redistribution between households based on income level, but
because of the fixed contribution rates per household there is a net effect of smaller households
subsidizing larger households, although the total effect is small. An issue of concern is that the
per capita public subsidy for government employees covered under the SHI program will likely be
much higher than that for CBHI enrollees (Purvis et al. 2011). Given that SHI employees tend to
be the better off than CBHI enrollees, this may exacerbate inequities in government budget
allocations.

       b. Targeting for priority population groups
The last decade has seen a real effort to address supply-side constraints and expand primary
health care coverage that will mostly benefit the rural population. The HEP is one of the
strategies involved, with the construction of 15,668 health posts, as well as training and
deploying over 35,000 HEWs. During the life of HSDP III (2005/06 2009/10), there was
aggressive capital investment to expand coverage of health services in general and primary
health care in particular. The investment cost was estimated at $1.2 billion ($322 million for
construction and equipping 12,249 new health posts; $225 million for construction and
equipping 563 new health centers; and $672 million for upgrading and equipping 2,167 health
stations to health center level).
To tackle the shortage of mid-level health workers and availability of essential commodities and
supplies, the government has invested in expanding medical schools and enrolling large numbers
of students in the pre-service training program. The HSDP IV midterm independent review
reported that the number of medical schools increased from five to 10 during this period. To
bridge the health workforce gap at the primary health care level, Ethiopia has introduced a new
cadre of health workers health officers, trained to provide many basic public health and clinical
services. The Pharmaceutical Fund and Supply Agency was set up in 2007 to procure equipment
and commodities and deliver them to facilities. One study (FMOH 2011) reported major
improvements in stock-outs of essential commodities in primary health facilities. For example,
more than a quarter of health centers and health posts were found to be stocked out of BCG
vaccine on the day of visit.

                                               11
Targeted subsidies are allocated to cover CBHI contributions for indigents, accounting for about
10 percent of the population in each pilot woreda. The fee-waiver screening and identification of
eligible beneficiaries are conducted with community participation. The selected beneficiaries are
given a certificate to entitle them to free health care services. The experience is diverse across
regions and a recent review of the health sector reform recommended further improvement in

facilities are expected to post lists of exempted services in the waiting area.

C.         Human resources for health (HRH) policies

1.         Current status of HRH
Table 3: Number and status of health workers in Ethiopia
                             Entry                                             Exit
              Current        Qualifications Government        Number of        Number of years Number
              number per                    determines        entrants per     of education    of newly
              1,000                         the number        year b                           licensed
              population a                  of new                                             per year
                                            entrants
Physicians 0.03              Secondary        Yes             1,517            At least 6 years of
                             school                                            university,
                                                                               including one year
                                                                               of internship
Health        0.02           Secondary        Yes             1,415            4 years of clinical
officers                     school                                            training and
                                                                               internship
Nurses        0.26           Secondary        Yes             1,227            Professional/
                             school                                            specialized nurses:
                                                                               3 years at
                                                                               university
                                                                               Level IV nurses: 3
                                                                               years at college
Midwives      0.02           Secondary        Yes             333              Bachelor of
                             school                                            Science Midwives:
                                                                               3 years at
                                                                               university
                                                                               Diploma midwives:
                                                                               3 years at college
Health    0.39               Secondary        Yes             2 for 3,000      1 year
extension                    school                           5,000
                                                                         c
workers                                                       population
a. Source: FMOH 2010.
b. The annual intake of medical universities and colleges has been increasing over time. Data presented in
this table is for the most recent year with data available (2009/10). Source: Feysa et al. 2012.


                                                    12
c. Training for HEWs has been in conducted in campaign mode so far, and has not been part of the regular
training program.


There is substantial variation in health human resources stock between regions. For example, the
health worker density per 1,000 population is in a range of 0.01 0.33 for physicians, 0.003
0.06 for health officers, 0.07 1.18 for nurses, 0.01 0.08 for midwives, and 0.23 0.70 for
HEWs5. No data are available for distribution of health workers at primary care level or among
specialties.



2.       Labor market dynamics
There is no particular financial incentive available for health workers to work in rural areas.

reason in joining the HEP. Indeed, disincentives abound for working in rural areas. Studies show
that nurses and particularly doctors deployed to rural areas tend to rapidly transfer to an urban
posting not long into their career. The most important reasons for leaving the rural area were
dissatisfaction with salary (more among doctors) and location (more among nurses) (Feysa et al.
2012).
The government has developed a mechanism to intervene in the health labor market, and
deploys physicians who have graduated to public health worker posts by lottery. The objective is
to make rural assignment impartial and provide equality of opportunity.
Training institutions have been established in regions that require special attention to provide
mid-level and community-level training, including nursing, pharmacy technicians, laboratory
technicians, and HEWs. The government has also made efforts to offer opportunities for
postgraduate training, particularly for professionals (e.g., nurses) who served in remote health
facilities (such as those in Tigray). HEWs and health officers are required to have a rural
background and are trained in a rural context, which has helped subsequent rural deployment.
Documented factors that affect the productivity of health workers include inadequacies of both
pre-service and in-service training, lack of accountability arrangements, and adverse working
environments.6 An HEP evaluation conducted in 2010 indicated that challenges in providing
services include lack of means of transport and communication systems, irregular supply of
commodities, lack of promotion and refresher courses, and low remuneration (CNHDE 2012).



3.       Flexibility of HRH workforce

workforce, with relatively shorter training period and lower entry bars. They are recruited based
on nationally agreed criteria that include residence in the village, capacity to speak local
language, graduation from 10th grade, and willingness to remain in the village and serve
communities. Selection is done by a committee comprising members nominated by the local

5
  The three regions with the smallest populations are excluded: Gambella (332, 599), Dire Dawa (360,183), and Harari
(193,002).
6
  Adverse working environments covers a range of issues, including high workload, lack of equipment and supplies, and
physical condition of the work place.
                                                         13
community and representatives from the woreda (district) health office, the woreda capacity
building office, and the woreda education office.


All selected HEWs go through a year-long training, which includes both theoretical training in
training institutions and practical training in health centers. The theoretical training is provided
in technical vocational education centers under the Ministry of Education. Upon graduation,
HEWs are assigned to their home villages to provide HEP health services. The village council and
the health center support the HEWs. Training in providing community-based care, such as
treatment of sick children and the conduct of clean and safe deliveries, and some refresher
courses are also provided to some HEWs.



D.         Sequencing of reforms

1.         How and why were the relevant UHC reforms put into effect?
The HEP was launched in 2003/04 first in the four big agrarian regions,7 expanded to the
remaining regions in later years tailoring to the particular requirements of pastoral areas, and
more recently expanded to urban areas. The overall goal is to create a healthy society and reduce
maternal and child morbidity and mortality (FMOH 2007).
The HEP was initiated to improve access to primary health care in rural communities in the
shortest time possible. The key motivations for launching it included low coverage of high-
impact interventions, low access to health services particularly among the rural poor, shortage
of health workers, and weak institutional synergies to expand primary health care.
Health financing reform (covering the initiation of health insurance and the fee-waiver system)
was introduced to increase overall resources for the health sector; increase efficiency in the use
of available resources; promote sustainable health care financing; and improve the quality and
coverage of health services.



2.         Actors
The HEP was initiated and is led by the government, particularly the FMOH, MOFED, and Ministry
of Education. Experiences with earlier approaches using community health workers (such as
traditional birth attendants) informed its design. Experience was also shared with Kerala State,
India, for South-South learning. The government demonstrated its strong political will and
commitment for the program by covering the cost of its design, curriculum development and
training of HEWs. The government also covered the salary of HEWs by making them civil
servants with defined career paths. External support was sought and successfully mobilized for
capital investments such as in building health posts and procuring equipment, for purchasing
commodities and supplies, and for capacity building.
The Protection/Promotion of Basic Services (PBS) program started as an initiative supported by
the World Bank in 2005/06, and initially funded through the World Bank Project. The program

7
    Amhara; Oromia; Southern Nations, Nationality and Peoples; and Tigray.
                                                         14
has since grown to a multi-donor program with nine supporting partners in 2011/12. Since
2006/07, contributions from PBS ranged from 1.3 to 1.7 percent of GDP and 10 20 percent of
domestic revenue. PBS finances the recurrent costs of basic service provision in social sectors,
including salaries, which account for about 66 percent of PBS budget. The average growth rates
of basic service salaries and PBS funding is almost identical. This implies that PBS has played a
key role in supporting the incremental salary cost of basic service providers (e.g., HEWs) over the
past few years (World Bank 2013).
For health financing reform, prototype legal frameworks and operational manuals were
developed at the federal level, with continuous technical assistance from subsequent USAID
projects. These projects include the Essential Services for Health in Ethiopia (ESHE-I and ESHE-
II) from 2001 08, and the current Health Sector Financing Reform project. Other development
partners, including the World Bank and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, provide technical
assistance on health financing.




                             Part II. Lessons to be shared
Through the implementation of a series of HSDP plans since 1997/98, Ethiopia has made steady
progress in improving health outcomes and moving toward UHC. Results from Ethiopia DHS
2005 and 2011 indicate that under-5 mortality has decreased from 123 to 88 during the period
between two surveys. Total Fertility Rate has decreased from 5.4 to 4.8 during the same period,
which is associated with the significant expansion of contraceptive use, 14.7 percent to 27.3
percent. Moreover, these achievements have been inclusive, observed among all income groups
(Figure 7).


Figure 7. Under-5 mortality rate (left panel) and Total Fertility Rate (right panel), by income groups,
2005–2011




Data source: Ethiopia DHS 2005 and 2011.


The country is still facing many challenges in achieving MDG 5 (reducing maternal mortality),
expanding some essential interventions such as skilled birth attendance and improving quality of
services provided. The health insurance schemes and management institutions are at their

                                                  15
formative stages. A significant amount of consultations and capacity building exercises will be
needed along the course to refine the scheme designs and enhance implementation capacity.
Decision makers and practitioners in the country acknowledge these challenges and are taking
steps addressing them. For example, the theme of the 2013 annual review meeting was set as
                                         newed to end preventable maternal and child death in

service quality enhancement were highlighted. The high level officials responsible for health
insurance schemes are seeking knowledge and experience exchange with international experts
and peer countries. They are also planning a comprehensive capacity-building program that will
                     -term needs.
Despite the challenges Ethiopia is still facing, the bold steps taken in establishing HEP may offer
some lessons from which other countries could learn.



A. Health Extension Workers
The introduction of HEWs, the backbone for the HEP, has greatly improved availability of health
workers, particularly for rural areas, in a relatively short period of time (Figure 8). As a result of
the rapid large-scale deployment of HEWs, on average about 2,500 people are served by one
HEW. HEWs serve communities and households through an innovative approach by spending a
significant amount of time to visit communities besides staffing health posts. In addition to
providing service care, one of their important roles is to train households on healthy living styles
and care-seeking knowledge. As of 2011/12, more than 12 million households (about 70 percent
of the eligible population) graduated as model families that met certain defined criteria in
knowledge and behavior about environmental management, personal hygiene, and care-seeking
knowledge (Bilal et al. 2011).
Figure 8. Population to Health Human Resource Ratio in 2009–10, by Region and HEW Scenario

 12000
 10000
  8000
  6000
  4000
  2000
     0
                                                            Amhara
                     Afar


                            Gambella




                                                                             Tigray




                                                                                                   Addis Ababa
           Somalia




                                                                                                                 Harari
                                                   Oromia




                                                                     SNNPR




                                                                                      Dire Dawa
                                       Ben-Gumuz




                     Pastoral                               Agrarian                              Urban

                                 Population HRH ratio (HEWs not included)
                                 Population HRH ratio (HEWs included)




                                                                     16
HEWs made it possible to target those who mostly need improvement in their access to services.
In Ethiopia, evidence shows women who are poor and less educated tend to underutilize essential
services. For example, according to EDHS 2011, 57 percent did not receive antenatal care among
women who gave birth during the past five years. This indicator is 65.7 percent for women
without any education, 44.6 percent for women with primary education and 10.5 percent for
those with secondary education. However, for women with less education who receive antenatal
care, they are much more likely to receive care from HEWs than from doctors/nurses, which is
due to their easy access to such services (Figure 9). Consequently, equity between people with
different income levels is also improved as shown in previous section.


 Figure 9. Antenatal care received, by education levels




Besides providing services directly to communities, HEWs also take important roles in training
model families and mobilizing the Health Development Army (HDA). Both model families and the
                                                                            ces and promote
appropriate care-seeking behaviors. By 2010/211, more than 12 million households graduated as
model families, covering 70 percent of eligible households. As of 2012/2013, 364,070 HDA
groups were established.
The successful deployment of HEWs can be attributed to the following main factors:
             Deep community engagement: The HEP is a program deeply rooted in
              communities. Through this program primary level preventive services and
              basic clinical services are provided to communities and households. It
              encourages families to be responsible for their own health by promoting
              knowledge dissemination and adoption of hygiene practice, feeding practice,
              appropriate health seeking behavior from professionals, and proper
              environmental management. This community outreach ensures sense of
              ownership and sustainable changes in communities. Communities are deeply
              engaged in selecting candidates, which greatly contributed to making sure
                                            17
               HEWs stay in the community.


              Strong political commitment: The HEP is long-term commitment by the
               government of Ethiopia. From its inception in 2003/04, it has lived through
               changes of leadership in the Ministry of Health and in the country itself. Although
               the specific focus changed over time, it has al
               Related issues are regularly reviewed and discussed between FMOH and
               development partners through the Joint Consultative Forum (JCF) cochaired by
               the minister of health and chair of HNP development partner group. They are also
               reviewed by FMOH and regional health bureaus through bimonthly regional
               steering committee meetings chaired by the minister of health.


              Liaison with development partners: The implementation of HEP benefited from
               the financial support for local recurrent expenditures and broad community
               empowerment activities under the Promotion of Basic Services (PBS) supported
               by multiple development partners including the World Bank. PBS supports a
               variety of measures designed to improve service quality and local government
               capacity to manage basic services. These measures range from financial
               transparency and citizen education in budget issues, to grievance redress
               mechanisms and social accountability through structured feedback.



B. System-wide interventions centered on the HEP
Instead of standing out as a program that is exceptional to the health system, HEP has been
seamlessly integrated into the public health system and sector management. HEWs have formed
the base of the pyramid of the public health system, receiving guidance and supervision from
health centers, district hospitals, as well as health authorities at all levels from woreda to central
level. The Annual Review Meeting of the health sector, as an important process of assessing past

component. Each year, new targets are determined by region, and actual results are evaluated
against the target. Challenges are also identified for all levels of decision makers to follow up.
The implementation of the HEP cannot be successful without a series of national policies
creating an enabling socioeconomic and political environment. These include devolution policy,
civil service policy, vocational education policy, and health policy.
The power devolution to local government makes it easier for a community approach to be
adopted, as they share principles of local empowerment, participatory governance, demand-
responsiveness, administrative autonomy, greater downward accountability, and enhanced local
capacity. Ethiopia introduced decentralization as the strategic tool for empowering citizens and
devolving power to lower levels, so that a conducive environment could be established to
enhance basic service delivery. As a result, a four-tier governance structure was created with
the center, the regions, the zones, and the woredas. Within this decentralized context, HEWs
were mandated civil servants and included as an integral part of the health service delivery
system; their salaries are paid from block grants transferred from MOFED to regions and

                                                 18
woredas. Putting 38,000 people on the payroll is a substantial financial commitment,
particularly for a country with limited resources. The fact that this program has been financed
for ten years without major delays has been critical in allowing the program to contribute
steadily to UHC.
The HEP has benefited from an innovative collaboration with the Ministry of Education: The
Ministry of Health has undertaken the training for health extension workers through their
network of technical and vocational training institutions. They developed an occupational
standard and curriculum for each level of the health extension services. After the majority of
HEWs were deployed, since 2009, the Open University UK (OU), in partnership with UNICEF and
African Medical and Research Foundation, is supporting the development of an innovative
program of print-based blended learning resources to teach the theoretical component and to
train HEWs on practical skills in local health centers and district hospitals.
The introduction of HEWs greatly increases availability of health human resources for
underserved populations in a short period of time. In rural and remote areas where they are
introduced, there is severe shortage of physicians as well as lack of incentives for health
professionals to work. They have relatively lower entry bars, receive less training, and work in
rural communities. For the types and modalities of services that HEWs provide, people would
have chosen other health professionals if they could afford it. For the level of the training, it is
also difficult for HEWs to work in other health professional categories, such as nurses, midwives,
and physicians. It is worth noting that HEWs were not introduced as a short-term solution,
rather with a vision for them to be an integral part of the health system. This is the cornerstone
of the HEP that is being institutionalized.
There are discussions in setting policies on developing career paths for HEWs. The government is
in the process of upgrading health extension workers from level III to level IV. The core objectives
of the upgrading program are to improve the extent and quality of HEP services, to fill gaps
identified in previous level III HEP trainings, to improve the knowledge, skill, and attitude of
HEWs, to make a significant contribution in achieving the health-related MDGs, and to upgrade
careers of HEWs.


 Figure 10. Number of HEWs vs number of health posts
 constructed




Source: Annual Performance Reports (2004/2005-2009/2010), FMOH, Ethiopia.
                                                19
Equipping HEWs with hardware is indispensable for the implementation of the HEP. With MOFED
covering salaries of HEWs, the Ministry of Health focused on capital investment so that all
critical inputs could be in the same place and at the same time for service delivery. Training and
deployment of HEWs were well coordinated with infrastructure and functionality improvement
of health posts. The FMOH also uses resources from the MDG Performance Fund (harmonized
support from partners) to provide in-kind transfers, ensuring availability of drugs, commodities,
supplies, and capacity-building activities. Figure 10 shows that the deployment of HEWs and
construction of health posts are progressing in parallel, and achieved the target of two HEWs per
health post in 2009/10.




                                               20
                                           References
Bilal, N., C. Herbst, F. Zhao, A. Soucat, and C.
                                                                   Yes Africa Can: Success
        Stories from a Dynamic Continent, ed. Punam Chuhan-Pole and Manka Angwafo.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                                  a.
CSA (Central Statistical Agency). 2012a. 2011 National Statistics (Abstract). Addis Ababa.


                                                                                             th


                                     c and Health Survey 2011
        Maryland.
Berhanu, F., C. Herbst, W. Lemma, and A.
      Addressing the

        Ababa.


                                                          V (HSDP-IV) 2010/11
        Ababa.




      . 2005/06 Annual Performance Report
      . 2006/07 Annual Performance Report
      . 2007/08 Annual Performance Report
      . 2008/09 Annual Performance Report
      . 2009/10 Annual Performance Report
      . 2010/11 Annual Performance Report
      . 2011/12 Annual Performance Report
      . 2012/13 Annual Performance Report



FM                                                 th National Health Accounts, 2010/2011
        Ababa.
                                                     21
                                                     ransformation
          Plan (2010/11



Purvis, G., A. Alebachew, and W. Feleke.

UN Inter-

                        iopia Economic Update
          World Bank, Addis Ababa.
      .
          Washington, DC.




                                                22
