                          91217

         Japan–World Bank Partnership
  Program for Universal Health Coverage




Universal Health Coverage for Inclusive and
         Sustainable Development

  Country Summary Report for Indonesia



Puti Marzoeki, Ajay Tandon, Xiaolu Bi, and Eko Setyo Pambudi




      Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice
                     World Bank Group
                        August 2014
                                       Acronyms
Askes       Social health insurance for civil servants
Bappenas    Ministry of National Development Planning
BPJS        Social Security Administration (Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan Sosial)
DALY        Disability Adjusted Life Years
DHO         District Health Office
DRG         Diagnostic Related Group
GDP         Gross Domestic Product
GNI         Gross National Income
GOI         Government of Indonesia
HRH         Human Resources for Health
Jamkesmas   Government administered health program for the poor (Jaminan Kesehatan
            Masyarakat)
Jampersal   Maternal health universal coverage program
Jamsostek   Social health insurance for formal sector workers
JKN         National Health Insurance Program, 2012–2019 (Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional)
MDG         Millennium Development Goals
MOH         Ministry of Health
NGO         Non-governmental organization
OOP         Out of pocket health spending
PBI         Health insurance subsidies paid by the government for the poor and near-poor
PPP         Purchasing power parity
PTT         Pegawai Tidak Tetap
Susenas     National Socioeconomic Survey
THE         Total Health Expenditure
UHC         Universal Health Coverage
WHO         World Health Organization




                                              i
                                           Preface
In 2011, Japan celebrated the 50th anniversary of achieving universal health coverage (UHC).
To mark the occasion, the government of Japan and the World Bank conceived the idea of
undertaking a multicountry study to respond to this growing demand by sharing rich and varied
country experiences from countries at different stages of adopting and implementing strategies
for UHC, including Japan itself. This led to the formation of a joint Japan–World Bank research
team under The Japan–World Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage. The
Program was set up as a two-year multicountry study to help fill the gap in knowledge about the
policy decisions and implementation processes that countries undertake when they adopt the
UHC goals. The Program was funded through the generous support of the Government of
Japan.
This Country Summary Report on Indonesia is one of the 11 country studies on UHC that was
commissioned under the Japan–World Bank Partnership Program. The other participating
countries are Bangladesh, Brazil, Ethiopia, France, Ghana, Japan, Peru, Thailand, Turkey, and
Vietnam. A synthesis of these country reports is in the publication “Universal Health Coverage
for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: A Synthesis of 11 Country Case Studies,? available
at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/uhc-japan.
These reports are intended to provide an overview of the country experiences and some key
lessons that may be shared with other countries aspiring to adopt, achieve, and sustain UHC.
The goals of UHC are to ensure that all people can access quality health services, to safeguard
all people from public health risks, and to protect all people from impoverishment due to illness,
whether from out-of-pocket payments or loss of income when a household member falls sick.
Although the path to UHC is specific to each country, it is hoped that countries can benefit from
the experiences of others in learning about different approaches and avoiding potential risks.




                                                ii
                                   Acknowledgments

This study was supported through the PHRD Grant (Japan) as a joint Partnership Program
between the government of Japan and the World Bank. The Program was steered by the
Program Coordination Committee, co-chaired by Keizo Takemi, Member of the House of
Councilors of the National Diet of Japan, and Timothy Grant Evans, Director of Health, Nutrition
and Population Network of the World Bank.
The Program was led by a team comprising Akiko Maeda, Lead Health Specialist and Task
Team Leader for the World Bank, and co-Team Leaders, Professor Naoki Ikegami, Department
of Health Policy and Management, Keio University School of Medicine and Professor Michael
Reich, Taro Takemi Professor of International Health Policy, Harvard School of Public Health.
This Country Summary Report was prepared by a World Bank team comprising Puti Marzoeki,
Senior Health Specialist; Ajay Tandon, Senior Health Economist, Xiaolu Bi, Junior Professional
Associate, and Eko Setyo Pambudi, Research Analyst. The report was prepared in consultation
with the Ministry of Health, Indonesia, especially the Vice Minister of Health, Professor Ali
Ghufron Mukti and the Chairman of the Human Resources for Health Board, Dr. Untung
Suseno.
The report incorporates information from a background study on Human Resources for Health
conducted by the Center for Health Services Management, Gadjah Mada University under the
leadership of Dr. Andreasta Meliala; and a Jampersal (maternal health universal coverage)
study conducted by the Center for Family Welfare, University of Indonesia. Dana de Ruiter and
Ian Anderson prepared the early drafts. The authors would also like to acknowledge the
guidance and comments received from Darren Dorkin and Pandu Harimurti, World Bank Group.
The report was edited by Jonathan Aspin.


Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this work are entirely
those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank Group, its
Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.




                                               iii
                     Country Summary Report for Indonesia

                                           Overview
Indonesia, a low-middle income country of around 242 million people, has made impressive
gains in health over the past few decades, notably in increased life expectancy and reduced
infant and child mortality rates. There has been less progress in improving maternal mortality
and malnutrition. Inequities among geographic areas and income levels are large, presenting a
major challenge to the health care system. Demographic and epidemiological transitions have
affected the disease burden: disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) due to cerebrovascular
disease, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and lung cancer have increased by 80 percent or
more during 1990–2010. The central government has committed to achieving universal health
coverage (UHC) by 2019 as projected in the Road Map of the Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional
(JKN), or National Health Insurance Program, 2012–2019.

Table 1. Data overview
                    Indicators                            Figure   Year      Source
 Population (millions)                                   242        2011   CBS
 Life expectancy at birth (years)                        69         2011   WDI
 GDP per capita (PPP$)                                   4,573      2012   IMF-WEO
 Total health expenditure per capita (PPP $)             126        2011   WHO
 Total health expenditure per capita ($)                 95         2011   WHO
 Government % of total health expenditure                38         2011   NHA
 Out-of-pocket (OOP) % of total health expenditure       47         2011   NHA
 # physicians per 1,000 population                       0.46       2013   MOH
 # nurses per 1,000 population                           1.2        2013   MOH
 # hospital beds per 1,000 population                    1.1        2013   RS Online,
                                                                           MOH
 Sources: CBS: Indonesia Central Bureau of Statistics; Ministry of Health (MOH), Indonesia;
 RS Online (web-based hospital information managed by the MOH).




         PART I.         Universal Coverage—Status and Sequencing

A.     Overview of current status

1.     Legal and statutory basis
The 2004 National Social Security Law (Law No. 40/2004) envisages coverage of the entire
population through JKN, a mandatory program evolving from existing insurance programs. Until
the end of 2013, Indonesia was supported by three major social health insurance programs:
Jamkesmas (Jaminan Kesehatan Masyarakat/the government-financed health coverage
program for the poor and near-poor); Jamsostek Health (the social health insurance program for
formal sector workers); and Askes (the social health insurance program for civil servants). The
2011 BPJS (Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan Sosial/Social Security Administration) Law (Law
24/2011) declared the transformation of PT Askes into Health BPJS.


                                                     1
The Health BPJS began implementation of the JKN officially on January 1, 2014 with 121.6
million participants, 96.4 million of whom are participants (poor and near poor) whose premium
is paid by the government (PBI), and the remainder are ex-participants of Askes and Jamsostek
Health.

2.       Current status of coverage along the key dimensions of UHC

         a. Population
All Indonesians are entitled to health services, including through enrollment in one of the major
health insurance programs. The share of households covered by insurance was around
40 percent in 2010. The largest program, Jamkesmas, targets 76.4 million poor and near-poor,
or around one-third of Indonesia’s population, while Askes and Jamsostek covered around
6 percent and 2.4 percent, respectively.


     Figure 1. Estimated coverage and leakage rates, Jamkesmas, 2011




Analysis of the National Socioeconomic Survey (Susenas) 2011 finds Jamkesmas coverage is
only around 33 percent from target and the leakage to non-eligible beneficiaries is around
53 percent (Figure 1).1 Jamsostek only covers around 15 percent of formal workers, as a result
of firm size limitation (only firms with 10 or more employees have to participate) and opt-out
provisions for firms providing private voluntary health insurance. Indonesia faces a problem

1
  This is measured using the household consumption sections in Susenas. Consumption is adjusted for household
size and district differences in the cost of living, and households are classified into deciles of per capita consumption.
For the purposes of this analysis, the lowest three deciles of individuals in the survey are considered equivalent to the
“poor and near-poor,? that is, the population targeted by Jamkesmas.


                                                            2
 common to many other countries in covering its informal workers—more than 60 million of them.
 The 2012–2019 road map of JKN acknowledged the difficulty of collecting contribution from this
 sector, and indicated the possibility of government subsidies.

           b. Services
 Jamkesmas has a benefit package that is more generous and inclusive than the other social
 insurance programs. It includes, for example, cancer treatment, cardiac surgery, hemodyalisis,
 and congenital diseases, all of which Jamsostek excludes. Table 2 provides a snapshot of the
 benefits available under the three main programs. Jamkesmas’ target population can, in
 principle, use primary care services at all primary health centers (puskesmas) as well as
 inpatient services (in third-class beds) at secondary and tertiary public hospitals and selected
 private hospitals.
 Yet challenges remain. Availability of services to deliver the Jamkesmas benefits package is
 limited, especially in remote and rural areas. OOP payments, even among those with coverage,
 are high.


 Table 2. Comparing the three main social insurance programs
                   Jamkesmas2                Askes (established 1960)             Jamsostek (established
                   (established                                                   1992)
                   2005)
Groups             Poor and the near-        Civil servants; retired civil        Private employers with >10
mandated           poor                      servants; retired military           employees or pay salary >Rp
                                             personnel and veterans               1 million a month
Number             76.4 million              16.6 million                         5.0 million
enrolled
Premium3           Rp 6,500 ($ 0.67)         2% of basic + 1%                     3% of salary for bachelors;
                   per capita per            government; No ceiling
                                                                                  6% of salary for married
                   month                                                          employees; Ceiling Rp 1
                                                                                  million per month (not changed
                                                                                  since 1993)
Contributor        Government 100%           Employees 66%; employer              Employers 100%
                                             34%
Carrier            Ministry of Health        PT Askes (for profit)                PT Jamsostek (for profit)



 2
   Health insurance for the poor was introduced as Askeskin in 2005 which was expanded and renamed as
 Jamkesmas in 2007
 3
   Under JKN, the contribution for PBI (poor and near poor paid by the government) is Rp 19,225 per person/per
 month; and for ex-Askes participants is 5 percent of salary (3 percent from employer and 2 percent from employee).
 For other formal sector workers, the contribution is 4.5 percent of salary (4 percent from employer and 0.5 percent
 from employee) until June 30, 2015, after which the contribution will be 5 percent of salary (4 percent from employer
 and 1 percent from employee). For the informal sector, the contribution varied according to the choice of service;
 Rp 25,500 (class 3), Rp 42,500 (class II), and Rp 59,500 (class 1)


                                                           3
                     Jamkesmas2                Askes (established 1960)           Jamsostek (established
                     (established                                                 1992)
                     2005)
Benefits             Comprehensive;            Comprehensive, no                  Comprehensive; cancer
                     Drugs are covered         specific exclusion; Drugs          treatment, cardiac surgery,
                     if prescribed within      are covered if prescribed          hemodialysis, and congenital
                     formulary; No cost-       within formulary;                  diseases are excluded;4 drugs
                     sharing                                                      are covered if prescribed
                                               Cost-sharing available
                                                                                  within formulary;
                                               when services fall outside
                                               basic benefit package              no cost-sharing
Dependents           All family members        Spouse + 2 children under          Spouse + 3 children under 21
                                               21 years who are not               years who are not working and
                                               working and not married            not married
Providers            All puskesmas and         Mostly contracted public           Mixed: public and private
                     public hospitals          health centers and public          providers
                     and selected              hospitals
                     empanelled private
                     hospitals
Provider             Fee for service at        Special fee schedules for          Fees are negotiated; extra
payment              puskesmas; DRG            civil servants; extra billing      billing depending on
mechanisms           for hospitals             depending on negotiated            negotiated fees
                                               fees



            c. Financial protection
 In 2011, public spending accounted for around 38 percent of total health spending, and almost
 half public spending was at district level, where district governments are responsible for service
 delivery and therefore account for the greatest share of government health spending. Public
 health spending tends to be inequitably distributed across provinces and income quintiles. OOP
 spending, even among those with insurance coverage, remains high at around 47 percent of
 total health spending. Much of the OOP spending is borne by the rich, as the top three deciles
 accounted for more than 50 percent of all OOP—the bottom three deciles less than
 15 percent. However, although OOP health spending per capita among Jamkesmas
 beneficiaries was lower than that among Askes, Jamsostek, or those without insurance, OOP
 health spending as a share of total household consumption in Jamkesmas households was no
 different from those without insurance. There is some evidence that the incidence of
 catastrophic expenditure is lower among Jamkesmas users than among other groups
 (Bredenkamp et al. 2011). Indonesia has a relatively low level of catastrophic spending for the
 region. There is no copayment, coinsurance, extra billing, or balance billing allowed under
 Jamkesmas, which is different from the benefits afforded to Askes or Jamsostek beneficiaries
 (see Table 2).



 4
     Starting in 2012, Jamsostek expanded the benefit package to cover catastrophic cases as well.


                                                            4
3.      Governance structure

        a. Goal setting
The objectives of Jamkesmas are to increase access to and quality of health services for the
poor and near-poor. The program is fully financed out of central government revenues and is
administered by the MOH. Every year, the MOH releases a ministerial regulation to guide
program implementation. It also reviews utilization and claims reports, although the review only
focuses on analyzing information related to budgetary allocations and aggregate utilization
rates, and does not explicitly monitor or target health or financial protection outcomes among
beneficiaries. Information on utilization rates has been used to increase premiums and improve
provider payment mechanisms, but not to improve health care delivery mechanisms or ensure
improvement in health outcomes.

        b. Governance structure
Five main actors are involved in the overall implementation of Jamkesmas: the National Task
Force for Acceleration of Poverty Alleviation (TNP2K); national government ministries, including
the Ministry of Finance, MOH, and the Ministry of National Development Planning (Bappenas);
provincial and district governments; public and enlisted private health care providers; and the
insurer/third-party administrator (Table 3). One additional actor (not in the table) is the Vice
President’s Office, which has the mandate to improve implementation of various social
assistance programs, including Jamkesmas.

Table 3. Roles and responsibilities under Jamkesmas
                               TNP2K MOF/MOH/       Provincial/ Public and   Insurer/third-
                                     Bappenas       district    empanelled   party admin-
                                                    governments private      istrator
                                                                providers
Oversight scheme                 X       X
Financing of scheme                      X
Benefits package                         X
determination
Accreditation/empanelment of             X               X
providers
Enrollment                               X               X                         X
Financial management/                    X
planning
Actuarial analysis               X
Setting reimbursement rates              X
Claims processing/ payment               X               X
Outreach/social marketing                                X
Service delivery                                                      X
Clinical information system              X




                                                5
                                  TNP2K MOF/MOH/       Provincial/ Public and     Insurer/third-
                                        Bappenas       district    empanelled     party admin-
                                                       governments private        istrator
                                                                   providers
Monitoring local utilization                   X            X
Monitoring national utilization                X
Customer service                               X            X            X
Source: Modified from JLN 2012.


           c. Service delivery
Indonesia’s system is characterized by a mix of public–private provision of services, with the
public sector taking the dominant role, especially in rural areas and for secondary levels of care.
However, private provision is increasing. Health service utilization rates are generally low
nationally. About 14 percent of the population used outpatient care in the month before the
2010 Susenas survey. Around 60 percent of outpatient visits occurred at private facilities
(typically clinics/midwives and nurses) and the rest at public facilities, mostly at primary care
level. Susenas data also show that the better-off used private facilities for ambulatory services:
69.5 percent compared to 51.6 percent among the bottom three deciles. Public facilities
continue to dominate inpatient care, except for the top three deciles, a larger proportion of which
use private facilities for inpatient care.
Basic primary health care is provided by the public sector via the puskesmas, each serving a
catchment area at the subdistrict level of about 25,000–30,000 individuals. Indonesia has over
9,500 puskesmas, and each is required to have at least one medical doctor on staff. About a
third of all puskesmas also provide inpatient services. Primary care is also provided by private
doctors, including by 70 percent of doctors working at puskesmas who practice privately after
hours. In principle, puskesmas are meant to provide referrals to secondary and tertiary public
hospitals, although in practice the gate-keeping and referral functions of puskesmas are not
strong. There are no penalties for self-referring to higher facility levels: patients can go directly
to secondary/tertiary hospitals and obtain services without puskesmas referrals (or simply obtain
a referral letter from the puskesmas without first seeking care at the puskesmas).
Indonesia has around 2,200 hospitals, of which around 62 percent are private.5 There are an
estimated 270,000 hospital beds, implying about 1.1 beds per 1,000 population, much lower
than the global benchmark of 3. About 45 percent of beds are at private hospitals. The
ownership of tertiary hospitals is mainly public. The nation has about 376 tertiary hospitals,
some of which are centers of excellence (about 300 of the 376 total tertiary hospitals are public).
Jamkesmas cardholders can, in principle, use primary care services at all puskesmas and
inpatient services (for third-class beds) at secondary and tertiary public hospitals and
empanelled private hospitals.
One of the key supply challenges in Indonesia is the provision of health services in rural and
remote areas in a dispersed archipelago of over 17,000 islands. The government is upgrading
puskesmas with inpatient facilities, especially in secondary towns and rural locations. The
government has allocated funds to expand inpatient facilities specifically for maternal
emergency-ready facilities. The MOH contracts doctors and midwives under the Pegawai Tidak
5
    MOH Rumah Sakit (hospital) Online, 2013.


                                                   6
Tetap (PTT) policy for distribution throughout the country. The program offers shorter contracts
and higher remuneration for rural and remote postings.

B.                                                  Current status of health financing

1.                                                  Sustainability of current coverage

                                                    a. Fiscal space
Has fiscal space been adequate to achieve UHC or at least enable an expansion of the
breadth and depth of coverage over time?


    Figure 2. National-level public expenditure on health in Indonesia, 1995-
    2011

                                                    National-level public expenditure on health in Indonesia, 1995-2011
                                                   70




                                                                                                                                        8




                                                                                                                                                   Share of aggregate govt expenditure
                                                                                                                                        7
                                                   60
     share of GDP/aggregate govt expenditure (%)




                                                                                                                                        6
                                                   50




                                                                   Public expenditure on health




                                                                                                                                        5




                                                         Public expenditure on health
                                                   40




                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                  Social health insurance expenditure
                                                   30




                                                                                                                                        3
                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                        Share of GDP
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                   10




                                                                                                                                        1
                                                    0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                                        1995    1998                                2001     2004     2007      2010        1995   1998    2001     2004     2007        2010
                                                                                                           Year                                                   Year

Source:    WHO (various years)
         WHO
   Source:



Indonesia’s National Health Accounts data estimates indicate that national-level government
expenditure on health was almost Rp 70 trillion in 2011, about 1 percent of GDP and over
5 percent of aggregate government expenditure.6 Government health expenditure has more
than tripled in nominal terms since 2005. A large part of the increase in government health
expenditure is due to the rise in social health insurance expenditures following the introduction
of Askeskin in 2005 (expanded and renamed Jamkesmas in 2007) (Figure 2 left panel). There
has generally been an upward trend in health’s share of aggregate government expenditure and
an increase in government health spending’s share of GDP over 1995–2011 (Figure 2 right
panel).
About half of all government health expenditures are made at district level, about 15 percent at
provincial level and about 35 percent at central level. Jamkesmas is entirely financed by the
central government: with allocations currently determined based on a “premium? rate of

6
    National-level government expenditure on health includes central, provincial, and district health expenditures.


                                                                                                                                                    7
Rp 6,500 per person per month (about $8 per person per year) the program accounts for about
a quarter of the central government’s health budget. Jamkesmas pr emiums and expenditures
do not reflect the full cost of provision of care, from both a unit cost as well as from an
aggregate utilization perspective (inpatient utilization rates remain relatively low for Jamkesmas
members). An estimated two-thirds of the cost of care for Jamkesmas continues to be
subsidized by supply-side government health spending on salaries and infrastructure. Actuarial
studies estimate the true cost to be at least three to four times higher than current premium
rates, even with existing levels of supply-side constraints (Guerard et al. 2011).
Are the revenues and expenditures balanced? What mechanisms are in place to ensure
fiscal sustainability?
In 2006–11, allocations and expenditures were largely in balance, with incremental adjustments
made to the estimated premium over the years (Table 4). The 2006 budget for Jamkesmas was
based on a cost per person per month of Rp 5,000, derived from preliminary actuarial
estimates and the experience of the civil servant insurance scheme, Askes. In the following
years, allocation adjustments were made based on expenditures of previous years.

Table 4. Jamkesmas target membership, premiums, allocations, and expenditures, 2005–
12
 Year                 2005      2006      2007        2008    2009      2010      2011      2012
 Target               60        60        76.4        76.4    76.4      76.4      76.4      76.4
 membership
 (million)
 Premium per          5,000     5,000     5,000       5,000   6,250     6,500     6,500     6,500
 member per
 month (Rp)
 Total allocations    2.3       3.6       3.5         4.6     4.6       5.3       6.3       7.2
 (Rp trillion)
 Total                1.3       3.5       3.4         4.2     4.5       4.6       6.3       7.1
 expenditures (Rp
 trillion)a
 Expenditures per     1,806     4,861     3,709       4,581   4,908     5,017     6,872     7,744
 member per
 month
a. The Askes and P2JK reports data may not capture all Jamkesmas spending, as additional funding
could be mobilized from other sources during mid-year budget revision, and some Jamkesmas supporting
activities could be funded by units outside of P2JK.

Source: 2005–07: Askes annual reports 2005, 2006, and 2007; 2008–10: P2JK report 2010; 2011–12:
P2JK reports 2011, 2012.


Fiscal sustainability is a key concern for Jamkesmas. Supply-side constraints and subsidies with
demand-side financing give the impression that financing of Jamkesmas is sufficient. However,
if the utilization rates were higher and supply-side constraints removed, actual costs would likely
be much higher. There are no expenditure caps or other mechanisms to ensure fiscal


                                                  8
                   sustainability. Jamkesmas premiums have been adjusted over time to account for rising
                   expenditures. In 2007, the use of services by Jamkesmas beneficiaries increased significantly,
                   especially inpatient services, while the program was budgeted historically based on the use of
                   funds from the previous year.7 This caused a budget shortage, and the MOH had to reallocate
                   the budget to pay hospital claims, which led to delays in paying hospital reimbursements. This
                   received wide media attention and led to some changes (including the transfer of administration
                   from PT Askes to the MOH) and some additional cost-containment measures such as the
                   introduction of a drug formulary and diagnostic-related group (DRG) payments.


                   What factors have enabled sufficient fiscal space to expand coverage and ensure fiscal
                   sustainability?
                   Jamkesmas is financed out of central government revenues. The expansion of this government-
                   financed health insurance program since 2005 occurred over a period of generally good
                   macroeconomic conditions (see Figure 3).


                       Figure 3. Central government expenditures in Indonesia, 1995-2011

                                                           Central government expenditure
                                                                Indonesia, 1995-2011
              800000




                                           Total
              100000
billions Rp



                   10000




                                                  Health




                                                                                                  Jamkesmas
                       1000




                               1995                        2000                   2005                        2010
                                                                        Year
                              Source: MOF & MOH




                   The overall economic and fiscal prospectives for Indonesia are positive (see Figure 4).
                   Government expenditures have been fairly stable at around 20 percent of GDP, gross debt

                   7
                     The spike in inpatient service utilization was mainly due to program maturation (more became aware of the
                   program’s benefit) and the absence of cost-containment measures (drug formulary, member verification, and so
                   forth).


                                                                           9
                     levels have declined sharply, government deficit levels have been in the manageable 1 –
                     2 percent of GDP range, and inflation and unemployment have been stable and low. Economic
                     growth has been robust, averaging almost 6 percent over 2005–11 in real terms.


                     Figure 4. Key fiscal/economic indicators for Indonesia, 1995-2017

                                                        Key fiscal/economic indicators for Indonesia
                                                         Actual:1995-2011; Projected:2012-2017
                        100




                                                                                                  60
                              90




                                                                                                  50
                                                Gross general government debt                                           Inflation rate
                              80
                              70




                                                                                                  40
                              60
Percent of GDP (%)




                                                                                                  30
                              50




                                                                                Percent (%)




                                                                                                                   Unemployment rate
                              40




                                                                                                  20

                                                                       Expenditures
                              30




                                                                                                  10
                              20
                              10




                                                                                                      0




                                                                         Revenues
                                  0




                                                                                                -10




                                                                                                                        Economic growth rate
                        -20 -10




                                                    General government balance
                                                                                                -20




                                      1993 1997 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017                                  1993 1997 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017
                                                       Year                                                                Year

                       Source:
                     Source:   WB & IMF
                             World   Bank and IMF (various years)

                      Figure 5. Share of central government budget in Indonesia, 1995-2010
                                                       Health, education, and fuel subsidies, 1995-2011
                             30




                                              Fuel subsidies
                             25
                             20
                             15




                                                                 Education
                             10




                                                                                                                  Health
                                   5
                                   0




                                       1995                            2000                                2005                          2010
                                                                                              Year
                                        Source: GOI




                                                                                                            10
Analysis of central government allocation data suggests that the rise in central government
health spending over 2005–11 occurred largely as a result of rising GDP and was not due to an
increase in either overall government spending’s share of GDP or in health’s share of central
government expenditures. Comparing 2011 with 2005, the central government expenditure’s
share of GDP decreased by 2.3 percentage points, and health’s share of central government
expenditure remained the same.


What factors have posed challenges to achieving adequate fiscal space to expand
coverage and ensuring fiscal sustainability?
One of the challenges is the lack of priority given to health. Indonesia is a comparatively low
spender on health, which to some extent is due to the perception of health as a non-productive
sector by the Ministry of Finance. The share of health expenditure is low compared with that in
other sectors. In 2011, health accounted for 1.6 percent of the central government budget,
much lower than fuel subsidies (18.2 percent) and education (10.8 percent). (The fuel
subsidies benefited mainly the top rather than the bottom income quintile.) The heavy burden
placed by fuel subsidies is a key constraint on government health spending.

       b. Cost management and value for money
Jamkesmas has an estimated premium rate of Rp 6,500 per person per month (about $8 per
person per year), totaling about a quarter of the annual central government health budget.
Actuarial studies estimate the true cost being at least three to four times the estimated premium
rate, even with existing levels of supply-side constraints (Guerard et al. 2011). The magnitude of
these numbers is consistent with the current estimated public and private expenditure on
curative and rehabilitative care of about $40 per capita per year, about five times the
Jamkesmas premium (Soewondo et al. 2011).
Supply-side constraints conceal the real costs of the Jamkesmas program and act as an implicit
cost-management strategy. Although Jamkesmas offers a comprehensive benefits package of
services, in practice, utilization and the associated claims reimbursements do not reflect actual
costs due to the limited supply of services. If utilization rates were higher, the program’s costs
would likely be much higher. Furthermore, puskesmas and public hospitals continue to receive
government subsidies for salaries, capital and some operational costs, which are also not
included in the overall cost of Jamkesmas and therefore skew the apparent cost of the program.
The subsidies are estimated at two-thirds of the average cost of care under Jamkesmas.
The MOH reimburses hospitals for Jamkesmas coverage based on DRGs. The system is called
INA-CBG, generated from Askes utilization data. Reimbursement rates are the same for public
and private hospitals in the network, although rates vary by the degree of specialization of the
hospital. There is no information whether DRGs have helped contain costs and improve
efficiency. Payments to puskesmas were initially based on capitation, but since 2011,
puskesmas have been reimbursed based on fee for service. District health offices (DHOs)
receive funds from the central government via the MOH based on a capitation payment of
Rp 1,000 per poor and near-poor person per month and subject to the availability of funding at
the time. DHOs are reimbursed for puskesmas utilization based on fee for service from these
funds. Any surplus or deficit of Jamkesmas-related financing at the DHO-puskesmas level is
adjusted by transfers to or from the local government treasury.
Of total program costs, about 75 percent are for reimbursement of hospital-based care, 20
percent for puskesmas-based care, and the rest for administrative costs. In 2011, it was

                                               11
estimated that 50 percent of Jamkesmas funds at puskesmas level was undisbursed, primarily
due to the absence of puskesmas autonomy in using Jamkesmas funds.

2.     How equitable is coverage?

       a. Solidarity and redistribution
Jamkesmas is entirely financed through central government revenues but provides benefits only
for the poor/near-poor.

       b. Targeting for priority population groups
The central government has prioritized better targeting of the poor and near-poor to improve the
effectiveness of all social assistance programs. In 2011, a new list of the poor and near-poor
was collected, and is being used as the basis for a unified registry for all social assistance
programs from 2012. As a result for Jamkesmas, the poor and the near-poor are now being
targeted on the basis of household per capita consumption, using a combination of geographic
and proxy means-testing methods. A challenge with Jamkesmas is that while it uses the new
list, actual targeting depends on local decisions, while identification and enrollment are done
differently in different places (World Bank 2012). This likely also contributes to leakage
problems. Continued efforts to improve overall social assistance targeting will help improve
Jamkesmas targeting, particularly if the lists stay current and are well managed.

C.     Human resources for health (HRH) policies

1.     Current status of HRH
 HRH category Per       Entry                                            Exit
              1,000
                        Qualifications   Government policy     Number of Number of years of Production
               (2013)                    on # of entrants      entrants  education          per year
                                                               per year
 Physicians    0.46     High school      Accreditation         No data   3.5 yr undergrad +      Around
                                         standards include               2 yr professional       10,000
                                         lecturer to student             training
                                         ratio to control
                                         admission
 Nurses        1.2      High school      Accreditation         No data   Vocational nurse: 3 Total around
                                         standards include               yr training.        33,700
                                         lecturer to student
                                                                         Registered nurse: 4
                                         ratio to control
                                                                         yr undergrad + 1 yr
                                         admission
                                                                         professional training

 Midwives      0.56     High school      Accreditation         No data   Vocational midwife: Total around
                                         standards include               3 yr training       21,200
                                         lecturer to student
                                         ratio to control
                                         admission




                                                  12
 HRH category Per        Entry                                           Exit
              1,000
                         Qualifications   Government policy   Number of Number of years of Production
                (2013)                    on # of entrants    entrants  education          per year
                                                              per year
 Community      No data Minimum           Recommend 5         No data    No standard          N/A
 health workers         elementary        cadres per Posyandu
                        school
Source: MOH.
Note: Posyandu—integrated health services post run once a month by the community, providing maternal
and child health services including growth monitoring, immunization, antenatal care, vitamin A, and
counseling.



2.     Labor market dynamics
The key feature of labor market dynamics is that supply of health workers has been rapidly
increasing, but still not enough to meet demand. The government plans to achieve 1 physician
per 1,000 nationally by 2019, the year when Indonesia is supposed to reach UHC. If production
remains at the current level of around 10,000 doctors per year the MOH will be able to meet the
2014 target of 0.5 physician per 1,000. But to meet the 2019 target, Indonesia will need 130,000
doctors between 2014 and 2019. The MOH estimates that an additional 118,788 health workers
were needed at hospitals in 2012. The largest shortfall was nurses: 87,874 additional nurses, or
74 percent of the total shortfall, were needed at hospital level. The second-largest cohort gap to
be filled at hospitals was midwives. There is some evidence that the dramatic increase in
provision in the private sector has relieved some access pressures in the public sector.

3.     Flexibility of the HRH workforce
The public–private dual practice system in Indonesia provides flexibility and constraints on the
HRH workforce. On the one hand, there is a good deal of flexibility because dual practice
deliberately allows medical staff to practice in the public and private sectors. Health workers are
allowed—even encouraged—to work simultaneously in the public sector as well as private
practice of their choice. On the other, the need to generate private sector income and maintain
clinical skills pushes health workers to urban settings and hospitals, reducing the overall
flexibility of the health workforce in terms of geographic distribution.

D.     Sequencing of reforms
The pressure and impetus for health policy reform in Indonesia arose in part from the Asian
financial crisis in the late 1990s, which resulted in higher costs of living and declines in real per
capita income. The government worked to help the poor in coping with some of the impacts of
the crisis, among other things by using a portion of oil-subsidy savings to subsidize health care
for the poor. This created pressure for the government to establish a more sustainable solution
for equitable care.
The political process to reforming the system began in 2001, when the government established
a team to review and reform the social security system. This was followed by issuance of a
presidential decree to establish a task force to design a National Social Security System that



                                                 13
was later embodied in the 2004 National Social Security System Law, a landmark legislative
commitment that called specifically for the attainment of UHC.
From creation of the task force to passage of the law was a rocky road. Various groups
expressed opposition to the proposed new system centered largely on the following issues:
        The mandatory nature of the proposed system: employment associations, business
         chambers, and even several government officials believed this to be in violation of
         human rights;
        The integration of social security systems: resistance from two existing insurance
         carriers slowed the submission of the law, until a compromise was reached that a
         council would be established to harmonize the diverse systems;
        Too much government control: some bilateral aid organizations as well as the private
         sector agreed with the mandatory nature of the law but opposed the administration of the
         system, in which the government had a monopolistic role;
        Shared contribution: private sector employees strongly opposed the proposal to share
         contributions between employers and employees;
        Levels of contribution: employers feared the law would cause them financial problems by
         increasing their contributions.
Despite such opposition, the law prevailed and the National Social Security Law (Law
No. 40/2004) was signed by the president in 2004. Although most stakeholders considered the
law a positive development, some local governments challenged the law in the Constitutional
Court, decrying the monopolistic nature and claiming it went against the decentralization
legislation. Six months later, the Court decided the law was in line with the Constitution.
The year 2005 saw the birth of Askeskin (now Jamkesmas) providing free health care for the
poor. The program was appropriately couched as part of the new law. Askeskin was declared
an insurance program for the poor, initially administered by PT Askes, the carrier of the civil
servants’ insurance program. In 2007, a significant increase in beneficiaries led to a budget
shortfall resulting in delayed payment of hospital claims. In 2008, the government decided to
assign overall management of Jamkesmas to the MOH, while PT Askes continued to manage
membership of the program, including issuance of membership cards.
All in all, despite the intense political debate and the early growing pains of the program,
Jamkesmas is largely seen as an important part of Indonesia’s efforts to improve health care for
the poor.




                        PART II. Lessons for Other Countries

A.       Current policy priorities, challenges, and opportunities

1.       Current policy priorities
The central policy priority is to achieve UHC under a single-payer umbrella covering all citizens
by 2014 and achieve full UHC coverage by 2019. Health insurance coverage has increased
sharply, from 15 percent in 1995 to 40 percent in 2011, particularly targeted at the poor. A key
priority is to further expand coverage in ways that deliver good health outcomes and financial
protection to the rest of the population—many of whom are in the informal sector—in a manner


                                                14
that is financially sustainable for the government. Other priorities as part of the national scale-up
to UHC include the need to integrate the current health insurance program for the poor and
near-poor—Jamkesmas—with all other social insurance programs.

2.       Challenges
The overarching challenge is to achieve rapid scale-up of services, improved health outcomes,
and increased financial protection in ways that are effective, efficient, equitable, and sustainable
in a country as large and diverse as Indonesia. Like other middle-income countries, the country
is facing the challenge of rapidly rising incidence of often preventable, chronic, and expensive to
treat noncommunicable diseases while it still has an unfinished agenda of communicable
diseases, especially tuberculosis, and undernutrition. Like others, Indonesia also has many
development needs: increasing government expenditure on health therefore needs to achieve
value for money and be sustainable financially.
Expanding the number and availability of qualified health workers. Despite rapid increases
in the supply of health workers, there are still substantial staffing gaps. The number of doctors
has increased annually but has barely kept up with population growth: the ratio of doctors to
1,000 population has increased only marginally from 0.43 in 2010 to 0.46 in 2013. Greater
progress has been made with respect to increasing the relative targets for nurses and midwives.
The MOH estimates that an additional 118,788 health workers were needed at hospitals in
2012. There are also significant gaps in key health worker positions at the primary care
(puskesmas level). The shortage of nurses—despite large numbers of graduates—at hospitals
and puskesmas is particularly notable.
Improving the distribution of health workers. The government uses several programs to
increase the availability of medical staff in rural and remote areas. These programs include
higher financial incentives and shorter contract periods for rural and remote postings;
recruitment based on ethnicity and location; and internship programs. Distribution of health
workers to remote and rural areas has been improving. However, efforts need to be maintained:
at this stage 30 of 33 provinces in Indonesia still do not have the WHO-recommended ratio of
one doctor per 1,000 population. The location of hospitals—many of which are concentrated in
densely populated Jakarta, East, West, and Central Java—acts as a “pull? factor attracting
health workers especially specialist doctors—who need the medical infrastructure that hospitals
offer to practice their skills. For example, 100 percent of public hospitals in Jakarta had an
anesthesia specialist, but in four provinces of Indonesia less than 20 percent of public hospitals
did (Rifaskes8 2011). The geographic location of medical schools can also reinforce the urban
bias and maldistribution of health workers. Only a few schools had special programs for
recruiting students from rural or underserved areas.
Improving the regulatory environment, overall quality of health workers, and
responsiveness of the health system to changing needs. The government in collaboration
with the professional associations is reforming the accreditation system of health professional
schools and standardizing the certification process of graduates. In 2012, 30 percent of medical
schools, 60 percent of nursing schools, and 62 percent of midwifery schools are accredited. The
dual practice (public–private) system provides flexibility for health workers and a source of
income that government does not have to budget for. However, there is an ongoing need to
strengthen the regulatory system: many specialists in provincial capital cities spend more time in

8
 Rifaskes: Riset fasilitas kesehatan (Health Facility Research) conducted by the National Institute for Health
Research and Development, MOH.


                                                          15
private practice and less time in public hospitals than envisaged under the scheme. Medical
schools do provide some initial training on UHC to prepare graduating health workers, but more
intensive and nationally standardized training will be required in future as the country expands
UHC. There is also a need to continually adjust the standards of competencies and the
curriculum in response to the changes in disease burden.
Improving the financing of health systems. Government expenditure on health has been
expanding in absolute and relative terms. However current total, and public, health expenditures
are still low relative to comparable countries. Financing streams will need to be consolidated
and made more coherent to make UHC effective. Sources of income for doctors and other
health providers are fragmented: there were recently 10 separate sources of income for
specialist doctors. Importantly in the context of the movement toward UHC, income from
insurance organizations was always the smallest contribution to overall income, providing less
than 5 percent of total income.

3.       Opportunities
A key opportunity is that there is clear government leadership and commitment, and that many
of the key building blocks for UHC are already in place. Since the 1970s, the government has
constructed more than 9,500 health centers, 22,000 auxiliary health centers, and 800 public
hospitals. There is an opportunity to expand the supply of health care for UHC further by
harnessing the participation of the large number of private health providers. Most local
governments have responded positively to Jamkesmas by expanding coverage; three provinces
have already declared UHC.
The growing number of medical, nursing, midwifery and other health professional schools
provides an opportunity to increase HRH production to meet demands for health care with
universal coverage. The number of medical schools, for example, has increased from 40
schools in 2003 to 72 schools in 2013: an increase of 80 per cent during the last 10 years. Of
those 72 schools, about 60 per cent are private medical schools. As a result, private medical
schools have been providing more than 60 percent of the graduating physicians in the last
three years. The increase of the number of midwifery and nursing schools is even larger. By
investing in reform of the accreditation system of health professional education the government
has an opportunity to improve the quality of HRH entering the market. Indonesia’s internship
program requiring a 12-month supervised practice for graduating physicians opens an
opportunity to improve the quality of newly trained physicians while at the same time address
some of the maldistribution problem.

B.       Lessons to be shared
Indonesia’s experiences to date are numerous, but the following points highlight some of the
more recent lessons that may be pertinent for other countries at similar levels of development:

        The private sector can be a major contributor to the supply of health workers, but this
         requires good accreditation and quality control.
        Financial incentives are an important part of attracting health workers to remote areas,
         but other factors, including non-monetary incentives such as opportunities for
         professional development, are important.
        The wealth and fiscal capacity of a province that suggest potential capacity to pay for
         health worker incentive, is not a good predictor of availability of doctors and other health
         workers.

                                                 16
17
                                        References
Anderson, I., P. Marzoeki, A. Meliala, E. Pambudi, K. Hariadi, and T. Marthias. 2013. “The
      Production, Disbursement, and Performance of Physicians, Nurses, and Midwives in
      Indonesia: An Update.? Working Paper, Jakarta, World Bank.
Bi, X., P. Harimurti, J. Langenbrunner, E. Pambudi, and A. Tandon. 2013. “Fiscal Space for
        Universal Health Coverage in Indonesia, Lessons from Jamkesmas Financing.? Working
        Paper, Jakarta, World Bank.
Bredenkamp, C., A. Tandon, P. Harimurti, E. Pambudi, and C. Rokx. 2011. “Enhancing Health
      Equity and Financial Protection in Indonesia: How Well Does Jamkesmas Do?? Working
      Paper, Washington, DC, World Bank.
Guerard, Y., M. Wiener, C. Rokx, G. Schieber, P. Harimurti, E. Pambudi, and A. Tandon. 2011.
      “Actuarial Costing of Universal Health Insurance Coverage in Indonesia.? HNP
      Discussion Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
JLN (Joint Learning Network). 2012. “Roles and responsibilities for Universal Coverage in The
       Nuts & Bolts of Jamkesmas, Indonesia’s Government Financed Health Coverage
       Program.? http//www.jointlearningnetwork.org/content/Jamkesmas.
MOH. Riset Fasilitas Kesehatan (Rifaskes). 2011.
———. RS Online. 2013. http://202.70.136.52/rsonline.
Pandu, H., E. Pambudi, A. Pigazzini, and A. Tandon. 2013. The Nuts and Bolts of Jamkesmas:
      Indonesia’s Government Financed Health Coverage Program, Jakarta: World Bank.
Rokx, C., G. Schieber, P. Harimurti, A. Tandon, and A. Somanathan. 2009. Health Financing in
       Indonesia: A Reform Roadmap, Jakarta: World Bank.
Soewondo, P., M. Nadjib, K. Sari, Y. Afdhila, and N. Afdhila. 2011. “SHA-Based Health
     Accounts in the Asia-Pacific Region: Indonesia 2005-2009.? SHA Technical Paper No.
     15, OECD-Korea Policy Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Thabrany, H. 2008. “Politics of National Health Insurance of Indonesia: A New Era of Universal
      Coverage?, Center for Health Economic and Policy Studies, University of Indonesia,
      Jakarta.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2013. Global Health Expenditure Database.
     http://apps.who.int/nha/database/DataExplorerRegime.aspx.
World Bank. 2012. “Targeting Poor and Vulnerable Households in Indonesia.? World Bank,
       Jakarta
World Bank, Center for Family Welfare, Faculty of Public Health, University of Indonesia. 2013.
       “A Study on the Implementation of Jampersal Policy in Indonesia.? Working Paper,
       Jakarta, World Bank.




                                              18
