                                                91216

                                   Japan–World Bank Partnership
                            Program for Universal Health Coverage




Universal Health Coverage for Inclusive and
         Sustainable Development

   Country Summary Report for France

      Helene Barroy, Zeynep Or and Ankit Kumar



    Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice
                The World Bank Group
                     August 2014
                                    Acronyms
ALD     Chronic conditions (affections de longue durée)
CAPI    Pay-for-performance pilot mechanism for office-based General Practitioners
CNAM    National Sickness Fund (Caisse nationale d’assurance maladie)
CSG     General Social Contribution
CMU     Universal Medical Coverage
DRG     Diagnostic-related groups
IRDES   Institute for Research and Information on Health Economics
GDP     Gross Domestic Product
GNI     Gross National Income
GP      General Practitioner
HRH     Human Resources for Health
OECD    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
ONDAM   National Objective for Health Care Spending
OOP     Out of pocket health spending
PPP     Purchasing power parity
SHI     Social Health Insurance
T2A     Activity-based payment system
THE     Total Health Expenditure
UHC     Universal Health Coverage
UNCAM   National Union of Sickness Funds (Union nationale de caisses d’assurance
        maladie)
VHI     Voluntary Health Insurance




                                        i
                                           Preface

In 2011, Japan celebrated the 50th anniversary of achieving universal health coverage (UHC).
To mark the occasion, the government of Japan and the World Bank conceived the idea of
undertaking a multicountry study to respond to this growing demand by sharing rich and varied
country experiences from countries at different stages of adopting and implementing strategies
for UHC, including Japan itself. This led to the formation of a joint Japan–World Bank research
team under The Japan–World Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage. The
Program was set up as a two-year multicountry study to help fill the gap in knowledge about the
policy decisions and implementation processes that countries undertake when they adopt the
UHC goals. The Program was funded through the generous support of the Government of
Japan.
This Country Summary Report on France is one of the 11 country studies on UHC that was
commissioned under the Japan–World Bank Partnership Program. The other participating
countries are Bangladesh, Brazil, Ethiopia, Ghana, Indonesia, Japan, Peru, Thailand, Turkey,
and Vietnam. A synthesis of these country reports is in the publication “Universal Health
Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: A Synthesis of 11 Country Case Studies,?
available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/uhc-japan.
These reports are intended to provide an overview of the country experiences and some key
lessons that may be shared with other countries aspiring to adopt, achieve, and sustain UHC.
The goals of UHC are to ensure that all people can access quality health services, to safeguard
all people from public health risks, and to protect all people from impoverishment due to illness,
whether from out-of-pocket payments or loss of income when a household member falls sick.
Although the path to UHC is specific to each country, it is hoped that countries can benefit from
the experiences of others in learning about different approaches and avoiding potential risks.




                                                ii
                                   Acknowledgments
This study was supported through the PHRD Grant (Japan) as a joint Partnership Program
between the government of Japan and the World Bank. The Program was steered by the
Program Coordination Committee, co-chaired by Keizo Takemi, Member of the House of
Councilors of the National Diet of Japan, and Timothy Grant Evans, Director of Health, Nutrition
and Population Network of the World Bank.
The Program was led by a team comprising Akiko Maeda, Lead Health Specialist and Task
Team Leader for the World Bank, and co-Team Leaders, Professor Naoki Ikegami, Department
of Health Policy and Management, Keio University School of Medicine and Professor Michael
Reich, Taro Takemi Professor of International Health Policy, Harvard School of Public Health.
This Country Summary Report was prepared by Helene Barroy, Health Economist, World Bank
Group; Zeynep Or, Research Director, Institute for Research and Information in Health
Economics (IRDES); and Ankit Kumar, Health Economist, Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD).
The report was edited by Jonathan Aspin.


Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this work are entirely
those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank Group, its
Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.




                                               iii
                         Country Summary Report for France

                                           Overview
Situated in Western Europe, France is a high-income country with a gross national income
(GNI) above $40,000 per capita. While the overall picture of health status is good, France
contains apparent contradictions. Life expectancy is overall better than in many European
countries, but premature male deaths remain high due to accidents, smoking, and alcoholism.
Social and geographic inequalities in health are substantial, to the disadvantage of the northern
parts of metropolitan France and overseas departments and territories. The French system
largely relies on Bismarckian-based Statutory Health Insurance (SHI), established after the
Second World War. Universal coverage was fully achieved in 2000 when a new law (Universal
Medical Coverage Act, or CMU by its French acronym) expanded coverage to noncontributory
low-income groups. Financial sustainability of the model has been a recurrent concern over the
last three decades. Recent shifts in the funding model and the introduction of spending targets
and efficiency measures have injected some flexibility to the system.


Table 1. Data overview
        Population                                   65.4 million
        GDP                                          $2,214 billion
        GNI per capita in purchasing power           $41,018
        parity (PPP)
        Total health expenditure (THE) as % of       11.6
        GDP
        THE per capita (in US dollars PPP)           3,974
        Out of pocket spending as % of THE           7.5%
        Public expenditure ratio of THE              77%
        Life expectancy at birth (years)             81.5
        Hospital beds per 1,000 population           6.4
       Source: World Bank and OECD Health Data, 2012.




                                                 1
     PART I.       UNIVERSAL COVERAGE—STATUS AND SEQUENCING

A.     Overview of current status

1.     Legal and statutory basis
The French health insurance system was shaped over a century but a major boost to setting up
a nationwide compulsory program took place just after World War II. In 1945, a general
insurance program was adopted under the Social Security Act with the goal of providing uniform
rights for all in five areas: illness, maternity, disability, old age, and death. In practice, expansion
of health insurance coverage to various population groups followed an incremental process over
the following two decades. General statutory insurance was extended to farmers in 1961 and to
the self-employed in 1966, but access to health insurance remained problematic for very low
income groups and people with variable (nonsalaried) incomes until 2000 when the CMU came
into effect. The new law opened the right to health insurance for all legal residents who were not
previously covered.

2.      Population coverage
The SHI system consists of three main programs. A General Program (called the Régime
Général) covers workers in business, trade, and industry, and their dependents (84 percent of
the population) and civil servants. CMU beneficiaries are also managed by the General
Program. The Agricultural Program relates to farmers and agricultural employees and their
dependents (7 percent), while the program for the self-employed recently merged various
programs for independent professionals (5 percent).
In addition, 16 small programs cover specific professional categories, including miners, the
clergy, and employees of the National Railway Company and the Bank of France (the central
bank) (1 percent).
Illegal residents are also covered by a mechanism (Aide Medical d’Etat) which provides access
to basic health services through direct government funding.
Enrollment in insurance programs is compulsory and automatic for workers. Consumers do not
have the choice of program or insurer, and cannot opt out. Apart from the CMU, enrollment
follows employment category, which means that an agricultural worker automatically comes
under the Agricultural Program and is not allowed to switch to the General Program. There are
thus no competing health insurance markets in France.
Benefits and copayments are fixed across population groups, while levels of wage-based
contributions vary across programs.

3.     Service coverage
Population groups are covered through different programs, but the same comprehensive health
benefit package today applies to all programs across the country, including CMU beneficiary
groups. Each SHI member has legally equal access to equivalent services, whatever their
program.
SHI provides access to this comprehensive package, which offers a wide range of medical
services and goods compared with other countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD). The package is defined through explicit positive


                                                   2
lists/catalogues of covered services, drugs, and devices/equipment. Catalogues also list
excluded medical procedures (such as thermal spa treatment, chiropractic, and cosmetic
surgery). Drug catalogues are different for hospitals and ambulatory care. Volumes of care are
generally not specified for common products and care; volumes can, however, be capped for
expensive drugs, devices, or innovations (e.g. a maximum of four intra-uterine fertilizations).
Prevention services have been somehow neglected in the benefit package as the system has
focused on treating diseases from the outset. Recent preventive programs introduced for
immunization or cancer screening are now covered by insurance programs, though general
public health programs are still funded directly from the budget.

4.       Financial protection
The insured are encouraged to enroll in complementary insurance provided by mutuelles,
provident firms and private firms. A total of 94 percent of the population is now enrolled in
Voluntary Health Insurance (VHI) programs, which generally cover patients’ full copayment,
though disparities persist across contract provisions.
Reimbursement is a distinctive feature of the French cost-sharing system. The insured are
expected to pay first for ambulatory care and to claim reimbursement from insurance funds,
based on predefined rates. Exceptions have, however, become the rule as more and more
patient groups are eligible for a third-party payment system (tiers payant), which prevents them
from making the initial advance. Some population groups are completely exempt from
copayments, mainly patients with long-term chronic diseases (such as the program for chronic
conditions “ALD - affections de longue durée?), pregnant women/newborns, and CMU
beneficiaries.
SHI accounts for 75.5 percent of Basic Health Expenditures1 in 2011, complementary voluntary
insurance 13.7 percent and direct private spending 9.6 percent. SHI spending fell from
76.7 percent of Basic Health Expenditures in 2000 to 75.5 percent in 2011, when the share
covered by VHI increased from 12.4 percent to 13.7 percent.2
When SHI and VHI are combined, France offers some of the highest financial coverage of
health expenses among OECD countries. Net out-of-pocket spending (after SHI and VHI
reimbursement) stayed quite stable in the last decade (around 9.6–9.7 percent). However, out-
of-pocket spending more than doubled during 1980–2008 in PPP3 under the combined effect of
an increase in THE and a continuous reduction of the financial share of SHI owing to cost-
containment measures.

5.       Governance and regulation rules
Regulation of the health insurance system is divided mainly between the state (Parliament and
the government with several ministries) and the SHI funds. The National Sickness Fund (Caisse
nationale d'assurance maladie, or CNAM), operating under the General Program, is the
predominant (almost only) SHI payer.
In 2004, a series of reforms began to shift financial stewardship to health insurance funds by
giving them more control over benefit packages, tariffs, and levels of copayments. The reforms
also modified governance of the health insurance funds. A federation of sickness funds has

1
  Includes medical goods and services (biens et service medicaux courants).
2
  Source: Direction de la recherche, des études, de l'évaluation et des statistiques (DREES).
3
  Source: Eco-santé: from €217 to €547 per capita a year.


                                                          3
been created to bring together, nationally, the three major programs. This federation (Union
nationale des caisses d'assurance maladie, or UNCAM) is now the sole representative for
negotiating with the government and health care providers.



B.     Current status of health financing and human resources for health (HRH)
policies

1.         Financing
Until the end of the 1990s, SHI financing depended almost exclusively on payroll contributions
from employers (63 percent) and employees (32 percent).4 Since 1998, most of the employee
payroll contribution has been substituted by an earmarked tax. A General Social Contribution
(CSG) levied at 5.25 percent on earned income and income from capital and 3.95 percent on
benefits is now one of the main sources of SHI funding (37 percent). Taxes on tobacco,
alcohol, and the pharmaceutical industry add to the revenue base.

2.         Delivery mechanisms and payment system
The delivery system is shared among the private and public sectors. Primary care is almost
exclusively delivered through self-employed physicians paid on a fee-for-service basis. The
main tariff (“Sector 1?) is negotiated nationally between general practitioners (GPs), the Ministry
of Health, and sickness funds.5 Practitioners can opt for a “Sector 2 system?, which allows them
to top-up their fees but they lose some financial advantages.
Hospital care is split among public sector (two-thirds of hospital beds), private for-profit and not-
for-profit facilities. The hospital payment system has evolved over the last two decades from a
needs-based approach (global fixed budget) to a more performance-oriented and public–private
alignment model through the introduction of an activity-based payment system (T2A) in all
hospitals. (There has also been a move to greater autonomy— See Box 1.)


Box 1. A shift to greater autonomy for hospitals in France
French policymakers sought to help public hospitals make the transition from a state-run
approach to a new, more autonomous and performance-oriented approach. (The French reform
process, however, did not go as far as Japan in granting hospitals autonomous authority.)
Hospital oversight was transferred from the central to decentralized level—Regional Health
Agencies—but public hospitals remain in the public domain.
Hospital reforms in France have consisted of a change of payment systems—from a global
budget to a diagnosis-related group (DRG) system—and a new model for corporate
governance. The new payment system resulted in a systemwide boost of activity volume as well
as gains in productivity and efficiency. The introduction of DRG has also helped induce positive
changes related to governance and care organization. Following the introduction of DRG,
resource-pooling across medical units (e.g. nursing staff) and cross-subsidization (between
high- and lower-cost activities) led to service rationalization in hospitals.


4
    Source: Commission of Social Security Accounts (1990 figures).
5
    The current rate for a GP consultation is €23 ($29).


                                                          4
Governance reforms translated into a new deal between administrative and medical
management. Practical managerial measures were taken to better align teams with corporate
goals and have led to the merger of medical units in larger departments, which has improved
coherence and efficiency; the setting up of joint managing boards; contracting with medical
chiefs; and the introduction of performance-based bonuses for heads of medical departments.


To be eligible for coverage, medical services and goods should be provided or prescribed by
registered health care professionals. Beneficiaries can opt for the provider of their choice.
A “soft? gate-keeping system was set up in 2005, however, using a “preferred practitioner?
(médecin traitant) enrollment system, entitled to coordinate care pathways and referral to
specialists. Since then, patients receive financial disincentives for not opting for their declared
“preferred doctor? as a first entry point in the health care system.
Although included in the initial plans, the fee schedule at the moment varies among public
facilities (where it is higher) and private facilities.


3.     Fiscal sustainability
France spends the third highest among OECD countries on health as a share of its GDP, at
11.6 percent in 2011, behind the United States and the Netherlands. Recurrent deficits of the
SHI funds have been critical concerns for the last three decades (it was €14.5 billion in 2010).
Annual growth in health spending has, though, slowed in recent years (to below 3 percent since
2010) following the introduction of macro-budgetary targets and efficiency programs at micro
level.
The country has managed to diversify sources of revenue for health, and the revenue basket
now consists of wages, the CSG, and other earmarked taxes, injecting more flexibility into the
funding model. The government is considering options to expand the SHI’s revenue base, as
well as for adjusting the activity-based payment system for hospitals (“bundled payments? is one
option).

4.     Cost containment and efficiency
Since the end of the 1990s, every year Parliament has adopted a National Objective for
Healthcare Spending (ONDAM). There are separate expenditure targets for the hospital sector
(distinguishing public hospitals and private clinics), for the ambulatory sector (doctors’ fees,
prescriptions, sickness benefits, etc.), and social/long-term care (for the elderly or disabled).
These targets are not compulsory. Therefore, with the exception of the first year, actual
expenditure always exceeded the target until 2010. However, the introduction of targets has led
France to set up a comprehensive system for monitoring health expenditure, including an “Alert?
mechanism for overspending.
In the second half of the 2000s, policy measures also focused on enhancing provider
performance and efficiency. On the hospital side, a major shift occurred through the introduction
of T2A in both public and private structures to pay for acute care services with the objectives of
improving efficiency and creating a level playing-field for payments to public and private
hospitals.




                                                5
The 2009 introduction of a pay-for-performance pilot mechanism for office-based GPs (CAPI)
also aimed at introducing financial incentives for quality of care and cost-efficiency gains in
managing chronic diseases. Although the initiative does not reform the overall fee-for-service
payment system but rather adds to it, it filters in some elements of a performance-based
approach with the potential to improve care rationalizing, accountability and, eventually, health
outcomes (Or 2009).

5.        Equity in financing health care
France’s health funding system is acknowledged as relatively equitable (Wagstaff and Doorslaer
1999). Changes to funding policies with new taxes may, however, question this view. More
reliance on VHI also raises concerns for “solidarity? and redistribution in the French health
insurance system, as in practical terms it points to more health expenses being covered out of
compulsory programs, general contributions, and consequently the sick. Some argue that this
shift is likely to increase inequalities in access to care across income and health groups, and to
put additional pressure on the worse off, who have less or no access to VHI: 12 percent of the
poorest do not have VHI against 3 percent among the better off. (As complementary insurance
remains voluntary, its purchase is traditionally associated with higher-income groups.) Most VHI
providers adjust contributions for age, health status, and risk. The financial coverage provided
by VHI also tends to vary across incomes: 53 percent of the richest benefit from broad
protection, but only 13 percent of the worse off (Bocognano et al. 2000).

6.        HRH policies
With more than 3.4 physicians and 7.8 nurses per 1,000 population, France has relatively high
medical care resources, although geographic distribution remains a concern. Lack of specialists
for sectors like gynecology, psychiatry, or anesthesia is another area of relative shortage.
The major regulatory mechanism for controlling physician supply is the yearly quotas for limiting
the number of medical students. The number of doctors and other health professionals (such as
nurses and physiotherapists) is regulated by the numerus clausus, a method used by the central
government to control access to the second year of study in medical schools (the first year
being accessible to all high-school graduates). In the ambulatory sector, generalists and
specialists are free to choose where they work. This mainly explains the unequal distribution of
doctors across regions, with a ratio of highest to lowest density of GPs by region of 1.55. The
southeast, known for a better quality of life, has 367 practicing GPs per 100,000 population
while northeast regions have fewer than 250 per 100,000 population (CNAMTS 2011).
In recent years, the government has introduced HRH-related measures to reduce geographic
variations in the distribution of health professionals. It has:
         Increased quotas for entrance to medical schools
         Enhanced multidisciplinary cooperation between doctors and paramedics at local level
          through skill mix and task shifting (i.e. for dialysis to nurses and eye-glass prescriptions
          to optometrists) (Bourgueil 2010)
         Raised tax incentives for group practices in medically deprived areas
         Offered “Public Service Involvement Contracts? [“Contrats de service public?]) to medical
          students with financial provision to set up practice in underserved areas.6


6
    Under the 2009 Hospital Law (HPST).


                                                   6
Today, group practices are in the majority: the share of private GPs declaring working in a group
practice has risen from 43 percent in 1998 to 54 percent in 2009. This increase is particularly
apparent among GPs aged below 40 with eight out of 10 working in a group practice. The group
practice structure appears to alter GPs’ weekly work patterns without altering their weekly work
volume as much: group practice GPs more often declare working fewer than five days a week
but carry out more medical acts per day than GPs working alone. Group practice is equally
associated with more time for training, supervising students, and greater use of computerized
patient files (Baudier et al. 2010).
The effects of other HRH policies have not yet been evaluated.

C.     Sequencing of reforms
From the Social Security Act’s ambitious goal in the 1940s to effective insurance coverage for
all in the 2000s, it took France more than 50 years to establish a universal coverage-oriented
health system. Routes to this mainly favored an employment-based coverage approach and a
“gold-standard? benefit package delivered by a public–private system. Although “socio-
professional? programs and insurance funds developed separately and have remained separate
for historical reasons, state policies have persistently aimed for coherence and alignment across
programs.


Figure 1: Milestones in the French health insurance system




        1945-1970                  1974-1978                        2000
 Set up of SHI general and   Expansion to uncovered         Inclusion of uncovered
     specific schemes           worker categories         legal and illegal residents




The current system comes from the tradition of mutuelle-based organizations in place since the
French Revolution (1789). At that time, provident societies (Sociétés de secours mutuel)
provided their contributing members with financial support in the event of death or disease.
The 19th century was marked by the introduction of targeted programs run by the state to cover,
among others, health risks. However, population coverage and benefits remained low, as the
programs were based on voluntary contribution.
After World War I, the first compulsory program was set up for industry workers in a region
bordering Germany—Alsace Lorraine. It served as a catalyst to the development of a broader
insurance system in the 1930s for the whole country (the Social Insurance Act). The system
was based on contributions from employees and employers in industry and business and
provided coverage for illness, motherhood, disability, old age, and death. This period was


                                                      7
indeed marked by a deeper state involvement in social protection issues in France and beyond
(the welfare state).
A major push to setting up a nationwide compulsory health insurance system took place in
France just after World War II, as seen. Nevertheless, the objective of one uniform program has
never been achieved, partly because differences arose from competing interests. Some
occupational/professional groups (civil servants, miners, railway workers, etc.) already
benefiting from insurance on more favorable terms kept their own programs—and still do.
Expansion of coverage to various population groups followed an incremental process over the
next two decades, and coverage for the whole population was eventually achieved in 2000 with
the introduction of the CMU program.




                                              8
                      PART II.        LESSONS TO BE SHARED
France has an employment-based social health insurance system, initiated in 1945, which
attained universal coverage in 2000 by introducing a state-funded insurance program for the
poorest part of the population. Targeted subsidies, in the forms of vouchers, financial incentives
or copayment removal, have been instrumental in extending access to low-income groups and
to those afflicted by long-term disease.
Sources of funding have been broadened in the past 10 years beyond payroll contributions to
include a broader range of incomes including from financial assets and investments. SHI
provides a comprehensive benefit basket but has cost sharing for all essential services. The
increasing reliance on voluntary insurance to cover copayments and other cost sharing is
raising concerns about the effectiveness of the redistribution mechanism in the system.
Despite its origins in independent management of social security, the government has come to
play a greater role in managing health expenditure through the introduction of spending targets
and rigorous monitoring mechanisms for health insurance funds. It has increasingly focused on
improving the quality and efficiency of primary care as a key strategy for ensuring equity of
access and efficiency of health system. It has also taken steps to transfer greater responsibility
to Regional Health Agencies that oversee hospital, ambulatory, and social care for better
coordination and accountability locally.
The French experience with pay-for-performance for GPs shows that it could contribute to
improving the quality and accountability of providers, but the fee-for-service setting and
preponderance of solo primary care practices limit the ability to change clinician behavior for
ensuring better care coordination and efficiency. Hospital-payment reforms (DRG) have helped
improve hospital productivity but France’s experience shows that effective payment reform also
requires strong information systems for monitoring costs and ensuring appropriateness of care,
and empowered hospital leadership to better align public and private hospitals with performance
standards and to improve accountability overall.




                                                9
                                         References
Bellanger, M., P. R. Mosse. 2005. “The Search for the Holy Grail: Combining Decentralized
       Planning and Contracting Mechanisms in the French Health Care System.? Health
       Economics 14: S119–S132.
Baudier F., Y. Bourgueil, I. Evrard, A. Gautier, P. Le Fur, J. Mousquès. 2010. “La dynamique de
      regroupement des médecins généralistes libéraux de 1998 à 2009.? Questions
      d"économie de la santé, Irdes n° 157.
Bourgueil, Y. 2010. “National policy for professional skill mix?, Health Policy Monitor. IRDES,
      Paris.
Cases, C. 2009: “Evaluation of the Cancer Plan.? Health Policy Monitor.
       http://hpm.org/survey/fr/a13/1.
CNAMTS (Caisse nationale de l'assurance maladie des travailleurs salariés). 2011. Les
     Comptes de l’Assurance Maladie, Chiffres et Repères. http://www.ameli.fr/l-assurance-
     maladie/statistiques-et-publications/index.php.
Com-Ruelle, L., P. Dourgnon, and V. Paris. 2006. “Can Physician Gate-Keeping and Patient
     Choice Be Reconciled in France? Analysis of Recent Reform.? Eurohealth 12 (1): 17–19.
Cour des Comptes. 2009. “La Sécurité Sociale.? In La mise en place de la T2A: Bilan à mi-
      parcours. DREES: Paris.
———. 2013. “ Le médecin traitant et le parcours de soins coordonnés : une réforme
    inaboutie ?, Rapport public annuel, chapter 3, février 2013.
Inspection Générale des Affaires Sociales (IGAS). 2010. Bilan de l’organisation en pôles
       d’activité et des délégations de gestion mises en place dans les établissements de
       santé.
Inspection Générale des Finances (IGF). 2012. Evaluation de la tarification des soins
       hospitaliers. Report 2011-M-056-01.
       http://www.igf.finances.gouv.fr/webdav/site/igf/shared/Nos_Rapports/documents/2012/2
       011-M-056-01.pdf.
Institut de Recherche et Documentation en Economie de la Santé (IRDES). 2000. “La
         complémentaire maladie en France: qui bénéficie de quels remboursements?? Bulletin
         d’information en économié de la santé 32 (October).
Ministère de la Santé, France. 2011. “Evaluation de la Loi CMU.? Report no. 5, November.
Mission d’Evaluation et de Contrôle de la Sécurité Sociale (MECSS). 2012. “Refonder la
       tarification hospitalière au service du patient.? Rapport d’information au Sénat, no. 703.
Mousquès, J., and D. Polton. 2004. “Sickness Funds Reform: New Governance.? Health Policy
     Monitor. http://www.hpm.org/en/Surveys/IRDES- France/04/.
OECD. 2009. Health at a Glance 2009: OECD Indicators. OECD, Paris.
Or, Z. 2009. “A Small Step Towards P4P in France.? Health Policy Monitor.
        http://www.hpm.org/en/Surveys/IRDES_-
        _France/13/A_small_step_towards_P4P_in_France.html
———. 2010. “Measures to Curbing Health Expenditure.? Health Policy Monitor (October).


                                                10
———. 2010. "P4P for Generalists: First results." Health Policy Monitor (October).
    http://hpm.org/en/Surveys/IRDES_-_France/16/P4P_for_generalists__first_results.html.
Or, Z., J. Bonastre, F. Journeau, and C. Nestrigue. 2013. “Activité, productivité et qualité des
        soins des hôpitaux avant et après la T2A.? Questions d’économie de la santé 186 (April).
        IRDES, Paris.
Or, Z., C. Cases, M. Lisac, K. Vrangbaek, U. Winblad, and G. Bevan. 2009. “Are Health
        Problems Systemic? Politics of Access and Choice under Beveridge and Bismarck
        Systems.? IRDES Working Paper, Paris.
Or, Z., and N. Sirven. 2011. “The French Health Care System.? In Health Care Systems, A
        Global Survey, ed. H. S. Rout, 152–78, New Delhi: New Century Publications.
Wagstaff, A. and E. Doorslaer. 1999. Equity in the Finance and Delivery of Health Care: an
      International Perspective. Oxford University Press.




                                              11
