                                                  91221

                                   Japan–World Bank Partnership
                            Program for Universal Health Coverage




Universal Health Coverage for Inclusive and
         Sustainable Development

   Country Summary Report for Turkey

         Meltem Aran and Ece Amber Ozcelik



    Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice
               World Bank Group Report
                   September 2014
                                      Acronyms
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GNI       Gross National Income
HEU       Health Economics Unit, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
HIG       Health Implementation Guide
HRH       Human Resources for Health
HTP       Health Transformation Program
MCH       Maternal and Child Health
MDG       Millennium Development Goals
NGO       Non-governmental organization
OOP       Out of pocket health spending
PPP       Purchasing power parity
SSI       Social Security Insurance
SSK       Social Security Insurance for formal sector employees (Sosyal Sigortalar
Kurumu)
THE       Total Health Expenditure
UHC       Universal Health Coverage
UHI       Universal Health Insurance




                                          i
                                           Preface
In 2011, Japan celebrated the 50th anniversary of achieving universal health coverage (UHC).
To mark the occasion, the government of Japan and the World Bank conceived the idea of
undertaking a multicountry study to respond to this growing demand by sharing rich and varied
country experiences from countries at different stages of adopting and implementing strategies
for UHC, including Japan itself. This led to the formation of a joint Japan–World Bank research
team under The Japan–World Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage. The
Program was set up as a two-year multicountry study to help fill the gap in knowledge about the
policy decisions and implementation processes that countries undertake when they adopt the
UHC goals. The Program was funded through the generous support of the Government of
Japan.
This Country Summary Report on Turkey is one of the 11 country studies on UHC that was
commissioned under the Japan–World Bank Partnership Program. The other participating
countries are Bangladesh, Brazil, Ethiopia, France, Ghana, Indonesia, Japan, Peru, Thailand,
and Vietnam. A synthesis of these country reports is in the publication “Universal Health
Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: A Synthesis of 11 Country Case Studies,?
available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/uhc-japan.
These reports are intended to provide an overview of the country experiences and some key
lessons that may be shared with other countries aspiring to adopt, achieve, and sustain UHC.
The goals of UHC are to ensure that all people can access quality health services, to safeguard
all people from public health risks, and to protect all people from impoverishment due to illness,
whether from out-of-pocket payments or loss of income when a household member falls sick.
Although the path to UHC is specific to each country, it is hoped that countries can benefit from
the experiences of others in learning about different approaches and avoiding potential risks.




                                                ii
                                   Acknowledgments
This study was supported through the PHRD Grant (Japan) as a joint Partnership Program
between the government of Japan and the World Bank. The Program was steered by the
Program Coordination Committee, co-chaired by Keizo Takemi, Member of the House of
Councilors of the National Diet of Japan, and Timothy Grant Evans, Director of Health, Nutrition
and Population Network of the World Bank.
The Program was led by a team comprising Akiko Maeda, Lead Health Specialist and Task
Team Leader for the World Bank, and co-Team Leaders, Professor Naoki Ikegami, Department
of Health Policy and Management, Keio University School of Medicine and Professor Michael
Reich, Taro Takemi Professor of International Health Policy, Harvard School of Public Health.
This Country Summary Report was prepared by Meltem Aran, Development Analytics, and Ece
Amber Ozcelik, World Bank Group. The authors would like to acknowledge guidance received
from Claudia Rokx, Lead Health Specialist, and Rekha Menon, Lead Economist, World Bank
Group.
The report was edited by Jonathan Aspin.


Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this work are entirely
those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank Group, its
Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.




                                               iii
                        Country Summary Report for Turkey

                                            Overview
Turkey is an upper middle-income country that has seen rapid economic growth and
development over the last decade. In a relatively short period, it has essentially achieved
universal health insurance (UHI) coverage of the population, high levels of financial protection
and equity, and high and rising levels of consumer satisfaction, while significantly improving
health outcomes. The universal health coverage (UHC) strategy, embedded in its Health
Transformation Program (HTP), was initiated in 2003 to improve the effectiveness of the health
system through improved governance, efficiency, and user and provider satisfaction.

Table 1. Turkey at a glance
Population                                                                     74,724,269* (2011)
Gross domestic product (GDP; current US$)                                      $775.0 billion**
                                                                               (2011)
Gross national income per capita in purchasing power parity (current           16,940 ** (2011)
international $)
Total health expenditures (THE) as % of GDP                                    6.74** (2010)
THE per capita (current US$)                                                   678** (2010)
Public health spending as share of total health spending (%)                   75.2** (2010)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)                                        73.94*** (2010)
Hospital beds (per 1,000 population)                                           2.6**** (2011)
Sources: * TurkStat, ** World Bank, ***OECD Health Data 2012,**** Health Statistics Yearbook 2011.




     PART I.       UNIVERSAL COVERAGE—STATUS AND SEQUENCING

A.     Overview of current status

1.     Legal and statutory basis
The 60th article of the 1982 Constitution states that “everyone has a right to social security, and
the state shall take the necessary measures and establish the necessary measures and
organization to provide this security?(MOH 2011a). Social Security Institution Law No. 5502
dated May 16, 2006 guarantees that all Turkish citizens receive primary health care services
free of charge irrespective of insurance status. The Social Insurance and Universal Health
Insurance Law No. 5510 of May 31, 2006 (Law No. 5510) defines population groups to be
covered by the UHI program.




                                                  1
2.     Current status of coverage along the key dimensions of UHC

       a. Population
Enrollment to the UHI program under the control of the Social Security Institution (SSI) is
mandatory for all Turkish citizens. According to the SSI, 97 percent of the population was
covered by the UHI program in 2011, while household level data coming from the Household
Budget Survey 2011 suggests that coverage of health insurance is 90 percent.

       b. Services
According to the Law No. 5502, under the UHI program, individuals are classified into one of
four income groups (G0-G3) (Table 2). The premium for each group is calculated annually. For
those in formal employment, employers cover 7.5 percent of the premium, employees the rest
(5 percent).


Table 2. Four income groups
 Income      Definition: Average monthly           Premium                    Contributors
  group         income per household              calculation
G0           Under 1/3 of gross minimum       1/3 GMW X 12.5%        Paid by the government
             wage (GMW)
G1           Between 1/3 of GMW and           1/3 GMW x 12.5%        Paid by beneficiary or if
             GMW                                                     formally employed share is
                                                                     employees 5%, employers
                                                                     7.5%
G2           Between GMW and 2 times          GMW x 12.5%            Ditto
             GMW
G3           Over 2 times GMW                 2 GMW x 12.5%          Ditto

Source: Law No. 5502 on Social Security.


According to Law No. 5502 all population groups except the following are covered by the UHI
program: conscripts undertaking military service, foreigners with their own social insurance
coverage in their home country, people working in country representative offices abroad with
social security coverage in the host country, tourists or short-term visitors, illegal immigrants,
and prisoners.
All beneficiaries of the UHI are entitled a fairly comprehensive benefit package (Table 3) listed
in the Health Implementation Guide.1 This list is updated yearly.




1
 The Health Implementation Guide (HIG (Sağ lık Uygulama Tebliğ i)), published annually,
covers the rules and regulations for the benefits package and there is a unified guide that
covers all existing schemes. For more details, see Tatar et al., 2011.


                                                2
Table 3. Benefit package for all income groups
                                     Personal preventive health care including preventive care for addictive
Benefit package for all income




                                      substances harmful to health
                                     Outpatient and inpatient services, medical consultation, diagnostic tests,
                                      treatment, dressing, tooth extraction, dental prosthesis and eyeglasses
                                     Outpatient and inpatient maternal health care, medical examinations,
                                      diagnostic tests and procedures, delivery, treatment and emergency care
           groups




                                      costs of newborns after delivery, follow up services
                                     Hospitalization for emergency cases and treatment
                                     In-vitro fertilization, up to two attempts
                                     Blood and blood products, vaccines, medicines, prosthesis, medical goods
                                      and equipment
                                     Pharmaceuticals and medical devices
                                     Free health care provision for children under 18 regardless of their insurance
                                      status
Source: Law No. 5502 on Social Security.


                                 c. Financial protection
Out-of-pocket payments are low and progressive. Households in the top quintile in 2008 paid
1.97 percent and 2.44 percent of their total and nonfood expenditures for health care, compared
with 1.43 percent and 2.37 percent in the lowest quintile, indicating a progressive system
(Aran and Hentschel 2012). The same study also shows that impoverishment as a result of
catastrophic medical expenses fell from 0.8 percent of all households in 2003 to 0.3 percent in
2008.
Copayments are waived for visits to family medicine providers. They apply to outpatient visits
and are TL 8 per visit to university and Ministry of Health (MOH) hospitals, and TL 15 for visits
to private hospitals. Copayment for pharmaceuticals is 20 percent, except for retirees who pay
10 percent.
Extra billing, up to an additional 70 percent of the SSI tariff, is allowed for private hospitals to
compensate for supply-side government subsidies (personnel salaries, capital investment, etc.)
to public hospitals. Beginning in January 2010, a new classification system for private hospitals
was implemented, which classified private hospitals into five categories (from A to E) based on
the numbers of beds, patient operations, and the like. Private facilities can request extra billing
according to their classification. For example, Category A facilities can charge up to an
additional 70 percent of the SSI tariff, while Category E facilities can bill up to 30 percent more.

3.                               How is governance structured?

                                 a. Goal setting
The MOH is steward of the system and is responsible for policy making, regulation, and
monitoring and evaluation. The Public Health Institution is responsible for the provision of
primary and preventive care services while the Public Hospital Institution is in charge of


                                                                        3
secondary and tertiary care services (see below). The SSI is the single purchaser of services in
the public health system, which now includes all five of the previously fragmented health
insurance programs.

       b. Financing
Total health spending as a share of GDP was 6.74 percent in 2010. In 2008, 43.9 percent of
funds for health spending came from the SSI, 27.6 percent from other government sources,
17.4 percent from out-of-pocket payments, and 9.6 percent from other private sources (Menon
et al. 2013). There is no earmarking of general revenues for the UHI program. Initiated in 1992,
the Green Card (Yesil Kart) Program—a noncontributory health insurance program—is the main
flagship social protection program funded through the national budget. Based on survey data,
the number of beneficiaries more than tripled, from 2.5 million in 2003 to 9.1 million in 2011, due
to expansion of the Program’s benefits (Menon et al. 2013).
Until 2012, a hybrid-targeting program was used to identify individuals eligible for the Green
Card. Centrally appointed kaymakams (district officers) were given discretion for distributing the
cards following eligibility rules determined by the central government. Enrollment was voluntary
and applications were collected at district-level Green Card offices, which usually reported
directly to centrally appointed district or provincial officers (kaymakams or valis). The ultimate
decisions on the distribution of the cards were made by local committees chaired by the
kaymakam (in districts) and the deputy governor in charge of the Green Card in the provincial
center.
In January 2012, the Green Card Program was merged into the UHI, leading to changes in the
flow of funds (funds for Green Card holders have been transferred from the Ministry of Finance
to the SSI), while the identification, certification, and monitoring of Green Card holders are now
regulated by the Regulation on the Rules and Principles of Identifying, Certifying, and
Monitoring Income Under the Universal Health Insurance. The identification of the poor to be
covered by the state budget is now based on the national Integrated Social Aid Services
System, managed by the Ministry of Family Affairs and Social Policies. The system also
determines beneficiaries of scholarships, home care for the elderly, and conditional cash
transfers and benefits for disabled people.

       c. Payment
Primary care and preventive services are financed mainly through the state budget. For MOH
hospitals, salaries and investment costs are covered by the general budget. The SSI transfers a
global amount for services provided to its beneficiaries. These funds go into the revolving fund
of each hospital and cover all other expenses, including performance-based bonuses for
providers. University hospitals have a structure similar to MOH hospitals and receive funds from
the state to cover salaries and other investments, and have revolving funds from which they
generate income from the SSI and patients. For private sector hospitals, the SSI negotiates and
concludes annual contracts (allowing extra billing based on hospital category). Figure 1
presents a flow of funds chart.


Figure 1. Flow of funds




                                                4
Source: Menon et al. 2013.


       d. Service delivery
Secondary and tertiary health care services are provided by MOH-affiliated public hospitals,
university hospitals, and private hospitals, although the MOH predominantly controls these
services. In 2011, there were 1,453 hospitals in Turkey, of which 840 were owned by MOH, 65
were university hospitals, 503 were private facilities, and 45 were owned by other public
establishments and local administrations (MOH 2011b). A total of 20,243 family practice doctors
and family health personnel (mainly nurses and midwifes) worked in primary and preventive
care services in 6,463 family health centers at December 31, 2011 (World Bank 2013).

B.     Current status of health financing

1.     How sustainable is current coverage?

       a. Fiscal space
The last decade has been a period of rapid economic growth and development for Turkey,
largely thanks to sound macroeconomic management and structural reforms since a banking
crisis in 2001. The economy grew by an average of almost 5.5 percent in 2002–11, compared
with the pre-2001 average of around 4 percent. Per capita income tripled over the period to
reach $10,444 in 2011. The government prioritized the health sector, enabling expansion of
breadth and depth of coverage. Through improved efficiency in health spending, the introduction
of fixed global budgets for MOH hospitals in 2007, and expenditure caps for university and


                                              5
private hospitals and for pharmaceuticals in 2010, fiscal sustainability of the UHI is ensured. SSI
deficits have narrowed and are covered by the government budget.

       b. Cost management and value for money
For its spending and income levels, Turkey appears to get reasonable value for money in terms
of health outcomes. The relative generosity of the comprehensive benefit package and
spending on pharmaceuticals are key cost drivers. Changes to the system are made regularly to
ensure continuing efficiency gains on both demand and supply sides.
Under the Family Medicine Program, funded through general revenues within the budget of the
MOH, family medicine physicians and other family medicine staff are contracted individually.
They are expected to function as a unit under the overall guidance and management of the
family physician. The payment for family medicine staff has five components (Table 4).


Table 4. Five components of payments for family medicine staff
                                   The monthly base payment for family physicians is defined
                                    with a capitation-linked formula, i.e. in proportion to the
A. Capitation-based                 number of people registered to the family physician.
payment                            Pregnant women have the highest payment coefficient
                                    (adjustment factor of 3), followed by prisoners (adjustment
                                    factor of 2.25), children under 4 years and the elderly over
                                    65 years (adjustment factor of 1.6), and the general
                                    population that does not fall into any of these categories
                                    (adjustment factor of 0.79).
                                   The monthly base payment is adjusted for the
B. Capitation adjusted for          socioeconomic development of the area in which the
socioeconomic level of              family physician practices. Family physicians serving in
area                                less developed districts with a shortage of medical
                                    personnel receive an additional payment “service credit?
                                    on a sliding scale that is linked to the socioeconomic
                                    development index of the district.




                                                6
                                   Family physicians are paid a lump sum each month to
                                    cover equipment and operational expenses including rent
                                    (where needed), electricity, fuel, water, telephone,
                                    Internet, data processing, cleaning, office supplies, small
C. Operational costs and            repairs, secretarial and medical consumables. This lump
other reimbursements                sum payment is calculated as 50 percent of the maximum
                                    monthly base payment.
                                   Depending on the category of the family medicine unit,
                                    family physicians are paid an additional lump sum
                                    payment that ranges from 10 percent of the maximum
                                    monthly base capitation payment for category D family
                                    medicine units to 50 percent of the maximum monthly
                                    base capitation payment for category A family medicine
                                    units. The purpose of this monthly lump sum payment is to
                                    ensure that family physicians have the additional
                                    resources needed to meet the mandated service delivery
                                    conditions.
D. Reimbursements for              The Core Resource Management System of the Ministry of
expenditures on                     Health is used to track budgets and expenditures of these items.
laboratory tests and               Family Medicine Information System includes an electronic
consumables                         health record for each person registered to the family physician,
                                    including diagnostic test results from laboratories to which
                                    patients are referred, and is used as an oversight for
                                    reimbursement of expenses to family medicine units.
                                   To meet mobile health care service expenditures, family
E. Ambulatory health care           physicians receive an additional lump sum payment of
service fees                        1.6 percent of the maximum base capitation payment for
                                    every 100 persons who receive mobile services.
Source: World Bank 2013.




In public hospitals doctors are paid both by salary and through revolving funds based on their
performance in the previous month based on specified individual and institutional criteria. There
is no differentiation between medical specialties as performance is graded by medical
procedures. A different coefficient based on the difficulty and time demand is assigned to
medical procedures ranging from medical examination to operation and invasive diagnostic
techniques. The coefficients differ for part-time practitioners, specialists and for some
departments such as intensive care, dialysis, operating rooms, and emergency.
The range of provider payment types under the current health system are described in Table 5,
below. They include: Case-based payments such as diagnostic related groups - CP; preference
price system to subsidize medical goods and pharmaceuticals purchased by patients (RP);
capitation for all services for an individual for a fixed period of time (CP); Performance-related
pay (P4P); and fee for service (FFS). For public hospitals there is a performance based
payment system for the personnel, which covers all categories workers including administrative
personnel.




                                                 7
Table 5. Payment systems
                             Service type                               Payment           Utilization
                                                                         system            controls
                     a
Inpatient services

Birth delivery                                                        CP

Emergency services                                                    CP

Other Inpatient hospital services

Hospital component (hotel services, nursing care, disposables,        CP
tests)
Physician service components                                          CP

Pharmaceuticals                                                       RP

Diagnostic imaging                                                    CP

Adjustments (e.g. teaching, disp. share of poor, capital)

Outpatient Services

Public health services, such as immunizations                         CAP, P4P

Outpatient primary care contacts                                      CAP, P4P

Outpatient specialist contacts                                        FFS              Copayment

Pharmaceuticals for outpatient services                               RP               Copayment

Clinical laboratory tests for outpatient services                     FFS

Diagnostic imaging for outpatient services– basic (X rays and         FFS
ultrasound)
Diagnostic imaging for outpatient services—beyond X-rays and          FFS
ultrasound (e.g. MRI, Cat Scan)
Other services

Eyeglasses                                                            CP               Copayment

Dental care                                                           CP               Copayment

Prosthetics and orthotics                                             CP               Copayment

Dialysis or Transplants                                               CP

Home-care services                                                    CP

Source: Menon et al. 2013.
a. For public hospitals there is a performance based payment system, which covers all workers including
administrative personnel.




                                                     8
CP: Case payment (e.g. DRG); RP: Preference price system to subsidize medical goods and
pharmaceuticals purchased by patients; CAP: Capitation (all services for an individual for a fixed period of
time); P4P: Performance-related pay; FFS: fee for service.


2.       How equitable is coverage?

         a. Solidarity and redistribution
Financial protection in Turkey is high, equitable, and continues to improve under the HTP. All
population groups are covered under a single universal health insurance program and premium
contributions differ based on income (see Table 2).

         b. Targeting for priority population groups
Incentives to focus on maternal and child health (MCH) including immunizations, a key health
sector priority under Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 4 and 5, are introduced under the
Family Medicine Program to service providers through the following performance levers:
        Up to 20 percent of base salary payments are “at risk? conditional on meeting MCH
         coverage targets.
        Provider contracts could potentially be terminated for repeated failure to meet MCH
         performance targets.
        The base capitation payment assigns higher weights to enrolling pregnant women and
         children to motivate providers to improve access to care among these categories of the
         population. Pregnant women have a payment coefficient of 3 while under-fives have a
         payment coefficient of 1.6. Both these payment coefficients are considerably higher than
         the coefficient of 0.79 for the general (non-prison) population. In effect this means that
         family medicine providers are paid more per pregnant woman and child under five, which
         incentivizes family medicine personnel to seek out pregnancies and register children
         under five, thus improving their access to care.

C.       Human resources for health (HRH) policies

1.       Current status of HRH
Inequitable geographic distribution of HRH in Turkey has been a longstanding issue, one
recognized and addressed by the MOH through the HTP. As a result of various policy changes
introduced by MOH (see below under “Labor market dynamics?), the personnel gap between the
highest and lowest provinces fell between 2001 and 2011 as follows: for specialists from 1:14 to
1:2.7; for general practitioners from 1:9 to 1:2.3; and for nurses and midwives from 1:8 to 1:4.
But disparities remain: in 2011, Western Anatolia had 2.6 physicians per 1,000 population,
against Southeastern Anatolia’s 1.16 physicians (the lowest). The highest-ranking region for
nurse and midwife density was the Eastern Black Sea, which had 1.84 times as high density as
Southeastern Anatolia, the lowest ranking.


Table 6: Current status of HRH
                                                   Entry                                      Exit



                                                     9
                 Current      Qualifications      Government Number of Number of                Number of
                 number                            determines  entrants  years of                 newly
                per 1,000                        the number of per year education             licensed per
               population                         new entrants                                     year
                            Undergraduate        NOa              8,438        6 years      5,138 (2010-
                            Degree +                              (2010-                    2011)
                            Compulsory                            2011)
              1.69          Medical Service
              (2011)
Physicians                  Specialized                           4,295 (in    3-5 years    4,980 (in
                            Physicians:                           2010-                     2010-2011)
                            Successful in                         2011)
                            “Central Medical
                            Specialization
                            Examination?
                            +Specialization
                            Training
                            Undergraduate        NOa              7,734        4 years      4,358 (2010-
                            degree                                (2010-                    2011)
                                                                  2011)
Nurses        1.67
              (2011)
                            Vocational high      YESb             10,296       4 years      8,874 (2010-
                            school degree                         (2011-                    2011)
                                                                  2012)
Midwives      0.70          Undergraduate        NOb              1,889        4 years      1,307 (2010-
              (2011)        degree                                                          2011)
Community         N/A              N/A                  N/A           N/A          N/A            N/A
health
workersc
Source: Ministry of Health 2011a.
a. Physician education and higher education of health professionals is regulated by the Higher Education
Council, a fully autonomous supreme corporate public body responsible for the planning, coordination,
governance, and supervision of higher education.
b. Vocational high school entrants are determined by the Ministry of National Education.
c. Community health worker is not an applicable category in Turkey.


In 2011, 58.2 percent of all physicians and 77 percent of all nurses and midwives worked in
MOH facilities; 20.9 percent of all physicians and 10.3 percent of all nurses and midwives
worked in universities; and 10.3 percent of all physicians and 12.7 percent of all nurses and
midwives worked in the private sector (MOH 2011b). In 2011, there were 0.65 physicians per
1,000 population specialized in gynecology and obstetrics, 0.64 in internal diseases, 0.53 in
anesthesiology, while only 0.03 physicians per 1,000 population specialized in medical oncology
and 0.07 in thoracic surgery (MOH 2011b).
The number of faculties of medicine increased from 56 in 2008/09 to 69 in 2010/11, and the
number of students who recently enrolled in faculties of medicine increased from 6,655 to 8,438



                                                   10
over the same period, which should greatly improve the density of physicians and nurses after
2015 (MOH 2011b).
The State Planning Organization, the Higher Education Council, the State Department of
Personnel, and the MOH are responsible for HRH policies. Workforce planning is mainly the
responsibility of the General Directorate of Health Services on behalf of the MOH.2 The MOH is
responsible for coordinating health care personnel education and employment in the public
sector.
Medical specialization requires further education after the completion of the undergraduate
degree and the central medical specialization examination.3 Medical residency training is
provided in MOH teaching hospitals. There is no health education accreditation institution. The
Higher Education Council approves all new programs.

2.       Labor market dynamics
The Family Medicine Program explicitly encourages doctors and health workers to serve in rural
populations. When a family practitioner has registered patients in rural areas, he or she is also
assigned health house midwives. In addition, periodic mobile outreach services are provided to
those who live in rural areas. The monthly base payment of family medicine physicians is
adjusted for the socioeconomic development of the area in which they practice (see Table 4).
Family physicians working in underserved areas receive a “service credit? on a sliding scale,
linked to the socioeconomic development index of the district (World Bank 2013). In the least
advantaged areas, the service credit can be as high as 40 percent of the maximum base
payment. Since the introduction of the Family Medicine Program, disparities in the distribution of
health personnel across the country have declined.
Compulsory service for all public and private medical school graduates has also helped improve
geographic distribution. Further, a Regulation on Appointment and Transfer has been
introduced to ensure a more balanced distribution of health care personnel to all MOH health
care facilities. According to this regulation, specialists, general practitioners, dentists, and
pharmacists are appointed through a computer-based lottery, and other personnel are
appointed based on the results of a national examination system.
Although there were variable practices for certified trainings conducted in professional fields of
health by many other public and private institutions, primarily the MOH and universities, there
was no regulatory framework before 2010. In 2010, the MOH introduced its Implementing
Regulation on Certified Trainings in order to regulate the policies and procedures on certified
training to be delivered by the MOH, the Turkish Armed Forces, universities, public agencies
and organizations, private entities, and individuals. The MOH introduced the Distance Health
Education System in 2006 to provide education to all health care personnel particularly
managers, management trainees, and specialists and to ensure orientation training to family
physicians to be assigned in primary health care and other health care personnel to be assigned
in family medicine.
There are signs of improvement in workforce productivity over recent years. Consultations per
physician per year—a crude measure of physicians’ productivity—increased from 2,272 in 2002
to 3,176 in 2006 and to 4,850 in 2011. Several complementary reforms contributed to the
increase in productivity including the introduction of performance-based payment, the activation
2
  Turkish Public Hospitals Institution and the General Directorate of Health Research also have responsibilities in this
area.
3
  The duration of specialization training depends on the requirements of the specialty.


                                                          11
of dormant health centers, and the increase in the availability of examination rooms for each
physician in health centers.
In 2004, a performance-based supplementary payment system was introduced in MOH
hospitals to encourage job motivation and productivity among public sector health personnel.
Health personnel receive a payment each month in addition to their regular salaries. The base
salary is paid from the MOH line item budget under health personnel salaries. Bonus payment
for a health worker is determined through a combination of individual and institutional
performance criteria. Performance-based payments are paid from hospital earnings. Under this
payment system, 93 percent of all specialist physicians preferred to work full time in the public
sector in 2010, up from 11 percent in 2003 (MOH 2011b).

C.         Sequencing of reforms

1.         How and why were the relevant UHC reforms put into effect?

           a. Historical sequence
In 2005, fragmentation in service delivery was reduced with hospitals under the Sosyal
Sigortalar Kurumu for formal sector employees being transferred to the MOH hospital system. In
the same year, the family medicine program was piloted in Duzce province. In 2006,
fragmentation in financing was reduced with the three social insurance programs—Sosyal
Sigortalar Kurumu, Bag Kur (social insurance for the self-employed), and the social insurance
for retired civil servants (Emekli Sandigi)—integrated into the SSI (Law No. 5502). In 2008, the
Social Security and Universal Health Insurance Law was adopted (Law No. 5510), which
provided the legal basis for fully synchronized UHI.4 In 2010, the Active Civil Servants program
was transferred to the SSI and by 2010 the Family Medicine Program was rolled out nationwide.
In 2012, the Green Card Program became a part of the SSI system. During the same period,
significant efforts were made to harmonize the benefits packages of the various programs. (The
Annex at the end of the document presents a timeline of health sector reform from 2003–12.)

           b. Actors
The Justice and Development Party (AKP) came to power after national elections in 2002. The
primary objectives of the health care sector were outlined in the AKP’s Urgent Action Plan,
announced in November 2002. The HTP was launched in 2003 and had support from the
highest levels of government.

           c. Economic context
Various governments in the past had made considerable efforts to restructure health service
delivery and financing with limited success. In 2003, there was a unique opportunity when the
new AKP government outlined its reform objectives under the HTP, which highlighted the need
for a broad “transformation? in health care. This decade was also a period of high economic
growth. This and priority to health in government policies helped support the move toward
universal coverage.




4
    Law No. 5510 was accepted in 2006, though it took some time to be phased in.


                                                         12
                    PART II.        Policy Priorities and Lessons

A.      Current policy priorities, challenges, and opportunities
The HTP has achieved many of the goals of UHC. Several challenges remain, though, where
the focus in the near future needs to be in the following four areas.

1.     Sustainably cultivating the health workforce
The HTP achieved rapid expansion of the health workforce, with the introduction of contracting,
new employment conditions, and outsourcing. The full-time work regulation gradually eliminated
dual practice and expanded public sector capacity to benefit patients, but also increased the
workload for health staff. There is a common perception of negligence and disregard among the
health staff, who believe that they have been insufficiently included in the decision-making
mechanisms during this restructuring process (Bump and Sparks 2013). Physicians working in
training and research hospitals and family health centers underline the fact that they lack the
required time and resources for improving themselves professionally within the existing system.
As the pay-for-performance system does not include allowances for teaching or research, those
interested in these activities felt personally punished (Bump and Sparks 2013).
Specialist physicians interviewed explained that due to MOH cost controls, they are not always
able to procure the supplies they need to serve patients. Because the MOH scheduling system
makes appointments that are 15 minutes in length, there is too little time to adequately diagnose
problems or provide lifestyle guidance. The capacity to perform complex procedures at leading
medical centers has been severely reduced and concerns were expressed with regards to the
quality of care under the HTP because quality assurance rests on patient satisfaction, but
patients are not well informed about what care is appropriate (Bump and Sparks 2013).
These concerns by health workers may have negative implications on the quality and availability
medical staff (and thus the sustainability of reform) in the medium and long term. Investments
and efforts are now needed to expand opportunities for professional development and research,
so as to create a committed and well-trained health workforce.

2.     Quality and safety
The next phase of UHC needs to focus on quality and safety in health care. While the
performance-based supplementary payment system incentivizes health staff for competition,
health staff report that it reduces quality and safety of health services as physicians focus on
number of patients treated rather than quality of care. There is a common belief among health
staff that significant revisions are needed in various components of that payment system. Health
staff believes that this system, which could potentially contribute to their motivation and income
if executed properly, has functioned in the opposite direction. It is key for this quality
management process that the MOH uses its regulatory powers while the SSI uses its strategic
purchasing power. Both organizations should establish clear quality parameters and undertake
transparent benchmarking of health care providers across the country, whereby performance
pay is not only linked to the number of patients cared for but other measures more appropriate
for reflecting quality of care.

3.     Adapting to the changing burden of disease
The Global Burden of Disease 2010 analysis suggests that the country faces an emerging
burden of chronic illnesses, which in disability-adjusted life-year terms increased by more than


                                               13
50 percent in 1990–2010 (Atun et al. 2013). An efficient health system is crucial to sustain UHC
as Turkey goes through this epidemiological transition with a rising burden of chronic illnesses,
disability, and risks of illnesses.
To manage future health risks, Turkey needs to strengthen its primary health care system
further. Additional investments are needed to increase the number of family physicians and
nurses, develop the skill set of staff, and improve the physical and technical resources within
primary health care to establish a comprehensive system that provides high-quality services
with well-functioning referral and counter-referral systems. In particular, it needs to expand
access to community-based prevention and screening programs for cancer; chronic illnesses;
and for physical, nutritional, and metabolic risk factors. To monitor emerging risks for
noncommunicable diseases, it could also consider investment in population data systems.

4.       Ensuring financial sustainability and containing costs
As a natural consequence of improved utilization of health care services, health care
expenditures have also increased. Turkey spent an additional 1.4 percent of its GDP on health
between 2003 and 2011, and the share of health care in GDP increased to 6.7 percent by the
end of this period (Tatar et al. 2013). Turkey’s per capita health care expenditures are still
relatively low and its share of health expenditures in GDP is the lowest among OECD countries.
This also indicates that the progress made above has been achieved with reasonable resources
(Tatar et al. 2013).
Fiscal space is the main determinant of sustainability. Increasing THE may be tolerated as long
as it can be sustained and supported by increasing government revenue and GDP.

5.       Ensuring rational allocation of HRH
Challenges remain in transitioning from a focus on expanding the hospital sector in terms of
capacity and production, to one focused on ensuring rational use of services and countering
pressure to increase spending on hospital services (Docteur 2013). These reforms will entail:
        Establishing an effective referral system that reduces demand for services that can be
         met more efficiently in the primary care setting. This is dependent on growing the
         primary care service capacity and may also require changes in public understanding
         regarding appropriate site for provision primary care.
        Making needed further investment in primary care/prevention so as to improve public
         health while helping take pressure off of hospital sector, especially in the light of
         projections for large, looming increase in chronic diseases such as diabetes.
        Establishing measures to combat the problem of supplier-induced demand, to the extent
         there is evidence of this problem emerging.
        Conducting the necessary studies to ensure that the bundled payment levels are
         consistent with absolute and relative costs of providing the care for which payments are
         bundled and helping hospitals employ effective procurement models and rational
         decision making via central assessments.
Meeting these challenges will require development within the SSI to become an increasingly
sophisticated purchaser of hospital services and increasing capacity within the MOH to adopt a
public-health orientation in management of hospital service supply, planning and coordination.
Furthermore, the SSI and MOH will need to develop improved coherence and competence in
their respective roles. Finally, the MOH will need to prioritize the timely production of reliable



                                                14
data on hospital (and health) expenditure and financing. Such data are essential for both
retrospective assessment and prospective planning (Docteur 2013).

B. Lessons to be shared
Several lessons emerge from Turkey’s experience of UHC. Though contextual and related to
the political economy of reform, they may be useful for other middle-income countries that have
embarked on steps to UHC.

1.     Political stability and speed of reform
The AKP acted quickly on health reform to capitalize on the popular support it enjoyed following
the 2002 elections. The political stability achieved by the government, which benefited from a
majority in the Grand National Assembly, was an important factor that enabled the
transformation (Atun et al. 2013). The MOH reduced the time needed to develop its policies by
drawing largely from health reform plans that had been devised throughout the 1990s.
Previously, various coalition governments had developed reform plans, but had been unable to
gain the broad support required to adopt and implement them (Tatar et al. 2011).

2.     Committed health transformation team
On taking office in 2003, Minister Akdağ and his reform team embraced them for their own use.
This reform team was in place from 2003 to 2013, when he stepped down as minister of health
(Atun et al. 2013). This team of trusted colleagues worked closely with the minister on all
aspects of the design, adoption, and implementation of the reform. According to interviews with
current and former senior officials involved with the process, the reform team drew on the
technical expertise of those who had devised these reforms and in parallel developed a
politically viable communications strategy to present and promote the HTP. A committed
transformation team at the MOH, strong prime ministerial support for change, and the
leadership and continuity of the minister of health and senior management provided the
opportunity to execute laws that had been legislated by the Grand National Assembly (Bump
and Sparks 2013).

3.     Use of citizen satisfaction surveys
A key feature of the HTP was the emphasis placed on systematically gathering information
about population perceptions of general living conditions and public services. Regular focus
groups and annual household surveys undertaken by the Turkish Statistical Institute (Life
Satisfaction Surveys) provided comprehensive intelligence to the government on citizen
satisfaction with public services so that it could fine-tune its policies. Health services, the worst
performing in 2003 of all public services surveyed regularly, were to improve substantially with
the introduction of the HTP and UHC (Atun et al. 2013). Improved satisfaction levels increased
the legitimacy of the HTP, providing a receptive context for change, and increased the standing
of the MOH and its minister within the Cabinet of Ministers. In 2003–12, health transitioned from
being a marginal ministry (as in the 1980s and 1990s, with ministerial changes almost annually)
to a strong and assertive ministry, with annual budget increases (Atun et al. 2013).

4. Clear and well-communicated vision
The last decade’s reforms in the hospital sector appear positive for increasing equitable access
to higher-quality services. Keys to success included a clear and well-communicated vision for


                                                 15
the model pursued, a plan for strategically implementing the reforms in an appropriate
sequence, and backup plans to surmount legal and administrative barriers (Docteur 2013).

5. Combination of comprehensive demand-side changes with supply-side transformation
Comprehensive health system changes on the demand side (expansion of health insurance for
the poor and conditional cash transfers) and the supply side (human resources and service
delivery) were instrumental in expanding insurance coverage and translating UHC to greater
service access, especially for the most disadvantaged population groups. Although improved
insurance coverage enhances access, benefits were more likely to be realized and were
stronger in the presence of supply-side interventions (Atun et al. 2013).




                                           16
                                       References
Aran, M., and J. Hentschel. 2012. “Protection in Good and Bad Times? The Turkish Green Card
       Health Program.? August 1. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6178.
       http://ssrn.com/abstract=2133813
Atun, R., S. Aydın, S. Chakraborty, S. Sümer, M. Aran, I. Gürol, S. Nazlıoğlu, Ş. Özgülcü, Ü.
       Aydoğan, B. Ayar, U. Dilmen , and R. Akdağ. 2013. “Universal Health Coverage in
       Turkey: Enhancement of Equity?. The Lancet, 382: 9886, pp. 65 - 99 (doi:10.1016/S0140-
       6736(13)61051-X)
Bump, J., and S. Sparkes. 2013. A Political Economy Analysis of Turkey’s Health
      Transformation Program. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Docteur, E. 2013. “Hospital sector reform in Turkey 2003–2012: An assessment of changes in
      governance, administration and financing.? 11 August. Unpublished background paper
      prepared for the World Bank.
Menon, R., S. Mollahaliloglu, and I. Postolovska. 2013. UNICO Studies Series 18. “Toward
      Universal Coverage: Turkey’s Green Card Program for the Poor.? World Bank:
      Washington, DC.
Ikegami, N., Y. Tagawa, and Y. Tsugawa. Forthcoming. Chapter 9, “National Hospital Reform
      Results and Challenges? in Universal Health Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable
      Development: Lessons from Japan, N. Ikegami, editor. World Bank: Washington, DC.
MOH (Ministry of Health). 2011a. Turkey Health Transformation Program Evaluation Report
     2003–2010. Ankara: Ministry of Health.
———. 2011b. Health Statistics Yearbook 2011. Ankara: Ministry of Health.
Tatar, M., S. Mollahaliloğlu, B. Sahin, S. Aydin, A. Maresso, and C. Hernández-Quevedo. 2011.
       “Turkey. Health System Review?. Health Syst Transit. 2011;13(6):1-186, xiii-xiv.
       http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22455830
Tatar, M., and Y. Çelik. 2013. “Health Financing in Turkey: An Overview and Value for Money
       Analysis.? Unpublished report prepared for the World Bank.
World Bank. 2013. Turkey—Performance-based Contracting Scheme in Family Medicine:
       Design and Achievements. Washington, DC.




                                             17
Annex: Timelines of Health Reform in Turkey, 2003-2012


         Individual perf ormance-based
         supplement ary payment syst em
         implement ed in MOH inst it ut ions                                                    No payment required
                                                       Green Card holders covered
                                                                                                f rom cit izens f or
         Right t o choose a physician syst em          f or out pat ient prescript ion
                                                                                                primary care, even if
         implement ed in MOH hospit als                drugs
                                                                                                not covered under
                                                                                                social securit y                                                                              Decree in Force of Law no.
                                                       SSK pharmacies closed and                                                       Amendment s t o Social
         Green Card holders covered f or                                                        Ambulance services                     Securit y and UHI Law                                  663 on t he Organizat ion
                                                       members allowed t o access
         out pat ient                                                                           made more accessible                   adopt ed by t he Grand                                 and Dut ies of t he Minist ry
                                                       privat e f acilit ies
                                                                                                in hard-t o-reach areas                Nat ional Assembly and                                 of Healt h and it s Af f iliat es
                                                                                                in wint er                             signed by t he President                               passed est ablishing t he
                                                     SSK hospit als t ransf erred t o
     Ambulance services made                                                                                                                                                                  Public Healt h Inst it ut ion
                                                     t he MOH                                    Family medicine                       Green Card holders t o
     f ree of charge                                                                                                                                                                          and Public Hospit als Union
                                                                                                 implement ed in Elazig,               receive same benef it s as                             and moving t he MOH int o a
     Mechanisms int roduced so                                                                   Ispart a, Samsun, and                 enrollees in ot her healt h                            st ewardship role and away
     t hat t he syst em of pat ient s                                                            Izmir provinces.                      insurance schemes under                                f rom provision and
     being held in hospit als as                                                                                                       UHI                                                    f inancing. Decree also
     pawns due t o non-payment of                                                                                                                                                             est ablishes posit ive
     f ees was abrogat ed                                                                                                                                                                     incent ives.

                               2004
                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                   2008                                            2010                                           2012

     2003                                       2005                                                2007                                                    2009                                           2011




                                                                                           New Healt h Budget Law adopt ed (SUT) according t o
                                                Copayment required f or                    which: i) ref erral requirement f rom MOH hospit al t o                      Healt h payment s of civil                                Green Card program
                                                Green Card f or                            universit y hospit als removed f or SGK and Ba -Kur; ii)                     servant s and t heir                                      t ransf erred t o SSI
                                                pharmaceut icals                           pat ient s wit h chronic condit ion can ref ill prescript ion                dependent s relocat ed t o SSI
                                                                                           at pharmacy wit hout aut horizat ion f rom physician
                                                Family medicine pilot f irst               f irst ; iii) bundled (f ixed-price) payment f or out pat ient
                                                                                           and inpat ient procedures based on CPT and ICD-10                            Family Medicine
                                                implement ed in Duzce
                                                                                           int roduced in all MOH and universit y hospit als and                        implement ed count rywide,
                                                                                           privat e hospit als under cont ract wit h t he SGK; iv)                      including Ankara and
                                                                                           hospit als under cont ract wit h t he SSI required t o                       Ist anbul
     Perf ormance-based
     payment s pilot ed in 10 MOH                                                          provide in-pat ient pharmaceut icals and medical
     hospit als                                                                            devices (covered by insurance) f or f ree, and would be
                                                                                           f ined if t hey charged pat ient s; v) all MOH, universit y,
                                                                                           and privat e hospit als under cont ract wit h t he SSI
                                                                                           required t o report claims t hrough MEDULA
                      Reimbursement
                      Commission responsible f or
                      reimbursement decisions            Global budget implement ed f or MOH hospit als                                                 Family Medicine implement ed in
                      est ablished according t o                                                                                                        t he provinces of Rize, Trabzon,
                      Minist ry of Finance decree        Implement at ion of Law 5502 (int egrat ion of social                                          Tuncel  ,Uşak and Bur
                                                                                                                                                                i              sa
                                                         securit y inst it ut ions) begins
                                                                                                                                                        Cont ribut ion share payment f or
                                                         Family medicine implement ed in Eskisehir, Edirne,                                             out pat ient physician and dent ist
                                                         Denizli, Adiyaman and Gumushane provinces                                                      examinat ions int roduced
                                                         Pharmaceut ical expendit ure t racking syst em est ablished
                                                         in SGK and work on an int egrat ed claims and ut ilizat ion
                                                         management syst em f or SGK (MEDULA) init iat ed




                                                                                                                              18
