91242
THE WORLD BANK OFFICE PHNOM PENH

No. 113 Norodom Boulevard
Phnom Penh Cambodia
Tel: (855 23) 861 300
Fax: (855 23) 861 301

Printed in July 2014

Cambodia Trade Corridor Performance Assessment is a product of staff of the World Bank. The ﬁndings,
interpretation and conclusions expressed herein do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Board of Executive
Directors of the World Bank, the donors or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of the
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Cover photographs are Copyright World Bank.
A Trade Development Report

Cambodia Trade Corridor Performance
Assessment
           Table of Contents

     Acknowledgements .....................................................................................................................................IV
     Acronyms and Abbreviations....................................................................................................................... V
     Executive Summary .....................................................................................................................................VI
     1 Introduction............................................................................................................................................... 1
     2 Regional Cooperation and Regulatory Context.................................................................................... 4
     3 Core Logistics Infrastructure and Services ......................................................................................... 9
          3.1 Road Infrastructure and Transport .............................................................................................. 11
          3.2 Railways ........................................................................................................................................... 13
          3.3 Ports and Shipping Services......................................................................................................... 14
          3.4 Customs and Border Management .............................................................................................. 17
          3.5 Clearing and Forwarding Services .............................................................................................. 18
          3.6 Informal Payments in Logistics in Cambodia ............................................................................. 18
     4 Trade Corridors ...................................................................................................................................... 21
       4.1 Phnom Penh – Sihanoukville Corridor.........................................................................................23
          4.2 Bangkok - Phnom Penh Corridor..................................................................................................25
          4.3 Phnom Penh – Ho Chi Minh City Corridor....................................................................................30
          4.4 Phnom Penh-Ho Chi Minh Waterway Transport Corridor .........................................................34
     5 Comparative Assessment of Corridor Performance ........................................................................38
     6 Framework for Improving Corridor Performance ............................................................................. 41
     References ...................................................................................................................................................44




             Cambodia Trade
II           Corridor Performance Assessment
  List of Figures
Figure 1. Cambodia freight transport market (2010)
Figure 2. Distribution of trucking ﬂeet sizes (Phnom Penh operators)
Figure 3. PAS cargo throughput, 2003-10
Figure 4. Number of vessels calling at Cambodia ports
Figure 5. Distribution of vessel sizes calling at Cambodia ports
Figure 6. Container volumes at Cambodia’s main ports
Figure 7. Relationship between draft and vessel capacity
Figure 8. Process map for imports through Sihanoukville Port
Figure 9. Major trade corridors for Cambodia
Figure 10. Top 10 origins of imports
Figure 11. Top 10 destinations of exports
Figure 12. Diagram of both sides of the Aranyaprathet/Poipet border
Figure 13. Cambodia’s trade balance with Thailand, 2008-11
Figure 14. Breakdown of goods imported through the Poipet border crossing (in terms of value)
Figure 15. Type of imports through Poipet
Figure 16. Type of exports through Poipet
Figure 17. Diagram of both sides of the Bavet/Moc Bai border
Figure 18. Types of imports through Bavet
Figure 19. Types of exports through Bavet
Figure 20. Trafﬁc routing options out of Phnom Penh
Figure 21. Containerized trafﬁc handled at Phnom Penh Port (TEUs)
Figure 22. Type of container movement in Phnom Penh Port (TEUs)
Figure 23. Breakdown of transit times on the road corridors

  List of Tables
Table 1. Bilateral agreements between Cambodia and neighboring countries
Table 2. Axle weight comparison among neighboring countries
Table 3. Number of empty containers exported to regional countries, ﬁrst half of 2011
Table 4. Cost of diesel fuel (November 2010)
Table 5. Trade volumes on Cambodia’s main trade corridors
Table 6. Cambodia’s total import/export value and trade balance with Thailand
Table 7. Import and export volume between Cambodia and Thailand per Custom House
Table 8. Trade value through Aranyaprathet-Poipet border
Table 9. Total value of goods imported to Cambodia through Poipet, July 2011.
Table 10. Total import/export value and trade balance with Vietnam
Table 11. Cambodia-Vietnam trucking companies granted permits
Table 12. Comparison of corridor performances
Table 13. Transloading procedures per route


  List of Boxes
Box 1: Integrated regional logistics operations: The case of Minebea

                                                                                       Cambodia Trade
                                                                       Corridor Performance Assessment   III
         Acknowledgements
     This report is a piece of Economic Sector Work (ESW) of the EASPR Department. A team led by Julian
     Latimer Clarke, composed of Christian Ksoll, Charles Kunaka and Daniel Saslavsky, prepared the report.

     The report was prepared under the overall guidance of Sudhir Shetty, Sector Director of EASPR, and Mathew
     A. Verghis, Sector Manager for the World Bank Cambodia.

     The report beneﬁted from discussions with government ofﬁcials from the Ministry of Commerce, the Ministry
     of Economy and Finance, and the Supreme National Economic Council. The report also beneﬁtted from the
     valuable comments of Mona Haddad, Enrique Aldaz-Carroll, and Kirida Bhaopichitr.

     The authors would like to acknowledge editorial support and review from Brendan O’Driscoll, Barbara Karni,
     Amir Fouad and Peter Milne. Lyden Kong provided useful logistic and administrative support.

     Funding from the donors of the Multi-donor Trust Fund for Trade Development Support Program (TDSP),
     comprising DANIDA, the European Union and UNIDO, is gratefully acknowledged.




          Cambodia Trade
IV        Corridor Performance Assessment
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AFAFGT   ASEAN Framework Agreement on the Facilitation of Goods in Transit
APEC     Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
ASEAN    Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CAMFFA   Cambodia Freight Forwarder Association
CAMTA    Cambodia Trucking Association
CDBTA    Cross-Border Transit Agreement
CDC      Council on the Development of Cambodia
DTIS     Diagnostic for Trade Integration Strategy
FDI      Foreign Direct Investment
FCL      Full Container Load
FTA      Free Trade Agreement
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GMS      Greater Mekong Sub-region
G-PSF    Government-Private Sector Forum
HCMC     Ho Chi Minh City
JICA     Japan International Cooperation Agency
KAMSAB   Kampuchea Shipping Agency and Brokers
LCL      Less Container Load
LPI      Logistics Performance Index
MOC      Ministry of Commerce
MOL      Ministry of Labor
PAS      Port Autonomous Sihanoukville
PPAP     Phnom Penh Autonomous Port
RGC      Royal Government of Cambodia
SEZ      Special Economic Zone
SWAp     Sector Wide Approach
TEU      Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit
VMMI     Vietnam Marketing and Management Institute
UNCTAD   United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
USD      U.S. Dollar
WB       World Bank
WTO      World Trade Organization




                                                                       Cambodia Trade
                                                       Corridor Performance Assessment   V
         Executive Summary
     The study found that logistics costs are high due to transshipment costs and various forms of
     payments. Many of these payments are imposed by the private sector with little or no transparency on
     how or where the costs are incurred. International trade corridors in Cambodia therefore perform well in
     terms of time but not cost. However, the corridors with transshipment have higher costs than the national
     corridor between Phnom Penh and Sihanoukville or the river corridor to the port of Cai Mep in Vietnam.

     Large shippers and international ﬁrms prefer to use several sub-contractors to make logistics
     arrangements so they do not have to coordinate what can be fairly complex and challenging
     arrangements for shipments. Intermediation in logistics is largely carried out by local agencies, leading
     to high intermediation costs. The main reason for the high intermediation cost is the prevalence
     and wide acceptance of facilitation fees as inducements for fast clearance and processing. Facilitation
     fees, largely informal, contribute to the high costs of logistics. Intermediaries, mostly forwarders and
     brokers, play a key role in collecting these payments. However, payment of such fees is clouded by lack of
     transparency. One of the main challenges is how to deal with informal payments in logistics in Cambodia.

     Another contributor to high costs is private sector capacity in the provision of logistics services,
     which is still low. Most of the truck ﬂeet is operated by family-run businesses owning a few trucks.
     Trucks are generally old which contributes also to the lack of appetite to operate across borders
     and at the same time compromises the feasibility of developing an effective transit system.

     Furthermore, corridors with interrupted movement of trafﬁ c have higher costs than those
     with seamless movement. Though some restrictions have been lifted between pairs of countries,
     operations are governed by bilateral agreements that have quotas for trucks allowed to operate in
     other countries. The Cross-Border Transit Agreement (CBTA) provides for gradual liberalization of the
     quotas, yet there are many practical bottlenecks even for existing quotas. Generally, the existing
     regional instruments, if implemented, could go some way towards nurturing an integrated regional
     logistics market. By virtue of its geographical position in the sub-region, Cambodia exhibits the problems
     that are faced especially where trucks cannot cross international borders. Removing transshipment could
     increase spillover effects of the more efﬁcient and lower cost operations in Thailand and Vietnam.

     A recent case of a ﬁrm allowed to operate its trucks across the border with Thailand can serve
     as a template for further reforms. The government recently provided special dispensation to a ﬁrm to
     run trucks from Bangkok all the way to its factory in Phnom Penh illustrating government’s ability
     to unilaterally open the borders to through trafﬁc and the beneﬁts that would be realized by joining regional
     production networks.




          Cambodia Trade
VI        Corridor Performance Assessment
The main recommendations stemming from this report are summarized in the table below.

 Issue                          Recommendation
 Eliminate informal fees        Informal fees that seem prevalent in trade and transport facilitation
                                in Cambodia are an avoidable cost. Suggested actions are:
                                a) Detailed corruption risk mapping. This can be based on
                                   the Arusha Declaration Concerning Good Governance
                                   and Integrity in Customs.
                                b) Develop the trade portal to provide all regulatory
                                   information on requirements and formal fees
                                c) Expedite automation of customs and border management, and
                                   urgently deploy direct trade input module in ASYCUDA.

 Enhance capacity               While transport costs are not much higher than in other
 in transport and               countries, costs could be lowered by:
 logistics services             a) Completing the rehabilitation of the Phnom Penh – Sihanoukville
                                   railway line and prioritizing freight operations
                                b) Reconnecting the Thailand and Cambodia railway networks
                                c) Introducing a ﬂeet modernizing scheme with appropriate
                                   ﬁnancing and quality enforcement mechanisms.

 Work with neighbors            a) Extend the Minibea scheme to all ﬁrms,
 for an integrated road            especially those operating in SEZs.
 transport market               b) Encourage Thailand to ratify the bilateral MoU.
                                c) Work with ASEAN and GMS partners to decide on
                                   and implement a regional transit system.
                                d) Introduce a regional third party liability insurance scheme.
                                e) Agree on standardized regional axle and vehicle load limits.


 Encourage competition          There is an emerging competition yet complementary service
 between ports                  between Sihanoukville and Phnom Penh/Cai Mep ports.
                                This offers ﬂexibility and increases capacity of the overall system.
                                Rate setting by the ports should be liberalized so in addition to port
                                performance, the ports can also compete on cost.

 Capacity building              As demands increase for a sophisticated logistics sector linked
                                to the SEZs there is need to provide for capacity enhancement
                                measures for private sector service providers and regulatory
                                authorities. Training opportunities should be designed for:
                                a) Clearing and forwarding agents based on FIATA courses.
                                b) Trucking industry on ﬂeet management and modernization.
                                c) Transport sector regulatory authorities on port, road and railway
                                   regulation and rate setting principles.




                                                                                       Cambodia Trade
                                                                       Corridor Performance Assessment   V II
1                    Introduction


This paper assesses the performance of the main trade corridors that link Cambodia to overseas
markets. The assessment is based on various forms of primary data collection including surveys, trip
sheets, observations at border crossings and a logistics background paper prepared by Emerging Markets
Consultants (EMC, 2011).

Cambodian exports have grown strongly over the past ten years, boosted among other factors
by its accession to the World Trade Organization in 2004. Current government trade priorities are
to enhance competitiveness by lowering the cost of doing business and achieving full WTO compliance.
These priorities are consistent with the recommendations of the 2007 Diagnostic for Trade Integration
Strategy (DTIS) which government is implementing via a Trade Sector Wide Approach (SWAp). The Trade
SWAp is structured around three pillars: (i) cross-cutting, regulatory, and legal reforms; (ii) product-speciﬁc
support; and (iii) capacity development. One of the areas identiﬁed as critical to underpinning the
SWAp is improving Cambodia’s logistics performance.

In 2010 Cambodia ranked a lowly 129 out of 155 economies in the World Bank’s Logistics Performance
Index, behind that of immediate neighbors Laos, Thailand and Vietnam. Farmers and manufacturers
encounter difﬁculties moving goods to markets, exporters face challenges to supply overseas customers
and prices for cargo movements are higher than in neighboring Vietnam and Thailand. These factors
may be impeding Cambodia’s development by constraining the export sectors that could otherwise enjoy
a comparative advantage. The cost of staple commodities such as rice varies with proximity to
border markets and/or the large population centers of Sihanoukville, Siem Reap and Phnom Penh. Poor
logistics may therefore be exaggerating wealth inequalities between regions.

It is therefore important to examine in detail the issues surrounding Cambodia’s weak logistics
performance, including bottlenecks and gaps in infrastructure and services, storage and border
clearance. Identiﬁcation of these impediments can inform policy changes by the government and enable
line ministries and agencies to better target trade-related reforms. This paper seeks to identify the
operational performance of trade corridors linking Cambodia to regional and international trade markets
and to propose a set of actions that contribute to improving logistics performance in the country.

Shippers and logistic services providers in Cambodia, both public and private, all stress the
importance of deepening understanding of the issues impacting on logistics services and costs
in the country. They generally acknowledge that unless there are improvements, the trade and transport
facilitation infrastructure and policies remain a constraint to further trade expansion and competitive-
ness. Stakeholders are also aware that Cambodia lies in the center of a region experiencing high
growth and should take advantage of its advantageous geographic position through tighter regional
integration.


                                                                                            Cambodia Trade
                                                                            Corridor Performance Assessment       1
            Introduction




    In addition to improving capacity and efﬁciency to handle current trade ﬂows, there are two other
    forces that require a rethink of logistics in Cambodia:
    •   The rapid expansion of export processing zones which are placing new demands on system design
        and performance; and
    •   Government policy to triple rice exports.

    Investors in SEZs in Cambodia require more sophisticated and integrated logistics services than
    are predominantly available in the country. Cambodia has been promoting Special Economic Zones
    (SEZ) for the past few years. The development of the zones is based on a decree issued in 2005. Since
    then some 21 licenses have been granted to develop SEZs. Most of the SEZs are located along the
    border with Vietnam and Thailand (Koh Kong, Bavet, Poipet, Phnom Penh) and at the Port of Sihanoukville.
    A recent SEZ established in Phnom Penh seems also to have grown fairly rapidly and successfully
    attracted several investors, including some from Japan and China. Overall, four zones (Phnom Penh,
    Sihanoukville, Koh Kong and Bavet) are fully operational. The locational preferences of this ﬁrst wave
    of zones can be regarded as an indication of the high logistics costs that would be incurred elsewhere
    in the country. In fact, the main concerns expressed by Japanese investors are the high costs of electricity
    and logistics. The zone investors seek to take advantage of the incentives offered as well as the relatively
    low labor costs, and to do so while minimizing logistics costs. Based on experience in other countries
    and Cambodia’s general attractiveness for investors, there is a potential for Cambodia to expand the
    economic impact of these zones. In order to do so effectively, however, it must improve its logistics
    performance.

    There is great potential for Cambodia to leverage its lower labor costs and to join regional
    production networks in South East Asia. High logistics costs are restricting SEZ growth mostly to
    border regions. The low volume of trafﬁc on the overland routes is in part due to the poor performance
    and high cost in comparison to the sea transport routes. Currently, trade in the South East Asian region
    is conducted through large-scale sea shipments between the major ports of Thailand, Vietnam, China
    and other countries. The fast-growing middle income economies are currently constrained in their
    trade with less-developed countries with low capacity such as Cambodia, that do not presently have
    the capacity to handle time-sensitive goods at low risk. For example some investors in the SEZs in
    Cambodia are planning to produce high value components for digital cameras as components for ﬁnal
    assembly in a neighboring country. Therefore, there is potential to create virtuous cycles where the
    pressure from the private sector to increase logistics performance could provide an impetus for further
    reform to improve trade facilitation performance in Cambodia. Improvement is critical to enable the
    country to become part of the production sharing networks that are developing in the South East Asia
    region and which Cambodia has not yet fully joined.

    Government has expressed an intention to triple its rice exports over the next ﬁ ve years. The
    majority of people in Cambodia are engaged in agriculture yet the rural areas are often characterized by
    poorer transport and storage infrastructure and logistics services than the core areas. Consistent with the
    ofﬁcial aim of expanding trade in agricultural products, it is critical to understand the nature, performance
    and costs associated with logistics services at the sub-national level, especially in the lagging rural areas.

    Cambodia produces more rice than it consumes. The World Bank (2010) maintains Cambodia has
    great potential to increase its rice exports from the current 300,000 tonnes a year to a potential level
    of 2 million tonnes, therefore yielding a surplus after accounting for domestic consumption. As such,
    Cambodia has a unique opportunity to expand its market share in world rice markets. The increasing
    import demand from Philippines and Indonesia is expected to contribute to scarcity in the international



         Cambodia Trade
2        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                          Introduction




rice markets that could offer regional export opportunities for Cambodian producers. However, in
order to increase the value of exports the World Bank study proposes that Cambodia should redirect
informal paddy trade to formal milled rice exports, which requires overcoming long-term production
and infrastructure constraints. This is not easy as it requires solving problems including lack of ﬁnance
for trading and processing, and limited transport infrastructure. Another opportunity would be to pursue
bilateral negotiations with Vietnam for bonded warehouse arrangements at Ho Chi Minh (HCM) in order
to overcome the high cost of shipping exports through the Cambodia port of Sihanoukville. Estimates
are that if Cambodia was to export all surplus rice then the number of container truck requirements
for rice exports could increase from the current 6,000 to over 230,000 per annum by 2015 (World
Bank, 2010). This would increase the country’s import and export traffic by 75 percent over current
volumes for all cargo.

The above emerging demands call for increased sophistication and scale in Cambodia’s logistics
systems and infrastructure. While both emerging regional supply chains and growing agricultural
exports will continue increasing the demand for logistics services, the demands of the two are very
different, one needing seamless, fast and cost-efﬁcient logistics and the other bulk handling capabilities.
The paper takes both into consideration and identiﬁes what could be the building blocks for a future higher
capacity and more efﬁcient national logistics system in Cambodia.

This paper is based on a background paper prepared by Emerging Markets Consultants (EMC,(2011),
following ﬁeldwork carried out between September and December 2011. Information was collected
from a variety of sources including a survey of industry stakeholders in the trucking and shipping
industries, site visits, observation of border checkpoints and the compilation of detailed trip sheets by
drivers on trafﬁc corridors. The report encompasses the movement of goods by road, sea and rail and
assesses Cambodia’s relative advantages and disadvantages in each of these contexts. The report was
compiled simultaneously with similar reports on logistics in Thailand, Laos and Vietnam, though the
information from those reports has only been included here to the extent that it may be relevant to
Cambodia speciﬁcally. The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the support of private sector
stakeholders, the Royal Government of Cambodia and EMC in supporting this initiative.

The remainder of the report is divided into ﬁve sections: Section 2 sketches out the regional context for
logistics in Cambodia; Section 3 examines Cambodia’s core logistics infrastructure and services; Section
4 focuses on the road, sea and rail corridors connecting Cambodia to overseas markets; Section 5 makes
a comparative assessment of the corridors and Section 6 presents a summary of the main ﬁndings and
recommendations for policy makers.




                                                                                         Cambodia Trade
                                                                         Corridor Performance Assessment      3
    2                     Regional Cooperation and
                          Regulatory Context


    Although Cambodia is a coastal country with access to its own domestic seaport, regional logistics
    and interconnectivity with its neighbors are still important to the performance of the national
    logistics system. This is because there is great potential to trade using overland transport routes
    especially with Vietnam, Thailand and Laos. In this regard there are two main regional agreements that
    Cambodia is party to that potentially have significant impacts on the efficiency of regional corridor
    operations. These are the ASEAN Framework Agreement on the Facilitation of Goods in Transit of 1998
    and the GMS CBTA of 1999, which are seen as complementary agreements. Cambodia, in its role as Chair
    of ASEAN in 2012 may be able to focus attention on the implementation of these agreements. The recent
    CLV Framework Agreement signed with Laos and Vietnam and the Cross Border Navigation Agreement
    provide some leverage for the removal of existing regulatory impediments.

    ASEAN Framework Agreement on the Facilitation of Goods in Transit

    The ASEAN Framework Agreement for the Facilitation of Goods in Transit is one of two competing
    proposals for an integrated transit regime in South East Asia. Cambodia together with Laos, Thailand,
    and Viet Nam are parties to the ASEAN agreement whose objective is to facilitate transportation of
    goods in transit; simplify and harmonize transport, trade and customs regulations requirements;
    establish an effective, efficient, integrated and harmonized transit transport system in ASEAN. The
    ASEAN Framework Agreement for the Facilitation of Goods in Transit (AFAFGT) of 1998 sets out a package
    of several measures pertaining to regulation of frontier facilities (designation frontier posts), harmonization
    and simplification of customs procedures, traffic, transit transport services, road transport permits,
    technical requirements of vehicles, mutual recognition of inspection certiﬁcates, mutual recognition of
    driving licenses, and motor vehicle third-party insurance. The high aspirations of ASEAN, however, are yet
    to be fully realized.

    The AFAFGT framework on trade facilitation offers great potential for Cambodia. It recognizes that
    logistics performance for the ASEAN member countries can be improved through measures to facilitate
    the fast movement of goods carried by road and rail transport in particular. It recognizes also that the
    beneﬁts of improved infrastructure across South East Asia will remain unrealized unless the regulatory
    environment is modernized to remove regulatory bottlenecks in particular. One of the main bottlenecks
    is in the granting of transit and trafﬁc rights. Common practices at most border posts is for the transloading
    or cargo from a vehicle registered in one country to another and for the transit procedure to be initiated
    at each land border crossing. A study by ALMEC cited by IBF International Consulting (2008) estimates
    that this increases the cost of transport by US$100-300 per container on top of transit fees which
    add another US$150 to US$200. Perhaps not surprisingly, there is little transit trafﬁc across several
    countries, and especially across Cambodia. This is a signiﬁcant barrier that suppresses intra-regional
    trade. However, implementation of the AFAFGT framework has been very slow. Rather, countries seem
    to rely more on the GMS framework.

          Cambodia Trade
4         Corridor Performance Assessment
Greater Mekong Sub -Region Cross Border Transit Agreement (CBTA)

The CBTA is the second competing transit regime in the region. The CBTA has some progressive
provisions that are poorly adhered to in the region. The CBTA was originally a trilateral agreement
between Lao, Thailand, and Vietnam signed on 26 November 1999 at Vientiane. Cambodia acceded in 2001
and China and Myanmar later also joined. It is a comprehensive multilateral instrument that covers
several aspects of cross-border transport facilitation, including single-stop and single- window customs
inspection systems, cross-border movement of persons (i.e., visas for persons engaged in transport
operations), transit traffic regimes, including exemptions from physical customs inspection, bond
deposit, escort, and agriculture and veterinary inspection, requirements that road vehicles will have to
meet to be eligible for cross-border trafﬁc, exchange of commercial trafﬁc rights and infrastructure,
road and bridge design standards, road signs, and signals. The CBTA has 20 annexes and protocols that
detail provisions on these areas. The CBTA applies to selected routes mutually agreed between
states with designated points of entry and exit. However, not all countries have ratiﬁed all the Annexes
and Protocols, preventing the full implementation of the agreement. Rather, implementation has largely been
 driven by bilateral agreements between the parties with the CBTA serving as a framework agreement.

In particular, Thailand has not ratiﬁed some key annexes of the CBTA thereby hampering the
realization of the intended beneﬁts. Even though the CBTA is not perfect, ratiﬁcation of some of its
provisions could allow more seamless movement of cargo across borders without the need to transship
at the borders. Taking the lead to provide a predictable regulatory regime would beneﬁt Thai companies in
particular that seek to exploit the low labor costs in neighboring countries such as Cambodia.

                                                                                         Cambodia Trade
                                                                         Corridor Performance Assessment      5
            Regional Cooperation
            and Regulatory Context




    There are several bilateral legal instruments that Cambodia is party to and which affect the
    performance of the regional trade corridors (Table 1):

    Table 1. Bilateral agreements between Cambodia and neighboring countries

                                                                                  Year of ratification,
       Instrument
                                                                                 accession, agreement
       Bilateral Agreement on Waterway Transportation
                                                                                            1998
       (Cambodia and Vietnam)
       New Bilateral Agreement on Waterway Transportation
                                                                                            2009
       (Cambodia and Vietnam)

       Bilateral agreements on road transport with Cambodia                                 1999

       Mekong River Commission Agreement (Article 9)                                        1999

       Accession to GMS Cross Border Transit Agreement                                      2001

       GMS Customs Transit Guarantee System (allows Thailand and
                                                                                            2009
       Vietnam to transit across Lao without transshipment)


    The CBTA provides for gradual liberalization of the quota arrangements between countries. This
    has happened between Cambodia and Vietnam where the quota has been revised gradually over time.
    Generally, the transport agencies seem to retain discretionary powers in the issuing of permits. Even then
    in all cases there remain many practical bottlenecks even for existing quotas. Operators ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
    operate out of their country of origin because of language issues, opaque regulations, driving conditions
    and vulnerability to corrupt practices and other barriers to market entry.

    Road transport services across the region are governed by bilateral agreements, though within the
    framework of the GMS Cross Border Transit Agreement. Implementation of the CBTA has been slow
    and this is reﬂected in the differences in transit practices across borders between Cambodia and all three
    of her immediate neighbors.

    Anecdotally, there is evidence that the regional logistics markets are not well integrated. For
    instance, Thai truckers interviewed at the Poipet border complained that few Thai trucks are allowed to
    cross the border, due to Cambodia’s many regulations. According to them, “few companies and few trucks
    drive the price up” (EMC, 2011). The small number of trucks on either side of the border contributes to an
    environment in which competition is impeded.

    Route competitiveness is weakened by the lack of a clear cross-border agreement between
    Cambodia and Thailand and Vietnam. As a result there is a prevalent practice of trans-loading cargo
    at the Poipet and Bavet borders with Thailand and Vietnam respectively. At present, Cambodian trucks
    are not allowed to operate in Thailand and a very limited number of Cambodian trucks operate in
    Vietnam. Similarly, Thai and Vietnamese trucks are generally restricted from operating in Cambodia,
    except to transload goods within the immediate border area, as outlined in greater detail in section 4 of
    this report. The lack of a transit agreement forces trucking companies to transload goods near the border,
    resulting in delays, additional costs, restricted competition and a limit on the price and shipping options
    available to the general public.




         Cambodia Trade
6        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                          Regional Cooperation
                                                                                        and Regulatory Context




Until recently there has been no exchange of traffic rights between Thailand and Cambodia
apart from limited arrangement in the border areas. This is despite the fact that a ﬁrst step was taken
to implement the CBTA through an MOU signed in May, 2010. The MoU provides for an initial quota of 40
trucks per country to be allowed to operate into each other’s territory. However, the Thai parliament has not
ratiﬁed all the protocols of the CBTA. Presently, Thai trucks may therefore only enter Cambodia up to an
ICD in Poipet where the goods are transshipped. An exceptional case has recently arisen: the company
Minebea is now permittedto drive its goods, sealed in containers, from Bangkok to Phnom Penh without
transshipment at the border. 1

There is a bilateral agreement between Cambodia and Laos which can allow trucks to cross
the border. The agreement limits each side to 20 permits each, though presently demand is so low that
the permits are underutilized. Route management between these two countries is not viewed as a
constraint to trade at this time.

The Thai border restrictions prevent positive knowledge and learning effects between the
Thai and Cambodian trucking industries. As noted above, trucks cannot operate deep into the
neighboring country apart from a limited number of transshipment locations. Operators consider as a
major constraint the fact that Thailand and Cambodia drive on different sides of the road, left in Thailand
and right in Cambodia. They suggest that allowing vehicles into each other’s territory would increase
trafﬁc accidents. The present restrictions appear to limit the potential spillover effects from Thailand’s
more open and more modern road freight operating environment.

Cambodia and Vietnam have a bilateral agreement which provides for each side to issue up to 300
permits. However, freight transport operators on both sides prefer to operate only to the border, reportedly
due to the high cost of obtaining the necessary permits. Out of the quota of 300 permits each side is
allowed, more than two-thirds are used for passenger services. Otherwise trucks carrying goods for the
SEZ at Manhattan near Bavet, on the Vietnam border are exempt with pre-clearance. Though inefﬁcient,
this practice seems to be widely accepted in the ASEAN region and can be seen at similar checkpoints
in other countries such as the Thai-Malaysia border on the Bangkok-Kuala Lumpur-Singapore route. The
cost of transshipment on the Cambodia-Vietnam route is about US$80 per container.

Besides market access, there are two other issues that impact on road transport service integration
between Cambodia and neighboring countries. These are differences third party insurance and axle
load limits.

Southeast Asia does not have a functional regional third party liability insurance scheme. Goods and
vehicles registered in one country require third party liability insurance in case there is damage to property
or personal injury in another country. Insurance companies do not cover cargo beyond their national borders
and this represents a risk to the consigner and consignee. If there is an accident in Cambodia for instance, a
truck and its cargo may be impounded and it can take months to be released, incurring high fees and charges
(shipping line container fees) in the process. Presently cross border operators must independently arrange
for insurance when Thai trucks cross the border. International best practice is to introduce a regional third
party liability insurance scheme, of which there are several that are well established in Europe and even in Africa.

One of the outstanding aspects of regional harmonization is on axle load limits. Presently each of the
countries in Southeast Asia has a different maximum axle load limit (Table 1). Sufﬁce to say such disparities
necessitate heavy overload control infrastructure with attendant negative impacts on trade facilitation.




                                                                                               Cambodia Trade
                                                                               Corridor Performance Assessment         7
             Regional Cooperation
             and Regulatory Context




    Table 2. Axle weight comparison among neighboring countries

                                      Lao PDR               Thailand                   Cambodia
                                      (Maximum Tonnage)     (Maximum Tonnage)          (Maximum Tonnage)
        Gross weight allowed          39                    45                         40
        18-wheel truck


    The reasons offered by trucking companies for vehicle overloading are threefold: cost competi-
    tiveness, the availability of trucks capable of carrying heavy loads and demand for heavy goods:

    •   There is a perception that shipping overweight is needed (or is a calculated risk) in order to remain
        cost competitive, particularly in an environment where some large players benefit from informal
        relationships.
    •   Foreign truck makers have been building wider and higher vehicles to reduce costs but the additional
        size and weight of these trucks are not suited to Cambodia’s roads and national legislation has not
        been updated to encompass their use.
    •   Cambodia’s relatively rapid economic development is increasing the demand for movement of heavy
        construction materials and agricultural goods (such as rice).

    In fact weighbridges provide one of the major opportunities for improper practices along regional
    trade corridors. There is need for strict enforcement of vehicle axle load limits. Vehicle overloading imposes
    an economic cost on the economy by increasing infrastructure maintenance costs while accruing
    benefits to individual operators. However, the enforcement of weight requirements also opens up
    opportunities for improper practices unless it is properly regulated. In some cases, the weighbridge stop
    is used by some operators as an opportunity to offer payments to ofﬁcials so they can let overloaded
    trucks through. A stricter enforcement of good practices with respect to fee collection at weighbridge
    stations may be warranted.




          Cambodia Trade
8         Corridor Performance Assessment
3
                           Core Logistics
                           Infrastructure and
                           Services


Cambodia has a sound core logistics infrastructure in place, comprised of sea and river ports, a
national road network and a railway line. The domestic airport is also linked to regional hub airports
in Thailand and Vietnam and through them to numerous other destinations across the world. Overall the
economy presently generates around 317,205 standard containers of cargo per year, both imports and
exports (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Cambodia freight transport market (2010)


                                                        Cambodia’s Containerized Trade

                                                                317,205 teu




                                       60,246 teu                222,928 teu




                                                                   Sea
                                              19%                  70%                    11%



Source: Authors’ estimates, data from various sources


The imbalance between import and export volumes in Cambodia results in a scarcity of
containers available for shipments in key routes, due to signiﬁcant number of empty containers
being shipped abroad. Exports are much less than imports. This contributes to a lack of ‘liquidity’ in
the container market as containers are sometimes unavailable. The majority of such empty box shipments
 are to Singapore and Thailand.

Shipping lines impose strict limits on the return of empty containers to the ports. Shipping
companies (owners of the containers) require empty containers to be returned within 7 days2 . These limits
are much more generous in Cambodia than they are in Laos, where containers have to be returned within
four days. Given the distance and time performance of domestic logistics in Cambodia, trucking companies




                                                                                               Cambodia Trade
                                                                               Corridor Performance Assessment   9
     typically do not pay container storage fees. Containers are instead stored at dry ports (often owned by
     trucking companies) at carrier charge. In general, there is a collegial business relationship between shipping,
     freight forwarding and trucking companies with respect to containers, although overall industry
     coordination could be improved as evidenced by the large number of empty containers being both imported
     and exported. The rationale for shipping empty containers is that large shipping companies have
     container leasing agreements with other countries’ ports (i.e. Singapore, Hong Kong) and have to re-export
     the empty containers to avoid paying demurrage fees. Since containers cannot be stockpiled, a scenario
     results whereby empty containers of different sizes are being both imported and exported in order to meet
     export demand from Cambodian ﬁrms.

     Table 3. Number of empty containers exported to regional countries, ﬁrst half of 2011

      Countries                                            Volume of containers (first half 2011)
                                                         20ft                   40ft                   45ft
      Other Asia                                         1179                   1495                    5
      Singapore                                           837                   902                     6
      Thailand                                           884                    641                     0
      Hong Kong                                           170                   283                     0
      Others (not stated)                                 156                   161                     2




          Cambodia Trade
10        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                           Core Logistics Infrastructure
                                                                                                            and Services




3.1 Road Infrastructure and Transport
Cambodia has a road network of approximately 38,257 km comprised of 4,757 km of national roads and
5,700 km of provincial roads, which fall under the stewardship of the Ministry of Public Works and Transport,
and 27,800 km of tertiary roads under the Ministry of Rural Development. Major roads link Phnom
Penh and regional centers to all neighboring countries. The network has been much improved since the
mid-1990s and is generally in fair to good condition. Road quality in Cambodia is therefore not considered
a serious constraint to trade. However, trucking ﬁrms perceive the condition of roads in Cambodia not to
be as wide or as well maintained as in neighboring countries. Some ﬁrms mention the need for further road
infrastructure development in the future in order to keep up with regional standards. A major infrastructural
impediment, noted during ﬁeld research for this report and mentioned by truck drivers, is the lack of a
bridge at the Mekong River crossing at Neak Loeung, on the critical route between Phnom Penh and Ho
Chi Minh City in Vietnam. However, a new bridge is under construction at Neak Loeung, which is scheduled
for completion in 2015.

In terms of other infrastructural impediments, trucking companies point to road safety and accidents
as a major problem. This is not surprising as “Cambodia has one of the highest incidences of road
accidents in the world, with 10 fatalities per 10,000 vehicles in 2010. This is a 44% decrease from 2007,
but still represents the highest accident rate in Southeast Asia. Thus, road safety continues to be a
major sector concern, especially with the growth of trafﬁc in provincial and rural areas.” 3 The survey ﬁrm
EMC (2011) established that frequent road accidents on the main Phnom Penh – Sihanoukville route often
result in congestion or even closure of the corridor at times.

The vehicle population of Cambodia has been increasing very rapidly, as is consistent with its rapid
rate of economic growth. Estimates are that the vehicle population is doubling every 6-7 years. For example
the population of cars increased from 84,000 in 2003 to about 157,000 in 2009. In 2009, it was estimated
that there were 98,438 cars and buses in the country. Statistics on the trucking industry are not readily
available, but the trucking association estimates that there more than 3,000 trucks of 20t or higher carrying
capacity. The total heavy goods truck ﬂeet in the country is estimated at 1,500 (EMC, 2011). These are
the trucks that are often used on the international trade routes. Over 90 percent of the ﬂeet is registered
in Phnom Penh, underscoring the importance of the capital to logistics in the country.

A few large trucking ﬁrms dominate the road haulage sector in Cambodia. There are many operators
with some ﬂeets, typically operated in an informal way. The twenty largest companies have on average
20 – 30 trucks each and between them operate more than 1,000 trucks. The largest ﬁrm has more than
200 trucks. The Government is now encouraging such operators to become formalized. This is being promoted
through the association of trucking ﬁrms.

The major trucking firms are organized in a formal trucking association, the Cambodia
Trucking Association (CAMTA). As of September 2011, CAMTA had 15 trucking companies as members.
Between them the ﬁrms owned a total of 800 large trucks (majority semi-trailer). As such, member
companies represent more than half of the heavy vehicle ﬂeet in the country. The membership has not
changed signiﬁcantly in recent years though the Government is now actively encouraging all operators
to join. The distribution of the CAMTA members’ ﬂeet compared with the general population is shown
below (Figure 25).



3
  Source: http://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/cif/sites/climateinvestmentfunds.org
/ﬁles/PPCR%208%20Cambodia%20Project.pdf



                                                                                                       Cambodia Trade
                                                                                       Corridor Performance Assessment     11
              Core Logistics Infrastructure
              and Services




     Figure 2. Distribution of trucking ﬂeet sizes (Phnom Penh operators)




     Source: Authors’ estimates, data from EMC and CAMTA.


     Most of the trucks operate on two routes connecting Phnom Penh to the ports of Sihanoukville and
     Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam. There is very little trafﬁc between Cambodia and Laos and small volumes
     on the Thailand-Cambodia route. Trafﬁc volumes have been increasing fastest on the route to Vietnam.

     Some of the key characteristics of the trucking industry are the following:
     •   The ﬂeet is generally old and prone to frequent breakdowns. Trucks are purchased and imported
         second-hand, mainly from South Korea, Taiwan and the United States. There is presently no legislative
         limit on the age of trucks when ﬁrst imported, though the average is 5-7 years.
     •   The cost of vehicles (and access to ﬁnance) poses a challenge for trucking companies. Operators
         can borrow money from the bank to purchase trucks though most prefer to ﬁnance using their own
         resources due to high interest rates charged by banks. This explains the use of second-hand trucks which
         leads to higher maintenance costs (in addition to fuel costs) and poses a major constraint to the overall
         level of prices and the overall efﬁciency of the Cambodian trucking ﬂeet.
     •   Cambodia’s trucks are under-utilized in international terms. Trucks average 5-6 trips per month,
         giving an annual mileage of less than 40,000km. This suggests the trucks are seriously under-utilized
         as the mileage is about one-third that reported in Southern Africa, for example. The low level of utilization
         is partly a function of lack of return loads, low frequency of truck movements and the industry’s limited
         geographic scope.

     High fuel cost is considered to be the greatest impediment to business operations, driving up total
     costs. One trucking company reported that fuel accounted for up to 70 percent of the total transport
     costs. This proportion of fuel to other costs is consistent with reports from Lao PDR and Thailand, where
     fuel cost was also reported as a major constraint. It reﬂects a major challenge that is faced in investing in
     new ﬂeets. In other regions of the world it is not unusual for fuel costs to be less than half of total costs,
     so the proportion of costs represented by fuel in the overall outlay reported by Cambodian truckers is
     large by international standards.

     It is not clear the extent to which fuel prices affect road transport costs, and hence the extent to
     which fuel prices impact on the competitiveness of Cambodian trucking companies. As of September
     2011, fuel prices in Cambodia were around 4,800 riel for diesel and 5,200 riel for gasoline. A survey of




           Cambodia Trade
12         Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                             Core Logistics Infrastructure
                                                                                              and Services




international fuel prices (Table 17) shows that Cambodian fuel prices are on the higher end of the
spectrum within the group of ASEAN countries, but close to those of Lao PDR, even though Lao is
landlocked. Vietnam has the lowest prices of the four countries, possibly due to government subsidies.
The limited geographic scope of the Cambodian trucking industry, rarely crossing national boundaries,
may mitigate the high cost of fuel in Cambodia compared with its near neighbors and thus limit the
impact of relatively high fuel costs on the overall level of pricing in Cambodia.

Table 4. Cost of diesel fuel (November 2010)

          Country               Cost of diesel (US c/lt)
          Cambodia                             98
             Laos                              97
           Thailand                            95
Source: www.gtz.de/fuelprices


Competition among trucking companies is mostly local. Due to the fact that foreign trucks are
restricted from operating deeply into Cambodia, international competition does not strongly affect pricing
policy for trucking services (EMC, 2011). The logistics landscape is changing, however. There are new
international players entering the market, as evidenced by Japanese logistics companies setting up
ofﬁce in Cambodia (Nippon Express, Yusen Logistics and Sojitz Logistics, for example). These companies
have potential to strengthen the logistics environment, especially as CBTA implementation and BRTAs
between Cambodia and its neighboring countries are ﬁnalized. Competition in the trucking sector,
however, faces additional barriers to entry in the form of cross border truck quotas that are only allotted
to majority-owned Cambodian ﬁrms. Several trucking companies report that more than 50 percent of
their sales originate from one key client—a ﬁnding that indicates market entry is predicated on having
an anchor client rather than functioning in a state of free competition for services. A survey by EMC
(2011) found only one logistics company reported a large number of customers (about 1,000), with
only 11-25 percent of revenue coming from their most important one. These findings suggest that
current operational practices limit contestability in Cambodia’s trucking service markets.



3.2 Railways
Generally, given its limited availability, railway transport does not appear to be inﬂuencing pricing
and competition in the transport service markets. Cambodia has a one-meter gauge network which was
concessioned to a private operator in 2009. The network consists of the Northern line linking Phnom Penh
with Sisophon (338 km), the Southern Line linking Phnom Penh to Sihanoukville (264 km), and a branch
line from Phnom Penh to the petroleum storage facilities at Ton Le Sap River (6 km). The Cambodia
railway network is meter gauge, the same as in Thailand. The railway system is only partially
operational and is undergoing rehabilitation, which will include the reconstruction of the “missing”
stretch of rail from Sisophon to Poipet (48 km) on the Thailand - Cambodia border. This stretch of
railway was removed during the war in the 1970s and its restoration will enable a link from Cambodia
to Thailand. It is possible that once the railway is operational it could help overcome some of the costs
incurred in transshipping cargo at the Cambodia-Thailand border. However, this will depend on the
efficiency of wagon transfers on crossing the border.




                                                                                         Cambodia Trade
                                                                         Corridor Performance Assessment      13
             Core Logistics Infrastructure
             and Services




     3.3 Ports and Shipping Services
     Cambodia is served by two main domestic ports, one river port in Phnom Penh and a seaport in
     Sihanoukville. Both ports are state owned but autonomously operated. (Another port, called the Mong
     Rithy Port, exists under a semi-ofﬁcial status. It is located North-West of Sihanoukville but does not pub-
     lish ofﬁcial data and was not covered by the EMC survey on which this report is based). Sihanoukville
     is operated by Port Autonomous Sihanoukville (PAS) and Phnom Penh by Phnom Penh Automous Port
     (PPAP) trusts.

     Cambodia has access by road and inland water transport to seaport trade gateways. Traffic to
     Sihanoukville from Phnom Penh is transported by road while that to the Vietnamese ports moves either
     via the Mekong River via staging points in Cambodia to the deep water port of Cai Mep (some 35 miles
     southeast of Ho Chi Minh City) in Vietnam or directly to Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) port. The port of Cai Mep
     was opened in 2006 as a joint venture between the shipping line Maersk (49 percent) and the
     Vietnam-based Saigon Port and Vietnam National Shipping Lines, Vinalines. Whereas the HCMC port
     serves as a gateway for waterborne trade between Cambodia and Vietnam and as a transshipment
     port to major maritime destinations (with some direct services, but also via Singapore and Malaysia),
     Cai Mep port is used as transshipment point for direct liner services to most hub ports in the US, the Middle
     East and Asia.

     The Port of Sihanoukville is the largest seaport in the country. The port was constructed in the
     1950s and became operational in 1960. It has an old berth that can accommodate four medium sized
     vessels on both sides. A new quay was constructed in the 1960s which can accommodate three vessels
     with about seven meters draft. A container terminal opened in 2007 and this can handle vessels with about
     10.5m draft. Port cargo volume is close to 2.5m tones per annum, more than two thirds of which is
     containerized. The actual volume of containers as measured in twenty-foot equivalent units is just over
     250,000 TEU per year.

     The Port of Sihanoukville has a limited draft which in turn restricts the sizes of vessels that can call
     at the port. The limitation and the generally small volumes of trafﬁc are one of the reasons why Sihanouk-
     ville is predominantly a feeder port linked in the main by feeder services to Singapore and Hong Kong.



     Figure 3. PAS cargo throughput, 2003-10




          Cambodia Trade
14        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                             Core Logistics Infrastructure
                                                                                              and Services




Sihanoukville is the main trade gateway for seaborne cargo entering or leaving Cambodia. Cargo
passing through Sihanoukville is transshipped through Singapore or Hong Kong. There are, therefore, no
direct vessel calls serving Cambodian ports. Sihanoukville handles about three-quarters of all trade trafﬁc
by volume. In 2008 the port handled about 250,000 TEUs while the river port handled about 50,000
during the same year (Figures 3 and 6.) Cargo volumes passing through Vietnam have been increasing in
recent years, due to the perceived competitiveness of both the overland and sea routes.

Vessels calling at Sihanoukville Port are small by international standards. The biggest ports in the
region through which Cambodia trafﬁc is transshipped (Hong Kong and Singapore) are more than 100
times larger than Sihanoukville in terms of container volumes. Sihanoukville Port is smaller than all the
other seaports in neighboring countries and is characterized by much lower international connectivity, as
measured by the UNCTAD Liner Shipping Connectivity Index. These patterns both show and explain why
the port operates largely as a feeder for the nearby deep-water ports (Figures 4 and 5).

Figure 4. Number of vessels calling at Cambodia ports




Source: World Bank and Containerization International, 2010.


Figure 5. Distribution of vessel sizes calling at Cambodia ports




Source: World Bank and Containerization International, 2010.



                                                                                         Cambodia Trade
                                                                         Corridor Performance Assessment      15
              Core Logistics Infrastructure
              and Services




     Figure 6. Container volumes at Cambodia’s main ports




     Source: Authors, data from PPAP and PAS.


     One of the reasons why Sihanoukville does not handle large vessels is due to the limited depth of the
     entrance channel to the harbor. Rocky outcroppings in the channel limit entry to vessels of a maximum
     draft of 8.5m. Empirical evidence points to a relationship between draft and vessel size (Figure 30) and it
     is not every port in the world that is capable of handling such large vessels. Potentially, therefore, due to
     its limited depth, the maximum size of the container vessels that can be handled at Sihanoukville is about
     1,800 TEU capacity.

     Figure 7. Relationship between draft and vessel capacity




     Source: Palsson (1998).

     The trade trafﬁc volume on the major trade routes out of Phnom Penh to the seaports is inﬂuenced in
     part by the frequency of vessel calling at the respective ports. So, while some shipping lines, such as
     APL, provide a regular weekly service to Sihanoukville, it is only a feeder service to Singapore. In compari-
     son, Ho Chi Minh has many direct vessel calls to numerous overseas destinations. Shippers typically make
     an assessment of the option that gives the shortest possible transit time within the constraints imposed
     by their overseas buyers. Cambodia’s ports are not functioning as international gateways. Improvements
     in physical capacity including blasting and dredging to deepen the entrance channel would be required for
     direct vessel calls, especially by the larger vessels now used in international shipping.

           Cambodia Trade
16         Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                                                                                               Core Logistics Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                                                and Services




The most competitive route for shipping is via the Mekong River from Phnom Penh to Cai Mep port
outside Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam. Trafﬁc through PPAP has been growing in recent years. This is
mainly due to the connection to Cai Mep port in Vietnam by river barge, which is an option that offers
international connectivity advantages over both Sihanoukville and Ho Chi Minh ports. Sailing down the
river from Phnom Penh to Cai Mep and linking to a deep sea vessel to the United States is US$200 cheaper
per container and two days shorter than driving from Phnom Penh and connecting through Ho Chi Minh.
The same route is also US$100 cheaper and 3 days shorter than going through Sihanoukville. A new
port with an adjacent container terminal is under development in Phnom Penh, some 30km downstream
from the current port, which will ultimately have a capacity of 300,000 TEU per year. This will add to the
efﬁciency of the river transport option for shipments from Cambodia to Vietnam’s deep-sea ports.



3.4 Customs and Border Management
It generally takes a few hours to clear the customs procedures related to cargo through Cambodia’s
various ports of entry. There is an ongoing process of automating customs processes, though clearing
agents or importers are not yet able to enter data directly into the customs system. The authorities are
already using some form of risk management, in which about 20 percent of cargo passes through a red
channel and in general some 60 percent of cargo is passed free of physical inspection.

Shippers in Cambodia suggest that the clearance procedure is cumbersome and signiﬁcantly
increases costs. Part of the clearance process takes place before goods are shipped to Cambodia,
when the importer submits documents for valuation purposes. When the goods ﬁnally arrive in Cambodia
the preparatory document submission often helps with the clearance process, due to the fact that the
contentious stage of goods clearance may already have been completed. Clearance itself is based on
submission of hard copies of all documents, some of which, such as the import permit, can only be
obtained in Phnom Penh. Clearing agents have to employ staff to take the documents to the port of entry
and clearance can only be done by a registered broker. The process is characterized by duplication of
bureaucratic activities and lack of data sharing between Customs and other border agencies, such as
Camcontrol. (Figure 31 shows trade process maps for PAS.)

Figure 8. Process map for imports through Sihanoukville Port
                                                                                                                                                                        ort
                                                                                              n to                                                                  Rep
                                                                                         atio                                                     ase
                                                                                                                                                     d          vey          tion
                                                                                     ent                     sta
                                                                                                                 rts                            ie           ur          nta                          sue
                                                    e              m s             m                                                       n re           eS         me                           y is
                                              ple
                                                  t
                                                             ust
                                                                 o
                                                                              oc u                      tion                           a tio           issu       ocu rity                    orit g
                                           om             hC              it d TROL                 pec                          ecia
                                                                                                                                      r            O L          D
                                                                                                                                                             mit utho                      uth Billin
                      ths                c             it               m                      in s
                                                                                                                              sd                TR                                     t A     f
                ber                din
                                       g
                                               iste
                                                    rw              Sub CON            tom
                                                                                            s                                                ON          Sub ort A                  Por eipt o
                               ioa                                       M                                                tom           MC
         ship               Un             Reg                        CA           Cus                                 Cus          CA                    to P                       Rec




Source: World Bank and Emerging Markets Consulting, 2009.



                                                                                                                                                                        Cambodia Trade
                                                                                                                                                        Corridor Performance Assessment                     17
             Core Logistics Infrastructure
             and Services




     3.5 Clearing and Forwarding Services
     Logistics services in Cambodia are typically provided by numerous brokers, each contributing one
     activity to the ﬁnal clearance of the goods. This means that multiple actors are involved in the
     transport and delivery of goods, muddying the waters about where and to who and for what various
     payments are really being made. This can be illustrated by the case of textile exports, where manufac-
     turers pass shipments to Inland Container Depot operators who work with forwarding agents and trucking
     companies to get a shipment to the port. For many exports, shipping lines have typically been designated
     in advance by the overseas buyer. In order to ensure smooth operations, therefore, the agents working
     with the designated shipping line tend to be preferred over independent agents, creating an informal bias in
     favor of one shipper that impedes competition and impacts on costs in general. As a result of this
     practice, while in theory there is competition in logistics services, in practice shippers have to work with
     service providers linked to one or other of the shipping lines. The lack of clarity about the roles played
     by various brokers presents exporters with an opaque process and regulatory environment that is
     characterized by limited competition and unusually high costs for shippers.

     In agriculture, the practices are similar though processors and exporting companies have greater
     control over the farmgate portions of their supply chains. Processors purchase from middlemen
     who buy directly from farmers and have to work with forwarders to export their produce. As a result
     there is little in-house management of logistics services by the country’s private sector.

     Freight forwarders are probably the most important player in organizing logistics in Cambodia.
     EMC (2011) found signiﬁcant overlaps among the services provided by trucking and freight forwarding
     ﬁrms. Some trucking companies provide basic transportation services while a few also offer freight
     forwarding services and warehousing. Some freight forwarders offer standard clearance services while
     others also own their own trucks. In many cases, businesses claim to provide a wide range of services but
     actually outsource the activities to another party. The area of most common overlap between trucking
     and freight forwarding companies is provision of customs brokering and warehousing services. In total,
     there are about 200 freight forwarders operating in the country.

     The freight forwarders in Cambodia are organized in a national association, the Cambodia Freight
     Forwarder Association (CAMFFA). CAMFFA was ofﬁcially established and recognized by the government
     in 2004. It has 21 members: 19 regular members and 2 associated members. CAMFFA and the
     Cambodian Trucking Association (CAMTA) are active in the same Government-Private Sector Forum (G-PSF)
     working group, which allows for dialogue between the private sector and the Government on logistics
     and trade related issues.



     3.6 Informal Payments in Logistics in Cambodia
     One of the fundamental problems underlying the logistics market in Cambodia is the opacity of the
     costs elements in determining the ﬁnal price for shipments. This is one of the reasons manufacturing
     ﬁrms do not invest in in-house logistics capability, because they wish to avoid having to deal with some
     of the informal practices that are encountered along the trade corridors. Importantly, the desire to avoid
     informal fees, or the desire to avoid being personally involved in making informal fee payments, enhances
     the power of agents and brokers to increase the charges involved in transporting goods into and out of
     the country. The ability of agents and brokers to claim the existence of high informal fees, and use it as



          Cambodia Trade
18        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                               Core Logistics Infrastructure
                                                                                                and Services




justiﬁcation for charging high shipment prices, seems to be one of the main contributors to Cambodia’s
high logistics costs. Furthermore, the agents and brokers have a financial incentive to maintain the
opacity of the regulatory environment so as to discourage any outside investigation of the amount that is
really paid by them in informal clearance fees versus the amount that is retained by them in the form of
abnormally high proﬁts.

Generally, trucking ﬁrms consider lack of access to accurate and up-to-date information as a
constraint . They perceive information regarding fees, regulations (particularly upcoming legislation
changes) and procedures to be unclear at times. Problems may also arise because of poor dissemi-
nation of information by government agencies and lack of knowledge in the private sector about where to
access the information provided. According to some operators there is no advance notice regarding new
regulations that have come or will come into effect. Informal fees are also sometimes charged for obtaining
information. The lack of transparency proves a fertile ground for informal payments including to various
border ofﬁcials.

Informal payments are regularly reported to take place at weighbridges and enroute checkpoints.
Trucking ﬁrms report that informal fees reportedly are collected routinely by police at checkpoints on
main roads. On the route between Phnom Penh and Poipet, for example, informal fees range between
5,000 and 20,000 riel, though fees as high as US$10 were reported. Weighbridge stations also provide an
opportunity for informal fee collection due to truck axle-weight and length issues. Many truckers elect
to pay an informal fee simply to avoid losing time from inspections.

Unclear and unfair application of trafﬁc laws was also noted. Trafﬁc police can collect informal fees from
shipping company trucks for “every perceived minor problem”, as stated by one interviewee (EMC, 2011).
While this may well be justiﬁed, there is a perception of harassment for purposes of extracting informal
fees. Operators on the PAS route report paying informal fees ranging from 10,000 to 50,000 riel relating
to “every single mistake related to truck safety” (EMC, 2011).

The informal fees are a signiﬁcant impediment to business, most frequently occurring at check-
points and weighbridge stations, at trafﬁc stops, and during border crossing and customs clearance.
These comments are consistent with ﬁndings from previous studies. Most operators are reluctant to even
discuss informal fees. Unequal treatment by border officials, based on informal relationships, may
also have skewed some responses more positively than is otherwise the case.4

There are also high levels of informal payments to clear cargo. Typically agents pay US$180 to
US$210 to clear each 20-foot container (a breakdown of the typical informal payments is given in Annex A).
The payments are shared between the clearing agent and border ofﬁcials. Stakeholders view the border
processes as the main contributor to high trade costs in the country. For example, shippers report a) ofﬁcials




                                                                                           Cambodia Trade
                                                                           Corridor Performance Assessment       19
             Core Logistics Infrastructure
             and Services




     extracting fees for mistakes made in ﬁlling out forms during the pre-shipment process; b) customs
     ofﬁcials routinely contest the value declared on the form leading to a kind of “bargaining” between ofﬁcials
     and clearing agent over the value of the shipment, which is often settled with informal fees; and c) when
     a container carries multiple kinds of goods, an informal fee is sometimes demanded by customs ofﬁcials
     under threat of ofﬂoading the entire container for inspection. Some exports of agriculture goods besides
     rice (such as cassava or corn) also require payment of informal fees. As a result of the above practices,
     the cargo clearance costs in Cambodia’s ports of entry and land border crossing points are high, even by
     regional standards.

     The informal costs are passed on to shippers, but without supporting receipts, leading to opacity
     about the real rate of informal payments that are truly required for clearance of each shipment and
     exacerbating the distrust between agents and shippers. In any event, agents add a premium on each
     informal payment that they make. The practices are similar at both ports and land border crossings where
     informal payments are common, though the clearance procedures can vary amongst the different ports
     and border crossings. Each crossing or port has its own rules and informal fees have to be paid in different
     situations to varying amounts.




          Cambodia Trade
20        Corridor Performance Assessment
4                       Trade Corridors


Cambodia is connected to regional and international trade markets by several domestic and
international trade corridors. The main domestic corridor links Phnom Penh to Sihanoukville Port, while
the main international corridor connects Bangkok through Cambodia to Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam. There
is little trafﬁc traversing the route between Laos and Sihanoukville Port. Rather most trafﬁc originates
in Bangkok and travels through the Poipet border post to Phnom Penh (734 km) and/or between Phnom
Penh and Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam (228 km). Trafﬁc volumes are higher on the latter route and have
been increasing, especially in containerized cargo. This is mainly due to shippers who prefer using Ho Chi
Minh as their export gateway.

The rest of this Note considers the performance of the international trade corridors (Table 5 and Figure 9).

Table 5. Trade volumes on Cambodia’s main trade corridors

         Corridor                      Trade Volume
                                   TEUs               % of total

        Sihanoukville             260,000                73

          Cai Mep                 62,000                 17

       GMS Southern               34,000                 10

The Corridor Performance assessment focused on the following key indicators:
• Trafﬁc ﬂows
  Transit volumes
  Border crossing volumes at the main border crossing points


•   Time indicators
   Inland transport between major economic centers along a corridor
   Transit time within countries
   Border crossing times
   Delays at control and check points
•   Costs
   Delivery to destination
   Cost associated with each activity and component of the transit operation.




                                                                                          Cambodia Trade
                                                                          Corridor Performance Assessment      21
     Figure 9. Major trade corridors for Cambodia




          Cambodia Trade
22        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                           Trade Corridors




4.1 Phnom Penh – Sihanoukville Corridor
Infrastructure within the Phnom Penh-Sihanoukville (PPS) corridor is comprised of the Port of
Sihanoukville, a highway (National Route 4), and a railway line. Each of these infrastructural
components is described below.

The Phnom Penh transport corridor linking Phnom Penh to Sihanoukville is the main trade route in
Cambodia, handling about 75 percent of the country’s trade trafﬁc. The corridor passes through six
provinces5 that contain close to one third of Cambodia’s population. It is a 235km long two-lane highway
called National Road Number 4. The road was originally constructed in the 1950s when the port was
developed. Following extensive rehabilitation works in the 1990s the road is in good condition once more,
as is the highway network across the country in general. Highway 4 has three toll gates. It is one of
the most important roads in Cambodia, carrying almost three quarters of the country’s international
trade trafﬁc.

The corridor also has a railway line, the Southern Line, linking Phnom Penh to Sihanoukville, and
a branch line from Phnom Penh to the petroleum storage facilities at Ton Le Sap River. Presently
the railway is undergoing rehabilitation and does not carry international trafﬁc. It is expected that the
Southern Line will start moving international cargo in mid-2012. The opening of the rail link may provide a
real alternative to road transport and is likely to reduce the opportunities for informal revenue collection
along Cambodia’s main roads.

Most of the import and export cargo volume passing through Sihanoukville Autonomous Port
(PAS) is originating from or destined for China. However, the majority of containers exported through
PAS are sent to America, followed by Europe, Asia and Africa. In 2010, Asia and Africa had the largest
percent increase in exports over the previous year, but together only accounted for 22 percent of total PAS
export volume. Asia in fact continues to be the fastest growing trading partner for Cambodia (+305 percent
and +570 percent year-on-year growth in 2010-11 and 2009-10, respectively). Exports to America (-41
percent) have decreased compared with this same period in 2010, while exports to Europe (+39 percent)
Oceania (+25 percent) have also increased. Total exports from PAS increased by 21 percent from 2009
to 2010. Rice, garment and wood commodity exports in particular rose over 2009 ﬁgures, along with the
exports to Africa, Asia and Oceania.

The PP-PAS Corridor has the largest number of logistics services providers in the country. It
accounts for the greatest volume of imports/exports and is the main route for Cambodian trucking
and freight forwarding firms. Close to three-quarters of trucking firms and the majority of clearing and
forwarding agents are active on the corridor.




5
    Phnom Penh, Kampong Speu, Kandal, Koh Kong, Sihanoukville and Kampot.



                                                                                            Cambodia Trade
                                                                            Corridor Performance Assessment    23
             Trade Corridors




     Figure 10. Top 10 origins of imports




     Figure 11. Top 10 destinations of exports




     The SEZs located in Sihanoukville aim to increase investment by providing incentives such as
     VAT and 3-year proﬁt tax exemption and a smoother and shorter customer procedure for both
     exports and imports. Proximity to the port is a main attraction for the SEZ. Additionally, if current
     national plans for local oil production materialize—based on encouraging results in offshore oil exploration
     in Sihanoukville—PAS is expected to play a role as stock keeper and oil transfer point for local and
     international markets. PAS intends to build an oil vessel terminal located 15km from the port.

     Border Clearance at the Port

     All the border clearance agencies are available in the same building at the Port of Sihanoukville.
     The main agencies are the terminal operator, Customs, Camcontrol, Kampuchea Shipping Agency and
     Brokers (KAMSAB) and clearing agents. In general, the customs clearance process for imports is the same
     as for exports, with two exceptions: (1) garment products do not require scanning at the port but do require
     inspection at the factory premise by customs ofﬁcers; and (2) the import process requires obtaining a
     “Delivery Order” from KAMSAB, which may take about 30 minutes.



          Cambodia Trade
24        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                                                  Trade Corridors




The total required time for export custom clearance is 2 to 3 hours on average. The import
process however takes longer, between 3 to 4 hours. Informal fees range widely, from US$50 to more
than US$1,000 depending on the products. For example, the informal fee paid for rice export scanning is
100,000 riel and tobacco is 300,000 riel.



4.2 Bangkok - Phnom Penh Corridor
The corridor between Bangkok and Phnom Penh connects two major metropolitan areas, linking
through the towns of Poipet or Koh Kong. While Bangkok is already an established production base,
Phnom Penh is an emerging one with an increasing number of ﬁrms locating on one of the SEZs around
the city. The corridor passes through the Aranyaprathet/Poipet border to Phnom Penh and stretches
over a total distance of roughly 665 km, around 405 km of which is in Cambodia and 260 km in Thailand
(comprising National Road No. 33 in Thailand, National Road No. 5 in Cambodia). In Cambodia, the road
traverses south of the Tonle Sap region, one of the largest rice reservoirs in Cambodia and therefore a
route most likely to grow in importance as Cambodia’s rice exports increase.

The quality of the infrastructure itself differs signiﬁcantly between the two countries. There are for
the most part four lanes (two in each direction) in Thailand and two lanes (one in each direction) in Cambodia.

On both sides around the Aranyaprathet/Poipet border the road is very narrow, leaving only little
room for trucks to park for drivers to complete border formalities. The following ﬁgure gives a sense
of the process involved in shipping goods on both sides of the border area (Figure 12). On the Cambodian
side of the border there are in total seven casinos, one of which is built just next to the rail connection to
Thailand taking up the space that was initially reserved for a common control area for inspections of the
Thai and Cambodian Customs. Also, both Thailand and Cambodia fail to segregate their lanes for different
types of vehicles and trucks, cars and buses, all of which are queuing in the same lanes.

The ICT infrastructure differs between the two countries. Thailand uses an e-Customs system whereas
Cambodia has just rolled out the ASYCUDA World program in this border post.6


Figure 12. Diagram of both sides of the Aranyaprathet/Poipet border




                                                                                                             Poipet customs house




Source: Survey on Improvement of Customs Procedures for Trade Facilitation in the Mekong Region.




6
     Survey on Improvement of Customs Procedures for Trade Facilitation in the Mekong Region, P. 6-4



                                                                                                                   Cambodia Trade
                                                                                                   Corridor Performance Assessment   25
              Trade Corridors




     Total trade between Cambodia and Thailand (in terms of value) is on the rise again after a dip in 2009,
     with over $1.3 billion in Cambodian imports in the ﬁrst half of 2011. Cambodian exports, which more than
     doubled between 2009 and 2010, still remain minor compared to imports.

     There is a large trade deﬁcit between Cambodia and Thailand, as illustrated in table 6 and Figure 13
     below. For example, in 2010 Cambodia imported US$2,342 million from Thailand compared with
     exports of US$214.90 million. This trade imbalance has a profound impact on the logistics sector
     in Cambodia as trucking companies often have to travel without an export-bound load from Phnom Penh
     to the border crossing before they can pick up imported goods.

     Table 6. Cambodia’s total import/export value and trade balance with Thailand

                                                                                                          Trade Balance with
            (US$ million)                     Export                            Import
                                                                                                               Thailand
             2011 (Jan-Jun)                    98.18                             1,332.73                           -1,234.55
                  2010                         214.90                           2,342.09                             -2,127.19
                  2009                         77.72                            1,580.59                            -1,502.87
                  2008                         90.22                            2,040.08                            -1,949.86
     Source: Thailand Ministry of Commerce.


     The border crossing of Aranyaprathet/Poipet is the principal border for the Thai-Cambodia trade
     although it represents only a minority of Cambodia’s total import-export border trade. The total
     export and import value between Cambodia and Thailand can be broken down by border crossing (Table 7
     and Figure 36).7 The findings for the Thai side reveal that more than 70 percent of the trade between
     the two countries is transacted via land transportation through the Aranyaprathet - Poipet border and
     Klong Yai - Koh Kong borders.

     Figure 13. Cambodia’s trade balance with Thailand, 2008-11




     Source: Thailand Ministry of Commerce




                                               7
                                                 There is some inconsistency between the data obtained from the Customs Houses and Thailand
                                               Ministry of Commerce as the Import through Custom houses exceeds the Thailand’s total Import.



           Cambodia Trade
26         Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                                    Trade Corridors




On the Cambodian side, import/export ﬁgures show that the Poipet border is responsible for rough-
ly half of Cambodia’s overland imports from Thailand and the vast majority of its overland exports
(83 percent) to Thailand. Furthermore, the Koh Kong border crossing is predominantly used for imports
as there are not many exports through it, while there is a small share of exports going through the Phsar
Prom crossing (to Chanthaburi province in Thailand).

There is a large discrepancy between data from the Cambodian and Thai sides of the border crossing.
Cambodia seems to underreport data compared to Thailand. For example, in 2010 Thai Customs reported
a total export value that is 2.6 times higher than Cambodia’s reported import value and an import value
that is 19 times higher than Cambodia’s reported export value (Table 7).

Table 7. Import and export volume between Cambodia and Thailand per Custom House

                                                            % Trade                                            % Trade
                                % Trade                                              % Trade
                                                            through                                            through
                                through                                              through
                       2011                                  Border                                             Border
    million US$               Border Cus-         2010                   2009      Border Cus-    2008
                      Jan-Jun                               Custom                                             Custom
                              tom Houses                                           tom Houses
                                                            Houses                                             Houses
                                  2011                                                2009
                                                              2010                                               2008

   Total Export,
    (Import for       1,332.73                  2,342.09               1,580.59                  2,040.08
    Cambodia)

       Export
 throught Custom
                       973.26         73%        1734.1       74%       1437.15       91%        1594.80         78%
  houses2(Import
   for Cambodia)

      Sa Kaeo          568.01        43%         963.45       41%       715.22        45%        891.66          44%

        Trat           341.72         26%        631.65       27%       599.91        38%        551.49          27%

   Chanthaburi          47.33         4%         76.70         3%        56.88         4%         70.20           3%

       Surin            8.93          1%          29.73        1%        24.79         2%         27.38           1%

      Sisaket            2.18         0%          23.97        1%        30.19         2%         45.64           2%

Ubon RatChathani        5.10          0%          8.60        0%         10.17         1%          8.43           0%


   Total Import 1
    (Export for         98.18                    214.90                  77.72                    90.22
    Cambodia)

 Import throught
 Custom Houses2
                       108.03        110%        175.13       81%       102.73        132%        107.02         119%
   (Export for
   Cambodia)

      Sa kaeo           89.91         92%        124.66       58%        64.65        83%         71.91          80%

        Trat            1.20          1%          2.08         1%         1.66         2%          1.16           1%

   Chanthaburi          15.82         16%        46.35        22%        28.54        37%         30.19          33%

       Surin            0.67          1%          0.91        0%          1.71         2%          1.86           2%
      Sisaket           0.43          0%          1.13         1%         6.17         8%          1.90           2%
      Ubon
                        0.00          0%          0.00        0%         0.00          0%         0.00            0%
   Ratchathani
Source: 1. Thailand Customs Houses in the Northeastern Region and Eastern Region
        2. Thailand Ministry of Commerce


                                                                                                    Cambodia Trade
                                                                                    Corridor Performance Assessment      27
              Trade Corridors




     Table 8. Trade value through Aranyaprathet-Poipet border

                                          Aranyaprathet-Poipet trade volume

                                   Thai Export          Cambodia                   Thai Import                 Cambodia
       (US$ million)              through Ara-        Import through              through Ara-               Export Through
                                   nyaprathet₁           Poipet₂                   nyaprathet₁                  Poipet₂
              2009                    715.22                 308.23                   64.65                              9.32
              2010                   963.45                  367.27                   124.66                             6.54
     Source: Thailand Customs Houses in the Northeastern Region and Eastern Region and Cambodia General
             Department of Customs and Excise₂


     Most of the goods ﬂowing through the Poipet border are Cambodian imports. It is useful to note the
     kinds of goods imported

     Figure 14 and Table 9 provide an overview and breakdown of goods, as reported by the Banteay Meanchey
     Customs Ofﬁce in Cambodia.8

     Figure 14. Breakdown of goods imported through the Poipet border crossing (in terms of value)




     Source: Banteay Meanchey Customs Ofﬁce


     Table 9. Total value of goods imported to Cambodia through Poipet, July 2011

                   Type of goods                                  Value (US$)

           Others - consumption products                           11,006,670
                       Motorbike                                    3,686,094
                         Cement                                       2,083,642
                          Truck                                       1,860,920
                         Tractor                                      1,607,321
               Construction materials                                 810,270
                        Fertilizer                                    687,943
                          Total                                     21,742,861
     Source: Banteay Meanchey Customs Ofﬁce


                                                                                               8
                                                                                                   The data is for the month of July, 2011.


           Cambodia Trade
28         Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                                                            Trade Corridors




Figure 15. Type of imports through Poipet




Figure 16. Type of exports through Poipet




Consumer goods represent the largest share of Cambodian imports from Thailand by value, based
on the data from the Banteay Meanchey Customs Ofﬁce. The other two main categories are vehicles
(motorbikes, cars, trucks, tractors) and construction materials, including cement. By volume, consum-
er goods and cement represent the major share of imports due to their lower per unit value compared
to vehicles. The relative distribution of trade products was also validated from interviews with trucking
and logistics companies. Thus, despite differing ﬁndings between Customs and mirror data, the principal
categories of goods imported from Thailand through the Aranyaprathet/Poipet border appear accurate.

The number of trucks crossing the border in both directions is estimated to be around 120 trucks
per day 9. However, traffic count data from the Thai Department of Highways suggests that those
numbers are overestimated as they counted on the road leading to the border a total of 5,835 trucks
in 2010, or roughly 16 trucks per day. The type of trucks are distributed roughly to equal shares between
light, medium, heavy, semi-trailer and full-trailer trucks.10 The largest volumes of trucking trafﬁc occur
typically between 8am and 5pm, but some trucks can leave the warehouses as late as 7pm. The trucks
bound for Phnom Penh normally depart around 4pm in the afternoon.

9
     Survey on Improvement of Customs Procedures for Trade Facilitation in the Mekong Region, P. 6-2.
10
      Light Truck: Light Truck or Pick-Up / Medium Truck: Two-Axle Truck (6 Wheels) / Heavy Truck: Three-Axle Truck (10 Wheels) /
     Semi-Trailer: Semi Trailer (Four or More Axle) / Full-Trailer: Full Trailer (Four or More Axle)
                                                                                                                         Cambodia Trade
                                                                                                         Corridor Performance Assessment      29
             Trade Corridors




     There are very few logistics providers available on the Cambodian side of the corridor, which
     raises questions about the openness of the market. For example, only three trucking ﬁrms (Diamond
     Transport, Pacific Transport and Tean Po) operate on this route, whereas Diamond and Pacific are
     connected through family ties. Although there are a few more smaller players with less volume operating,
     their price quotations seem to be higher than the larger players. Similarly, only one freight forwarder
     sustains business on this route (Chay Da Logistics). One reason why there is only one freight forwarder
     could be that the two trucking companies do their own freight forwarding operations. In general, this leads
     to the conclusion that opaque market practices create a disincentive for new players to enter the market
     and make abnormally high proﬁts for a few market participants.

     With the exception of few isolated instances, all goods are transloaded at one of warehouses
     in Cambodia. In total, there are nine warehouses in the immediate proximity of the border (within 5 km),
     where transshipment of goods takes place. All of the warehouses are operated by the private sector;
     three by each of the trucking ﬁrms operating on the corridor and the remaining six are owned by large
     importers from Phnom Penh (Chipmong, Tong Hout, Lay Sreng, Ly Ony, Teng Hong Heng and RPC) that use
     their warehouse only for their own production/export. The warehouses are all located along the national
     road number 5 within close proximity to the Thai-Cambodia border.11

     In total, there are seven border agencies present on the Thai side: Customs, Immigration, Food and
     Drugs Agency, Animal Quarantine, Public Health, Ministry of Agriculture and Foreign Trade. The Thai side
     offers a one-stop-service center. On the Cambodian side there are Customs (lead agency), CamControl,
     Police, Immigration and Quarantine present whereas CamControl acts as a duplicate customs agency
     in many respects.12



     4.3 Phnom Penh – Ho Chi Minh City Corridor
     The route between Phnom Penh and Ho Chi Minh City follows National Road No. 1 to the Southeast
     via Bavet to the border with Vietnam (250 km). After the border, a relatively unimpeded stretch of
     four-lane road continues to Ho Chi Minh City (80 km) and the port (90 km). On the Cambodian side of the
     corridor, the road is only one-lane in each direction. A toll fee has to be paid for this road. However, traf-
     ﬁc speed is relatively slow (around 40km/h) because the road leads through several villages and smaller
     towns and experiences high trafﬁc volumes in the form of buses and smaller trucks.

     Infrastructure is generally of higher quality on the Vietnamese side of the border. The road
     condition on the Cambodian section of the corridor varies. A 60km strip, ﬁnanced by JICA, is of high quality
     whereas a roughly 120 km part of the road is of low tarmac quality but nonetheless passable throughout
     all seasons. One missing link along the corridor, the bridge at Neak Leung, is presently under
     construction and is expected to be completed in 2015. In the meantime, a ferry operates daily from 5:30 to
     midnight.

     In addition, there are three operational SEZs located along the corridor to Ho Chi Minh City located
     on National Road No. 1. The Phnom Penh SEZ is located outside the capital. The Manhattan SEZ and Tai
     Seng SEZ are both located a few kilometers before the border to Vietnam in Bavet. All SEZs offer
     one-stop-shops where all government services are offered in one building such as the General Department
     of Customs and Excise, CamControl, Ministry of Commerce (MOC), the Council on the Development of
     Cambodia (CDC), and the Labor Ministry. Within the exporting process, the MOC is responsible for issuing
     the Certiﬁcate of Origin. The CDC (issues investor licenses) and the Ministry of Labor (facilitates the


                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                      EMC 2011
                                            12
                                                 Survey on Improvement of Customs Procedures for Trade Facilitation in the Mekong Region, P. 6-5.
          Cambodia Trade
30        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                                                          Trade Corridors




provision of labor and assists in dispute resolution) have no role in the export process. Export and import
clearance for the SEZs is usually completed at the warehouse of the ﬁrm.
The SEZs are major demand generators for logistics services in the region. Particularly the SEZs near
Phnom Penh or at the Vietnamese border in Bavet, Manhattan SEZ and Tai Seng SEZ, all of which
contribute signiﬁcantly to the production capacity of the Cambodian economy. For example, the Phnom
Penh SEZ has 20 multinational manufacturing tenants, several of them from Japan. Products manufac-
tured range from micro-motors, plastic and paper production, parts for the car industry, etc. Manhattan SEZ
has 11 investors manufacturing footwear, bicycles, wetsuits and other industrial products. Tai Seng SEZ is
the smallest and newest. Presently there are only six companies in the zone but they expect to have 10 zone
investors by the end of 2012. Among the six companies, two are presently responsible for the majority of
exports: one bicycle manufacturer, as well as one garment producer.

Cargo export and import clearance can also be completed at one of the dry ports along the corridor.
In Bavet, clearance is primarily performed at the So Nguon Dry Port which was established in 2008. Another
possibility is to complete the export clearance at a dry port in Phnom Penh and domestically transit the
cargo to the border.

The border facilities of Bavet/Moc Bai itself are adequate by international standards. There are no
fast track lanes available on either side but a small common control area which should be replaced by
a larger one in the near future13. ASYCUDA World has just been rolled out in mid-September 2011.
The following Figure 17 provides a diagram of processes on both sides of the border area.
Figure 17. Diagram of both sides of the Bavet/Moc Bai border




Source: Survey on Improvement of Customs Procedures for Trade Facilitation in the Mekong Region, P. 6-8


The Cambodian border post (at Bavet) is equipped with 10 computers but none have internet
connection. Although there are four x-ray machines to inspect luggage none of them are functioning.
Vietnam has 15 computers with internet connection at the Moc Bai border and functioning scanners but
they can be used for scanning luggage only.14

Formal trade between Cambodia and Vietnam has been steadily increasing. The ﬁrst half of 2011
was especially strong, with imports approaching 2010 totals and exports already exceeding it. Similar
 to the trade with Thailand, trade with Vietnam is also highly imbalanced. Cambodia imports 5.6 times more
goods from Vietnam than it exports (2010).

13
     Survey on Improvement of Customs Procedures for Trade Facilitation in the Mekong Region, P. 6-8/9.
     14
        Survey on Improvement of Customs Procedures for Trade Facilitation in the Mekong Region, P. 6-9.
                                                                                                                           Cambodia Trade
                                                                                                           Corridor Performance Assessment   31
              Trade Corridors




     Table 10. Total import/export value and trade balance with Vietnam

             US$ million                     Exports             Imports                Trade balance

             2011 (Jan-Jul)                  282.8               1,315.7                -1,032.9

             2010                            276.6               1,551.7                -1,275.1
             2009                            197.1               1,166.5                -969.4
             2008                            214.3               1,531.6                -1,317.3
     Source: General Statistics Department of Vietnam


     According to the Vietnam Marketing and Management Institute (VMMI), total Import-Export value
     through Moc Bai Border in 2009 and 2010 are US$178 and US$368 million respectively. The Bavet/
     Moc Bai border is an active crossing where 13 percent (2009) and 20 percent (2010) of total trade between
     Cambodia and Vietnam is transacted.

     From a value perspective, the largest imports are inputs to the garment industry. Other products
     are electronic products such as cell phones and electric parts. Exports by value consist of more than 75
     percent garments with the rest divided in different kinds of vehicles, motorcycles and bicycles.

     In terms of weight, the dominating export products were ‘used rags’ and other worn out articles
     of twine, rope and textiles materials together with garment exports. Together they accounted for
     roughly 80 percent of export products. The largest import products by far are inputs for the garment
     industry, such as knitted, crocheted or woven fabrics of different quality that account for about 53 percent
     of imports by weight in 2010. Other major import products are vegetables as well as some carbonate. In
     total, 36,645.28 tons were transported across the border of Bavet, of which most were imports
     (32,540 tons vs. 4,105 tons exports).

     Figure 18. Types of imports through Bavet




           Cambodia Trade
32         Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                         Trade Corridors




Figure 19. Types of exports through Bavet




According to a customs ofﬁ cial, trafﬁ c amounts to about 80 trucks per day at the Bavet border-
crossing with Vietnam (in terms of both imports and exports). The majority of trucks carry containerized
cargo (40-50 in imports; 15-20 for exports) with only very few (5-7 trucks per day) transporting gas and
liquids. Around 80 percent of trucks for imports clear their cargo in either the dry port or one of the SEZs
and the remaining 20 percent at the border gate itself. Most of the export cargo comes from one of the
SEZs and is therefore cleared there. Only around 10 trucks per month carrying export cargo do not come
from an SEZ which is usually some garment exporters with destination Ho Chi Minh City seaport or airport.

There are numerous transport and freight forwarding companies operating along the corridor
between Phnom Penh and Ho Chi Minh City. The most predominant of all is the So Nguon Company,
which runs the dry port near the Bavet border.

According to a So Nguon Dry Port representative, only about 10 percent of exported cargo is cleared
directly at the border in Bavet. The rest is performed at ICDs in Phnom Penh and Bavet. Clearance in
Bavet is primarily performed at the So Nguon Dry Port or at one of the ﬁve Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
located near the border. Imported cargo is usually cleared at one of the SEZs or at the So Nguon Dry Port
near the border (around 80 percent of all imports). Only a few trucks (the remaining 20 percent) are actually
cleared at the border.

There are at present four agencies at the Cambodian side of the border: Customs, Immigration,
Quarantine and the Police. If clearance is not completed at one of the SEZs, it is done at an ICD, 2 km away
from the border using the single administrative document. Both Customs and CamControl are present
at the ICD and have a joint inspection team. Changes are expected due to the recent roll-out of the
ASYCUDA World system at the Bavet border.

At both the ICD and SEZs there are “one-stop-shops” housing ofﬁcials from the General Department
of Customs and Excise and CamControl. At the SEZ there are also ofﬁces from Ministry of Commerce
(MOC), CDC and the Ministry of Labor (MOL), although the CDC and MOL have a limited role in the
actual clearing process. The MOC is primarily involved in the exporting process, concerning the
Certiﬁcate of Origin.




                                                                                          Cambodia Trade
                                                                          Corridor Performance Assessment       33
              Trade Corridors




     Most trucks transporting goods on the route between Phnom Penh and Ho Chi Minh City operate
     under the so-called bilateral agreement as the implementation of the CBTA has drifted. The latest
     MOU, signed in 2010, between Cambodia and Vietnam allows 300 vehicles from either side to operate in
     the other country. In Cambodia, the licenses are split between 243 buses and 57 trucks (from 9 different
     companies). Vietnam has dedicated all its licenses to buses. This number has been increasing from 40 in
     2006 and 150 in 2009. Although until recently only one company with 20-30 trucks applied to operate
     under the bilateral agreement, there are now nine ﬁrms (Table 11) in Cambodia who hold cross-border
     trucking licenses. Goods carried by trucks with no license have to transship their containers onto
     Vietnamese trucks which are allowed to come to the ICD and SEZs on the Cambodian side.

     A “white zone” at the Cambodia-Vietnam border line has been established for transloading imports
     and exports. Due to the small area and congestion however, all transloading is currently performed at the
     So Nguon Dry Port. Generally, operations are dominated by only a few operators.

     Table 11. Cambodia-Vietnam trucking companies granted permits


                                         Cambodia companies with international cargo
                                             transportation permits to Vietnam

      No    Company                                                            Number of        Member of CAM-
                                                                                Trucks               TA
       1    Bus Express & Travel (Cambodia) Co., Ltd                               2                   No
       2    Khai Nam Transportation (Cambodia)., Ltd                               2                   No
       3    Phal Sareth Import Export & Tourism Co., Ltd                           2                   No
       4    Raksmey Samaki Co., Ltd                                                0                   No
       5    Rubytran Import Export & Transport Co., Ltd                            3                   No
       6    So Nguon Transportation & Service Import Export Co., Ltd               34                  Yes
       7    Sokan Transport Pte.Ltd.                                               8                   Yes
       8    Tai Seng Import Export & Construction Co., Ltd                         5                   No
       9    Van Rec Co., Ltd                                                       1                   No
            Total                                                                  57                   -



     4.4 Phnom Penh-Ho Chi Minh Waterway Transport Corridor
     This corridor takes advantage of the Mekong System navigable waterways, stretching from the river
     port of Phnom Penh in Cambodia, to the Cai Mep deep sea port (380 km) and Ho Chi Minh City Port
     (430 km) in Vietnam. Phnom Penh Port is located right next to the city’s most transited areas. The cargo
     terminal is 3-4 km from the junction of the Tonle Sap and Mekong rivers, and about 330 km away from
     the mouth of the Mekong, of which about a third is in Cambodian territory. Vessels of up to 2,000 DWT
     can use this route without major difﬁculties, whereas much larger ships can pass the entrance to
     the Mekong only on favorable tides. For these latter vessels to operate, dredging is necessary at three points
     in Cambodia for ships to reach Phnom Penh.




           Cambodia Trade
34         Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                       Trade Corridors




Phnom Penh Autonomous Port (PPAP) is rapidly reaching capacity at its current location. The
throughput capacity is currently set at about 65,000 TEU/year, which is currently slightly over the
current container trafﬁc. The main-cargo port consists of two sites. The container terminal consists of a
300x20m long quay built in reinforced concrete, with a simultaneous berthing capacity of 3 barges. The
container yard spreads over 14,000 sq.feet. The domestic port is located some 500m downstream of the
container terminal, with a length of about 300m and currently serving interprovincial routes to Kampong
Cham and Siem Reap.

Currently the bulk of trafﬁ c handled by PPAP is containerized, consisting mainly of textiles.
However, agricultural commodities are also shipped both by container and break bulk. Container
throughput (in TEUs) has expanded at an annual average rate of 65 percent between 2002 and 2010,
and currently adds up to about 68,000 TEUs (Figure 21). Although container inbound and outbound
movement presents a marginal difference, the imbalance in tonnages is substantial. In 2008, import vol-
umes (in tons) more than tripled that of outbound shipments, although this gap has narrowed considerably
considering the imports drop of about 100,000 tons between 2008 and 2011.


Figure 20. Trafﬁc routing options out of Phnom Penh




Source: Sisovanna, S. (2011)




                                                                                        Cambodia Trade
                                                                        Corridor Performance Assessment     35
              Trade Corridors




     Figure 21. Containerized trafﬁc handled at Phnom Penh Port (TEUs)




     Source: Based on Phnom Penh Autonomous Port Statistics.


     A more detailed examination of container movements at the port shows that about 40 percent of
     the outbound movements belong to empty containers leaving Cambodia by waterborne transport.
     For exports, most of the cargo leaving Cambodia by river travels downstream in 40-foot containers to
     Vietnamese ports. Up to 4,000 additional empty forty foot containers to those arriving by river are
     needed to carry this volume of cargo out of Cambodia via PPAP. A logical assumption is that the needed
     containers come from the Phnom Penh hinterland, where industrial SEZs unpack their containers
     ﬁlled with imported inputs. Meanwhile, imports from Vietnam are mostly carried out with 20-foot
     containers (LCL or FCL), whereas most of the 20-foot containers being exported out via PPAP do not
     contain cargo at all.

     Figure 22. Type of container movement in Phnom Penh Port (TEUs), 2010




     Source: Based on Phnom Penh Autonomous Port Statistics.


     Domestic and international exports and imports as well as transit operations use river transport.
     For the latter, these are mainly coming from mainland China, Hong Kong, South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan.



           Cambodia Trade
36         Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                                                          Trade Corridors




Characteristic of Supply and demand for logistics services for the corridor

Phnom Penh port is currently served by a number of Vietnamese shipping lines that make between
13 and 16 weekly calls. These consist mostly of smaller vessels and barges with a capacity between
40 and 130 TEU, capable of carrying both containerized loads and break bulk cargo. In general, these are
feeder services connecting to the Port of Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) and later to Singapore, where goods
are transshiped on their way to their ﬁnal destination overseas. The newly inaugurated deep sea Port of
Cai Mep in Vietnam has expanded the number of services to main markets in US and Europe, thus allowing
Cambodian exporters to avoid a transshipment in HCMC. The direct route to Phnom Penh-Cai Mep-USA
saves at least US$200 and at least 2 days lead time compared with Phnom Penh-Ho Chi Minh-Singa-
pore-USA; and US$100 and 3 days vis-à-vis the Phnom Penh-Sihanoukville-Singapore-USA land-sea route.
Currently, Cai Mep offers services from most ﬁrst-class international shipping lines to the West Coast
of the United States (via China and/or Japan), and to the Atlantic Ports in Europe and in the East Coast of the
United States (via Suez-Mediterranean -Gibraltar).

There are three foreign carriers operating services to Cambodia on top of the Cambodian ﬂag vessels
in PPAP: Gemadept Corporation, Hai Minh and New Port Cypress, all Vietnamese corporations. Currently,
Gemadept handles the largest volumes of cargo in volume at Phnom Penh Port, with a 24,000 TEU
throughput (57 percent of the total); approximately 16,000 TEU correspond to laden cargo (7,000 for
imports, and the rest for exports) and 8,000 TEUs in empty boxes. Frequency of vessel calls in PPAP grew
from an average of 5 to 7 weekly calls between 2010 and 2011. In addition, the company offers transshipment
services within its liner network connecting the Terminals in Southern Vietnam to Thailand, Malaysia, Sin-
gapore, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Taiwan, coastal services to Northern Vietnam, and Sihanoukville Port.15 In
late 2010, New Port Cypress started its services with two vessels—each with a capacity of 128 TEU—in both
directions, making two weekly calls. Outbound container barges from Phnom Penh Port feed the Tan Cang
– Cai Mep Terminals in Vietnam for onward shipping to the United States and Europe.16

Part of the demand using this route stems from garment shippers that favor the use of containerized car-
go, and to lesser extent, exported break bulk agricultural commodities, such as rice, coconut oil, corn,
 bean and rubber wood. A key comparative advantage of the Phnom Penh port in comparison to Siha-
noukville lies in the proximity to the factory ﬂoor; though hourly restrictions on the movement of trucks
within Phnom Penh hinder the ﬂexibility of delivery and shipping times to and from the PPAP, as well as its
limited capacity (now closer to its full use).

Regulatory issues

The Cross Border Navigation Agreement between Cambodia and Vietnam signed in 1998 and
amended in late 2009 is the main regulatory landmark governing the supply of cross border shipping
services along the Mekong River between the two countries. This agreement sets the routes for both
countries to navigate, as well as the ports and terminals where vessels are allowed to call. In addition,
cabotage (the right to embark and disembark revenue passengers or freight between two points in the
other Party’s territory) is not permitted under this agreement, although multiple calls within the territory
of the vessel’s country ﬂag are allowed. This means that, for example, Vietnamese vessels—now accounting
for the bulk of the tonnage transported out of Cambodia via the Mekong—will be able to load (or unload)
cargo at PPAP and also on the soon-to-be-inaugurated container terminal downstream, to be discharged
(or loaded) in a Vietnamese port. The agreement mutually recognizes the authority of the other contracting
party to issue the needed operating permits to carriers without any limitations in number.

15
     Gemadept Corporation Annual Reports: http://www.gemadept.vn/ﬁnancial_report.aspx
16
     http://www.bairdmaritime.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=8453:
     cambodia-vietnam-trade-augmented-by-new-shipping-route&catid=66:container&Itemid=57                   Cambodia Trade
                                                                                           Corridor Performance Assessment   37
     5                    Comparative Assessment
                          of Corridor Performance


     The costs and time performance of using each corridor is summarized below:

     Table 12. Comparison of corridor performances


                                                                               Average
                     Distance     Transport Transport            Transit                      Cost per      Price per
      Corridor                                                                  speed
                       (km)         Cost      price               time                       t-km US$       t-km US$
                                                                               (km/hr)

         PAS           235            220           650              8.5           28            0.06          0.18

         BKK           734            1110          1650             14            52            0.10          0.15
        HCMC           228            260           680              11            21            0.08          0.20


     Some of the main ﬁndings are that:
     • The corridors perform reasonably well in terms of time, even though average speeds can be low.
       Transshipment and customs and border clearance times take a signiﬁcant proportion of the total time.
     • The corridors feature two operating modalities: uninterrupted ﬂow as on the domestic Phnom
       Penh-Sihanoukville corridor (same would apply on the river corridor) and transshipment as on the
       Phnom Penh-Bangkok and Phnom Penh-Ho Chi Minh corridors.

     Table 13. Transloading procedures per route


           Border                            Import                                          Export

                                                                           Same as Import; cargo is transloaded
                           All cargo is transloaded at Cambodian           between Cambodian and Thai trucks at
                           warehouses. Thai trucks with a “border          Cambodian warehouses. Only rare excep-
            Poipet
                           permit” can travel there and back after         tions are made for some ﬁrms in SEZs,
                           crossing the border.                            in which case the Thai trucks can go
                                                                           to ﬁnal destination.

                           No Vietnamese trucks can operate in             Fifty-seven Cambodian trucks have
                           Cambodia at the moment. They can enter          license to operate in Vietnam. Others have
            Bavet
                           the country with a “transit permit” to go to    to transload at the border, which is usually
                           the Dry Port or SEZs near Bavet.                done at the So Nguon Dry Port.




          Cambodia Trade
38        Corridor Performance Assessment
•      Trucking costs are higher than for South East Asian countries, but are generally within the range
       of costs in other developing regions of the world.
•      Transport prices in general are much higher than other parts of the world. Generally such rates
       are less than US$0.15 per tonne/km, whereas in Cambodia they are above this rate except on the
       Phnom Penh-Bangkok route.
•      It would appear facilitation fees and other payments en-route, especially at weighbridges, account
       for the most of the increase in price beyond trucking costs.
•      The higher transport prices in Cambodia would explain the low level of international transit
       trafﬁc through the country, if any exists. The bulk of transport consists of the country’s own
       imports and exports with Thailand and Vietnam, rather than flow along a transit corridor. A recent
       JICA study17 cites Cambodian regulatory constraints as a main reason for low utilization of the
       Cambodian transport corridors in international transit trade.




17
     Source: JICA, Survey on Improvement of Customs Procedures in the Mekong Region (2011)



                                                                                                             Cambodia Trade
                                                                                             Corridor Performance Assessment   39
              Comparative Assessment of
              Corridor Performance




     Figure 23. Breakdown of transit times on the road corridors




     Source: EMC, 2011.



      Box 1: Integrated regional logistics operations: The case of Minebea


       Minebea (Cambodia) is a subsidiary of Minebea Company of Japan. It manufactures miniature ball
       bearings, mechanical parts and electronic devices. The Cambodia operation is part of a network that
       includes 32 manufacturing centers in 14 countries. The Minebea factory in Cambodia is located in
       the Phnom Penh Special Economic Zone (PPSEZ) and assembles precision motors using parts from
       Minebea’s production facilities in other countries, mainly Thailand and Malaysia. Presently, the Phnom
       Penh plant is responsible for the ﬁnal assembly only while the ﬁnished products are sent Thailand
       for ﬁnal testing before they are exported to overseas markets. There are plans that as quality and
       consistency are established then exports will be directly from through Phnom Penh’s airport.

       Minebea maintains that even though Cambodia has weak infrastructure compared to other countries
       in the region, it was selected for the plant because of its proximity to the Thai production plants and
       low labor costs. Labor costs in Cambodia are much lower than those in coastal China and Thailand.
       An additional but critical consideration was how Minebea could overcome Cambodia’s poor logistics
       performance, especially given the sensitive nature of the inputs and products it handles. The company
       was then granted special dispensation by the Cambodia government to allow Thai trucks to operate
       to Phnom Penh without the need to transload cargo at the border. Allowing the same truck to bring
       in components from Thailand to Phnom Penh and return with ﬁnished products removed the need for
       multiple handling would could have compromised the quality and reliability of the products and the
       supply chain in general.

       The Minebea case suggests that the transloading of cargo at the border can be a constraint to some
       ﬁrms that may wish to take advantage of Cambodia’s lower labor costs. The transloading increases
       costs and reduces reliability of supply chains. The special dispensation granted to Minebea shows
       also that it is possible for countries such as Cambodia and Lao to join the production networks that
       have exploded in recent years across the Southeast Asia region. However, for this to happen it is
       important that current logistics constraints are tackled.




           Cambodia Trade
40         Corridor Performance Assessment
6                       Framework for Improving
                        Corridor Performance


Transport infrastructure sufﬁcient for good trading networks to develop is in place, at least along the
three major corridors. However, the quality of the infrastructure is uneven. Only relatively small parts of
the network need to be developed or a few bridges constructed. Road quality is therefore not a major
binding constraint to facilitate ﬂow of goods, except in parts of Vietnam and Laos.

Cambodia should note the importance of taking a whole-of-corridor approach to deal with shipping
liner connectivity at the regional hub ports of either Ho Chi Minh, Singapore or Hong Kong. Clearly
shippers consider all the options including those in neighbouring countries when they decide how to make
their shipments. This inﬂuences their decision as to which port to access, depending on the frequency of
vessel calls and overall port connectivity to global market.

Even though specialization is critical to good performance, specialization has been forsaken in
Cambodia due to the preference of some large shippers to use sub-contractors to avoid complex
and challenging arrangements for shipments. The main reason is the prevalence and wide acceptance
of facilitation fees as inducements for fast clearance and processing. Facilitation fees contribute to the
high costs. The fees include formal and informal charges to speed up processing. Intermediaries play a key
role in advising and collecting the payments—and transporters and shippers rely on the services of such
intermediaries. However, the payment of such fees is clouded by lack of transparency. Freight forwarders
and brokers would appear to be the main conduit for such payments. The single most important issue is
how to deal with the informal payments in logistics in the country.

Poor implementation of the regional transit framework remains problematic. This issue is identiﬁed
as a major constraint in all previous studies and still remains of concern. Currently there is no secure and
integrated environment for modern logistics operators who wish to operate regionally—for instance to
support production sharing. Though the basic ingredients of transit operation are available through the
CBTA, implementation has been poor and inconsistent such that there are important gaps across the
region. By virtue of its geographical position in the sub-region, Cambodia shows clearly the manifestation of
the problems that are faced especially where trucks cannot cross international borders. Removing
transshipment could increase spillover effects of the more efﬁcient and lower cost operations in Thailand
and Vietnam.

The corridors with transshipment have higher costs than those without transshipment, such as
the national corridor or the river corridor. Though some restrictions have been lifted between pairs of
countries, operations are largely governed by bilateral agreements. The agreements have quotas for trucks
allowed to operate in other countries. The conditions of allocation of the quotas to the operators are
not transparent and discretionary power is often given to the transport agencies. The CBTA provides for
gradual liberalization of the quotas, yet there are many practical bottlenecks even for existing quotas.


                                                                                          Cambodia Trade
                                                                          Corridor Performance Assessment       41
     Border processes are costly. Border facilities and procedures are often rudimentary. Gains could be
     achieved through improved capacity at the border, better implementation of risk management, and
     improved coordination of control activities—across agencies within a country, or across countries.
     Ongoing modernization projects in the country should address some of the current constraints.

     Rent-seeking activities are widespread, especially at the port and land border crossing points.
     Trucking faces a significant exposure to corrupt practices particularly outside the operator’s home
     country. Generally, operators ﬁnd it difﬁcult to operate outside of the country, partly because of language
     differences and driving conditions. The practices are not so much a source of delay but they add to a lack
     of predictability of the transit routes for operators looking for high reliability.

     The private sector capacity is still low. Most of the truck fleet is operated by family-run businesses
     owning a few trucks. Trucks are generally old which contributes also to the lack of appetite to operate
     across borders and at the same time compromises the feasibility of developing an effective transit
     system. Intermediation in logistics is largely by local players. International players seem to play by the same
     rules as the locals leading to a high cost equilibrium.




          Cambodia Trade
42        Corridor Performance Assessment
                                                                              Framework for Improving
                                                                                 Corridor Performance




Summary of Main Recommendations

              Issue                                        Recommendation


                                   Informal fees that seem prevalent in trade and transport facilitation
                                   in Cambodia are an avoidable cost. Suggested actions are:
                                   (i) Detailed corruption risk mapping. This can be based on the Aru-
                                       sha Declaration Concerning Good Governance and Integrity
      Eliminate informal fees          in Customs.
                                   (ii) Develop the trade portal to provide all regulatory information
                                        on requirements and formal fees.
                                   (iii) Expedite automation of customs and border management,
                                         and deploy direct trade input module in ASYCUDA.



                                   While transport costs are not much higher than in other
                                   countries, costs could be lowered by:
                                   (i) Completing the rehabilitation of the Phnom Penh – Sihanoukville
                                       railway line and prioritizing freight operations.
   Enhance capacity in transport
                                   (ii) Reconnecting the Thai-Cambodia railway networks.
      and logistics services
                                   (iii) Introducing a ﬂeet modernizing scheme with appropriate
                                         ﬁnancing and quality enforcement mechanisms.
                                   (iv) Reconstruction of the Neak Leung Bridge on the road from
                                        Phnom Penh to Ho Chi Minh City.


                                   (i) Extend the Minibea scheme to all ﬁrms, especially those
                                       operating in SEZs.
       Work with neighbors         (ii) Encourage Thailand to ratify the bilateral MoU
         for an integrated         (iii) Work with ASEAN and GMS partners to decide on and
      road transport market              implement a regional transit system.
                                   (iv) Introduce a regional third party liability insurance scheme
                                   (v) Agree on standardized regional axle and vehicle load limits.


                                   There is an emerging competition yet complementary service
                                   between Sihanoukville and Phnom Penh/Cai Mep ports. This
      Encourage competition
                                   offers ﬂexibility and increases capacity of the overall system.
         between ports
                                   Rate setting by the ports should be liberalized so in addition
                                   to port performance, the ports can also compete on cost.


                                   As demands increase for a sophisticated logistics sector linked
                                   to the SEZs there is need to provide for capacity enhancement
                                   measures for private sector service providers and regulatory
                                   authorities. Training opportunities should be designed for:
         Capacity building         (i) Clearing and forwarding agents based on FIATA courses.
                                   (ii) Trucking industry on ﬂeet management and modernization.
                                   (iii) Transport sector regulatory authorities on port, road and
                                         railway regulation and rate setting principles.




                                                                                      Cambodia Trade
                                                                      Corridor Performance Assessment      43
          References

     1. Apthorp, P. (2011) Developing the SEC – Logistics, presentation, Phnom Penh, March 9, 2011.
     2. Cai, J., L. Ung, S. Setboonsarng and P. Leung (2008) Rice Contract Farming in Cambodia: Empowering
        Farmers to Move Beyond the Contract Toward Independence, ADB Institute Discussion Paper No. 109, ADB.
     3. Chap Moly (2008) Infrastructure Development of Railway in Cambodia: A Long Term Strategy, IDE Discussion
        Paper. No. 150, IDE Jetro.
     4. Containerization International (2011) Covering the Globe, February 2011, pp. 28 – 29.
     5. EMC (2011) Transport and Logistics Corridor Assessment in South East Asia: Cambodia, Report for
        the World Bank.
     6. Emerging Markets Consultants (2005) Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness Project Performance
        Measurement System: Final Report, Emerging Markets Consulting, Ltd., Cambodia
     7. IBF International Consulting (2008) Realisation of the ASEAN Customs Transit System (ACTS), Report
        to the CPTFWG Kuala Lumpur, 27-29 October 2008.
     8. JICA (2011) Pilot Project for Port Statistics assisted by JICA.
     9. Ksoll, C. (2011) The Blue Book on Transport and Trade Facilitation along the Southern Economic Corridor:
        Background paper, ADB.
     10. Parlson, G. (1998) Multiple Ports of Call versus Hub-and-Spoke: Containerized Maritime Trade between
         West Africa and Europe, SSATP Working Paper 31, World Bank.
     11. Sisovanna, S. (2011) Economic Corridors and Industrial Estates, Ports and Metropolitan and Alternative
         Roads in Cambodia, in Intra and Inter-City Connectivity in Mekong Region, Bangkok Research Center.
     12. Slayton, T. and S. Muniroth (2011) A More Detailed Road Map for Cambodian Rice Exports, mimeo.
     13. Sophorndara, N. (2008) Trade and Transport Facilitation in Cambodia,
     14. World Bank (2010) Options for Cambodia Rice Exports, World Bank, Cambodia.




          Cambodia Trade
44        Corridor Performance Assessment
     Cambodia Trade
46   Corridor Performance Assessment
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
