                                                    91299
                                        Japan–World Bank Partnership
                                 Program for Universal Health Coverage




  Universal Health Coverage for Inclusive and
           Sustainable Development

        Country Summary Report for Ghana



Nathaniel Otoo, Evelyn Awittor, Patricio Marquez and Karima Saleh



         Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice
                    World Bank Group Report
                        September 2014
                                   Acronyms
CBHI    Community-based health insurance
DHMIS   District Health Mutual health Insurance Schemes
GDP     Gross Domestic Product
G-DRG          Ghana Diagnostic-Related Groups
GHS     Ghana Health Service
GNI     Gross National Income
HIPC    Highly indebted poor countries
HRH     Human Resources for Health
MDG     Millennium Development Goals
NGO     Non-governmental organization
NHIA    Ghana National Health Insurance Authority
NHIS    Ghana National Health Insurance Scheme
OOP     Out of pocket health spending
PPP     Purchasing power parity
SNNIT   Social security scheme
THE     Total Health Expenditure
UHC     Universal Health Coverage
VAT     Value-added tax




                                         i
                                           Preface
In 2011, Japan celebrated the 50th anniversary of achieving universal health coverage (UHC).
To mark the occasion, the government of Japan and the World Bank conceived the idea of
undertaking a multicountry study to respond to this growing demand by sharing rich and varied
country experiences from countries at different stages of adopting and implementing strategies
for UHC, including Japan itself. This led to the formation of a joint Japan–World Bank research
team under The Japan–World Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage. The
Program was set up as a two-year multicountry study to help fill the gap in knowledge about the
policy decisions and implementation processes that countries undertake when they adopt the
UHC goals. The Program was funded through the generous support of the Government of
Japan.
This Country Summary Report on Ghana is one of the 11 country studies on UHC that was
commissioned under the Japan–World Bank Partnership Program. The other participating
countries are Bangladesh, Brazil, Ethiopia, France, Indonesia, Japan, Peru, Thailand, Turkey,
and Vietnam. A synthesis of these country reports is in the publication “Universal Health
Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: A Synthesis of 11 Country Case Studies,?
available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/uhc-japan.
These reports are intended to provide an overview of the country experiences and some key
lessons that may be shared with other countries aspiring to adopt, achieve, and sustain UHC.
The goals of UHC are to ensure that all people can access quality health services, to safeguard
all people from public health risks, and to protect all people from impoverishment due to illness,
whether from out-of-pocket payments or loss of income when a household member falls sick.
Although the path to UHC is specific to each country, it is hoped that countries can benefit from
the experiences of others in learning about different approaches and avoiding potential risks.




                                                ii
                                   Acknowledgments
This study was supported through the PHRD Grant (Japan) as a joint Partnership Program
between the government of Japan and the World Bank. The Program was steered by the
Program Coordination Committee, co-chaired by Keizo Takemi, Member of the House of
Councilors of the National Diet of Japan, and Timothy Grant Evans, Director of Health, Nutrition
and Population Network of the World Bank.
The Program was led by a team comprising Akiko Maeda, Lead Health Specialist and Task
Team Leader for the World Bank, and co-Team Leaders, Professor Naoki Ikegami, Department
of Health Policy and Management, Keio University School of Medicine and Professor Michael
Reich, Taro Takemi Professor of International Health Policy, Harvard School of Public Health.
This Country Summary Report was prepared by Nathaniel Otoo, Deputy Chief, National Health
Insurance Authority of Ghana; a World Bank team comprising Evelyn Awittor, Senior Operations
Officer, Patricio Marquez, Lead Health Specialist, and Karima Saleh, Senior Health Economist;
and Cheryl Cashin, Health Economist, Results for Development.
The report was edited by Jonathan Aspin.


Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this work are entirely
those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank Group, its
Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.




                                               iii
                         Country Summary Report for Ghana

                                          Overview
Ghana is a country in West Africa with a population of about 25 million. The country is a stable
democracy and achieved lower middle-income status in 2011 with a per capita gross national
income (GNI) of $1,410. Poverty remains high, however, at nearly 30 percent of the population.
Life expectancy at birth, though only 65 years on average (Table 1), has seen a marked
improvement over the past two decades. The prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Ghana is among the
lowest in the Sub-Saharan Africa region, and this too makes its status related to life expectancy
relatively better.
The government made a commitment to universal health coverage when it passed the National
Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) Law, Act 650, at the end of 2003. The law was revised in
2012 (Act 852) to bring the district insurance schemes into t a single pooled fund, thus
eliminating fragmentation. Act 650 established the National Health Insurance Authority (NHIA)
to implement the NHIS and mandates that all residents of Ghana enroll in one of the accredited
insurance schemes. The law does not specify consequences for failing to enroll, nor are
residents automatically enrolled, so until now the NHIS has been operating as a de facto
voluntary scheme.
With the 2003 NHIS law, the health financing system in Ghana is now a combination of supply-
side subsidies for public and faith-based providers directly through the government budget,
entitlement-based insurance coverage financed through a combination of earmarked taxes and
individual-paid premiums, and direct out-of-pocket payments. The NHIS covers 36 percent of
the population, or close to 9 million people.

Table 1. Data overview
     Population                                      24.66 million (2010)
     Gross domestic product (GDP)                    $32.9 billion
     GNI per capita in purchasing power parity       $1,410
     GDP per capita, in US$                          $1,150 (2010)
     Total health expenditure (THE) as % of          4.86% (2009)
     GDP
     THE per capita                                  $54 (2009)
     Public expenditure as % of THE                  53% (2009)
     Out-of-pocket expenditure as % of THE           37% (2009)
     Life expectancy at birth                        65 years
     Hospital beds per capita                        0.9 hospital beds per 1,000 population
Source: World Development Indicators, The World Bank, 2013.
Note: For 2011, unless otherwise noted.




                                                 1
As highlighted in the 2014 Budget Statement presented by the minister of finance to Parliament
on November 4, 2013, the government is committed to increase membership of the NHIS by 9
percent to 10.15 million or about 42 percent of the total population in 2014. The government
also committed to ensure that by 2014 people in the informal sector will constitute 35 percent of
the total number of people enrolled in the NHIS.




     PART I. UNIVERSAL COVERAGE—STATUS AND SEQUENCING

A.     Overview of Current Status

1.     Population Coverage
The NHIS covers about 8.9 million people, or 36 percent of Ghana’s population (2012).
Reporting of NHIS coverage figures changed in 2010 from a cumulative reporting system to one
based on active membership, including only those members who currently have valid cards that
entitle them to services in the reporting period. This change resulted in a downward adjustment
of coverage estimates since coverage has been characterized by high levels of non-renewal.
There are also challenges of delays in issuing cards once the premium is paid and the official
three-month waiting period is completed, which has meant that some subscribers have been
denied access to services. There are efforts under way to issue instant cards using biometric
identification for rapid authentication of membership. A pilot membership authentication system
showed a 17 percent increase in enrollment of indigent beneficiaries between 2012 and 2013. In
2014, the NHIS will scale up the implementation of enhanced membership authentication and e-
claims systems across the country.

2.     Benefits
The benefits included in the NHIS benefit package are comprehensive and are the same for all
population groups. The NHIA has claimed that the benefits cover 95 percent of health conditions
affecting the population (NHIS 2013). The benefits package, which is published on the NHIS
website, includes most necessary outpatient diagnostic and curative services, medicines
according to the published list, inpatient services, emergency care, maternity care, and oral
health. The benefits package specifies excluded services, which are those that are not
medically necessary (e.g. cosmetic treatments) and some high-cost services, such as most
cancer treatments and organ transplant and parallel government programs such as TB and
HIV/AIDS anti-retroviral medications.
In 2008, a policy was introduced exempting all pregnant women from paying the NHIS
registration and premium fees (the Free Maternal Health Service Initiative). Enrollment entitles
women to six antenatal visits, childbirth care (including complications), two postnatal visits within
six weeks of childbirth, care of the newborn for up to three months, and other primary health
care benefits. A recent evaluation of the initiative found a continuing trend of increasing use of
health facilities for deliveries by pregnant women, with the share of supervised deliveries rising
from 24.3 percent in 2012 to 37.5 percent in mid-2013. The rate of prenatal care rose to 46.3
percent.

3.     Financial protection
The NHIS accounts for about 18 percent of total health spending in Ghana, while another 40
percent is paid directly by the government to public and faith-based health service providers.
                                              2
Other than the excluded services, there are few formal limits placed on NHIS coverage. There is
no cost sharing beyond premiums (i.e. no copayments, coinsurance, or deductibles), and no
annual or lifetime limits. The population not covered by the NHIS pays fee for service for both
government and private providers. Out-of-pocket spending is about 37 percent of total health
expenditure. Only 1.4 percent of households had catastrophic health spending in 2006, defined
as spending 10 percent or more of their total expenditures on health care (Scheiber et al. 2012).
Informal payments and balance billing are anecdotally reported to be uncommon, but this has
not been confirmed by research (Scheiber et al. 2012).

4.     Governance
Ghana’s approach to transitioning toward a uniform national insurance system was to build on
the existing system of community-based health insurance (CBHI) schemes, which proliferated
from 1995. In 2003, under Act 650, most CBHI schemes transitioned into district mutual health
insurance schemes (DMHISs), which maintained a level of independence by having their own
governance and management structures. Until 2012 Ghana had about 145 DMHISs (some with
satellite offices) that were individually registered as companies limited by guarantee. These
schemes were regulated and supervised by the NHIA, which also distributed subsidies to
DMHISs for exempt enrollees.
Under Act 650, the NHIA is governed by a board, which reports to the minister of health. The
board includes representation of a wide range of stakeholders including the Ministry of Health
(MOH), Ghana’s public provider network (Ghana Health Service), private providers, insurance
schemes, the National Insurance Commission, and consumers.
In 2012, the National Health Insurance Act of 2003 was replaced with the National Health
Insurance Act 2012 (Act 852) which introduced governance, administrative, and operational
reforms, a key part of which integrates all DMHISs into a unified NHIS creating a bigger risk
pool and resolving some of the governance and administrative challenges of Act 650.

5.     Financing
Since the NHIS was established in 2003, government health spending has increased in
absolute and relative terms. The share of the government budget allocated to health increased
from 8.7 percent to 12.1 percent between 2003 and 2010. The government now contributes
around 56 percent of health financing. Of this, 28.8 percentage points is channeled through the
NHIS (NHIA 2010). The share of GDP allocated to health has declined recently, however, most
likely on account of the upward rebasing of GDP in 2010.
The NHIS is financed from a few main sources: 72.8 percent of NHIS revenue comes from a 2.5
percent levy added to the value-added tax (VAT); 17.4 percent from a 2.5 percentage point
portion of social security contributions; 4.5 percent from premiums; and about 5.3 percent from
investment income, grants, and other sources (NHIA 2012).

6.     Service delivery
Ghana has a multilevel health system distributed throughout the country, with participation of
the private sector comprising both faith-based nonprofit and for-profit providers. The delivery
system is made up of public community-based CHPS compounds and health centers at
subdistrict level, district hospitals, and regional and teaching hospitals. The private sector
operates at the same levels. In the public delivery system, the country has separated policy
making (the MOH) from service provision (Ghana Health Service or GHS) and decentralized
health service management to district level. Private delivery of health care represents between a

                                               3
third and a half of all services used and likely half or more of all out-of-pocket spending
(Makinen et al. 2011). Private providers can be accredited and participate in the NHIS.
Ghana has a referral system that requires individuals to first seek care from a primary care
provider, which is reinforced by the health insurance law. In practice, however, the referral
system functions poorly, and there is widespread self-referral and “provider-shopping? (SEND-
Ghana 2010).
Budgets for the public delivery system are formed in line with the country’s Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework. Personnel costs—paid directly by the central government—consume
about 54 percent of the government health budget. The remaining budget funds are allocated
and managed at district level (Scheiber et al. 2012).

B.     Current status of health financing

1.     Fiscal space
In recent years, Ghana has experienced relatively stable macroeconomic growth, and the
government used the opportunity to undertake rapid fiscal expansion between 2004 and 2008.
Ghana’s GDP growth increased from 4 percent (2009) to 7.7 percent (2010). Over that period
total public expenditure grew from 20 percent to 24 percent of GDP (World Bank 2011).
Expansionary policies in 2004–08 contributed new resources to the health sector but almost led
to a macroeconomic crisis. The stabilization program undertaken since 2009 has had effects on
improving the overall health of the economy, but the gains remain fragile and the job of clearing
arrears and strengthening overall public financial management is far from over (World Bank
2010).
As part of the fiscal expansion of 2004–08, the government increased expenditures for health
particularly through the new resources dedicated to the NHIS. Ghana also benefited from the
Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative, and the health sector was allocated around 20
percent and 18 percent of poverty reduction–related funds in 2007 and 2008 (Seddoh et al.
2011). The HIPC funds were used to fund NHIS start-up costs related to establishing district
health insurance schemes in all districts that did not have them in 2003 (Agyepong and Adjei
2008).
Earmarking a share of the VAT and social security contributions has been an important factor in
preserving and expanding fiscal space for NHIS coverage even during the economic downturn
of 2009 (Scheiber et al. 2012). Overall government spending on health increased from 0.93
percent of GDP in 2004 to 1.68 percent in 2008 (World Bank 2011).

2.     Cost management and value for money
The NHIS is widely credited with increasing access to and utilization of health services (Nguyen
et al. 2011; Scheiber et al. 2012). The growth in utilization and exponential increase in total
claims, however, also pose challenges for cost management and sustainability of the NHIS. The
average cost of total claims per member per year more than doubled between 2007 and 2009
(NHIA 2010). Expanding coverage to more poor and vulnerable households will likely spur
further cost escalation.
The NHIA in consultation with providers and with the approval of the minister of health
establishes provider payment systems. Act 650 specifies the provider payment methods that are
permitted under the NHIS are fee for service, capitation, diagnosis-related groups, or any other
payment system determined by the board. At the inception of the NHIS, the NHIA adopted an
itemized fee-for-service system, paying providers for each service and each prescription. In
                                               4
addition to the natural incentive of fee-for-service payment to increase utilization with no lever to
contain costs, the tariffs used by different district schemes were not uniform, and inequities
emerged, as different facilities were reimbursed at different rates for treating the same condition.
However, over time, the NHIA has come up with standardized service and drug prices that are
used by all service providers, although service prices differ for public, faith-based, and private
providers to account for the government subsidies given to private (and to a lesser degree faith-
based) providers.
In response to the challenges created by the itemized fee-for-service system, the NHIA
implemented the Ghana Diagnosis Related Groups (G-DRG) payment system, a form of DRG,
in 2008. Under the G-DRG payment system, providers are reimbursed the same fixed tariff for
cases that fall into the same diagnostic category. There are about 500 G-DRGs, including
bundled payment for outpatient services. The G-DRG payment system has not, however,
contained costs, particularly for outpatient services, with outpatient claims now accounting for
about 90 percent of total NHIS claims volume and over 70 percent of total claims costs. NHIA
is piloting a capitation payment system for primary care services in one region to better manage
costs among other objectives.
Pharmaceutical spending is another significant source of inefficiency and threat to the
sustainability of the NHIS. Pharmaceuticals account for some 50 percent of NHIS spending.
There are major issues concerning not just prices and spending, but also quality, prescribing
patterns, patient expectations and medicine consumption behavior (Scheiber et al. 2012). The
NHIA covers medicines based on a medicines list drawn from the essential medicines list. Until
recently NHIA reimbursed providers for whatever drug charges they claimed; however, now
standardized prices are in place and transparently reported on NHIA website.1 These prices are
determined from median retail prices from market surveys. This combination of policies has not,
however, had much influence on the growth of NHIS claims payments for medicines, and the
NHIA is exploring other options to manage drug expenditure growth.

3.       Equity and redistribution
A recent study shows that Ghana's health care financing system is progressive, driven largely
by the progressivity of general taxes, which make up the bulk of the revenue sources for the
health sector. The national health insurance levy (which is part of the VAT) is mildly progressive.
The incidence of total benefits from both public and private health service utilization, however, is
pro-rich. Public sector district-level hospital inpatient care is pro-poor and benefits of primary-
level health care services are relatively evenly distributed (Akazili et al. 2012).
In terms of the equity of the NHIS itself, the results are mixed. Some research has shown that
the wealthy are up to 50 percent more likely to enroll in the NHIS than the poorest residents
(Jehu-Appiah et al. 2011). The financial protection effect and the impact on utilization, however,
tend to be greater among the poor (Scheiber et al. 2012; Nguyen et al. 2011).
The premium is considered progressive because of geographic differences (ranging between
7.20 and 48 cedis per person per year) and the wide range of premium exemptions. Exempt
population groups include all seniors aged 70 and above, retirees who contributed to the social
security (SNNIT) scheme, all children under 18 years of age with both parents enrolled in the
NHIS, and indigents.2 Act 852 has removed the requirement for both parents of children to be
registered members of the NHIS for eligibility. It has also added pregnant women, persons with

1
  NHIS Medicines List. Effective October 2009. http://www.nhis.gov.gh/?CategoryID=158&ArticleID=1096
2
  An indigent is defined by law as follows: is unemployed and has no visible source of income; does not have a fixed
place of residence according to standards determined by the scheme; does not live with a person who is employed
and who has a fixed place of residence; and does not have any identifiable consistent support from another person.
                                                          5
mental disorders and categories of disabled persons determined by the minister responsible for
social welfare as exempt from payment of premiums. As a result, more than 1,000 residents of
two large psychiatric hospitals were recently enrolled in the NHIS.
During a review of NHIS enrollment, about 68 percent of NHIS registered beneficiaries were
found exempt from paying premiums. The rest of the population is expected to pay registration
fees and premiums. The exempt population groups are required to enroll, however, so many
individuals entitled to fully subsidized coverage may still be uncovered by the NHIS. There also
are concerns that the targeting is not specific (Scheiber et al. 2012). It is likely that there are
wealthy individuals receiving fully subsidized premiums, and that poor are excluded because of
the restrictive definition of indigent and subjective criteria, and lack of outreach (Seddoh et al.
2011). A common targeting mechanism to be used to identify the entitled population in all of
Ghana’s social assistance programs, including the NHIS indigent coverage, is being piloted in
10 districts across the country.
The premium revenue that was collected by the DMHISs was retained at the district level, and
the revenue from all other sources is accumulated by the NHIA for redistribution across district
schemes in the form of subsidies for exempt population groups. With the reforms introduced by
Act 852, however, premiums are paid into a central pool from which payments are made to
district offices based on need.

C.     Current status of human resources for health (HRH) policies
Compared with other countries of similar income and health spending, Ghana does not fare too
badly in its overall health worker ratios, and access to health workers has generally improved.
However, distribution favors urban areas, and hospitals not clinics. Health worker density is
highest in Greater Accra, Ashanti, and Volta regions, and lowest in the north.




                                                6
Table 2. Current status of HRH
                                  Entry
                                                      Number
                                        # of          of years    Number of                      # of newly
            Number                      course        of          years of      Means of         accredited
            per 1,000     Qualification entrants      educatio    mandatory     accreditation/   HRHs per
            population    s             per year      n           internship    qualification    year
Physician   0.1           High school     260         4+ years    2 years       National         About
s                         graduate                                              exam             7,500-
                                                                                                 8,000
Nurses      0.39          RN: high        2220        RN: 3                     National
                          school                      years+                    exam
                          graduate or
                          LPN
                          LPN:
                          Junior-high
                          graduate
Midwives    0.15          High School     685         2-3 years                 National
                          graduate for                                          exam
                          3 year or
                          RN enrollee
                          for 2 year
Communi     Not           N/A             N/A         N/A                       N/A
ty Health   available
Worker
Source: Appiah-Denkyira, et al., 2012, and Ghana MOH, “Human Resources for Health Country File 2011
Edition?


The public sector employs the greatest proportion of health workers (65,000 in 2009). The
MOH’s health staffing has increased due to an increase in enrollment of new trainees, a result
of MOH plans to improve staffing distribution and to replace forthcoming retirees, especially
among some key cadres. The increase in trainees was sharp after wage reforms of 2006.
Recruitment of health workers, especially physicians, remains a challenge, however, although
the present situation represents a reversal of an earlier trend. The 2006 wage reforms also
appear to have contributed to a decline in physicians emigrating overseas.
Despite these efforts, training of physicians remains inadequate for the country’s needs, and a
shortage of midwives also exists. A more egalitarian distribution exists among nurse –midwives
and pre-service nurse–midwife training institutions are also more widely distributed in the
country, but pre-service training for physicians is concentrated in a few cities. To rectify that, the
government is setting up training grounds for physicians in regions and districts in addition to
tertiary teaching hospitals.
Retention of health workers, especially in rural and remote areas and in the northern regions,
remains a persistent challenge. The government has offered several incentive packages,
including housing, additional allowances, and career opportunities; however, it still faces


                                                  7
shortages outside large cities. There is a new five-year bonding scheme with service
commitments to high-priority areas in exchange for preservice support.
On another dimension, quality of care and health workers’ competencies and productivity are
also rated low. These are factors that deter patient access. Although absenteeism is modest,
health workers’ attitudes toward clients are reported to be poor and motivation low (Appiah-
Denkyria, 2012). The government increased salaries to improve worker productivity but its
impact remains uncertain. Many health workers appear not to be performing up to standard,
particularly in rural areas, among the poor, and in the northern region.
The balance of skills mix and the choice of specialties among the newly recruited health workers
will warrant further review. Most popular specialties for physicians are obstetrics, internal
medicine, and surgery. The University of Ghana’s School of Public Health offers preservice
professional training in public health and four short courses in malaria, HIV, and epidemiology
for district health officers, and management for district health officers. The security of a career
ladder in public health practice at district level is unknown. In view of the growing interest toward
medical specialties among new health workers, there may be a need to ensure a balanced
recruitment and retention among other key health workers, including public health specialists.

D.     Sequencing of reforms
The NHIS has grown out of a pilot, scale-up, and ultimate national integration of CBHI schemes.
Ghana started experimenting with such schemes as far back as the early 1990s through pilot
projects. It began taking serious steps toward establishing its NHIS in 2001 in fulfillment of a
2000 election campaign promise. There was a strong mandate to replace out-of-pocket fees at
point of service with a more equitable and pro-poor health financing policy (Agyepong and Adjei
2008). Ghana’s choice of establishing the NHIS and focusing premium subsidies on the poor
was a direct result of the negative history of user fees imposed on free public health services as
part of a structural adjustment program in the mid-1980s. The user fees, which became
popularly known as the “cash and carry? system, led rapidly to serious financial access barriers
to care. Between 1995 and 2003 health service utilization fell by 25 percent (Seddoh et al.
2011).
In 1997, the government established a task force and appointed a Director of Health Insurance
within the MOH to oversee the establishment of an NHIS. The number of CBHI schemes
increased from fewer than five in 1991 to 47 by 2001 and to 168 in 2003.
By 2003 when the NHIS was being designed, there did not appear to be any serious opposition
to the insurance approach in general. There were, however, major disagreements on the task
force established by the new government to design the scheme about the structure. In particular
there were disagreements about whether the new system should build on the existing
community-based and district level schemes by centralizing insurance fund and purchaser, or
have multiple schemes serving different population groups (Agyepong and Adjei 2008). Also,
when the time came to agree on the sources of funding, disagreements emerged from different
stakeholders, such as organized labor groups opposed to channeling a portion of their social
security contributions to the NHIS. In Parliament, the majority party opposed increasing taxes to
fund the NHIS, and VAT in particular. The contentious issues were resolved through
compromises such as exempting formal sector workers from paying NHIS premiums if they also
contributed indirectly through the social security earmark to the NHIS (Agyepong and Adjei
2008).



                                                 8
                           PART II. Lessons To Be Shared

A.     Current policy priorities, challenges, and opportunities
The NHIS and progress toward universal coverage are at a critical stage, as highlighted by
heated debates captured by the press during Ghana’s recent presidential and parliamentary
elections (Ghana Times 2012; Afedo 2012; NPP Ghana 2012) and the conference marking the
10-year anniversary of the NHIS (NHIS 2013). The NHIS boasts many achievements and
popular support, but there are also some fundamental concerns about the current design and
implementation of the system.
The NHIS has been unable to reach much of the informal sector, and population coverage rates
have stagnated. The inefficiencies in provider payment systems combined with a generous
benefits package, high cost and overutilization of medicines, and operational inefficiencies
create an ongoing threat to the scheme’s viability and sustainability (Scheiber et al. 2012). The
president has publicly stated that the government will critically review the efficiency in the use of
health resources as it considers options for increasing funding to the NHIS to expand coverage
while ensuring sustainability (NHIS 2013).

B.     Lessons to be shared
Ghana has embarked on an approach to universal coverage that after 10 years offers many
lessons to be shared. Although it built its national insurance system on a foundation of
community-based insurance schemes, several key decisions have helped avoid the
fragmentation and inequity that often comes with expanding coverage through multiple
insurance schemes. It has also taken an innovative approach to financing the NHIS, creating a
diversified funding base with the largest share coming from general taxation, which tends to be
more progressive and equitable. Ghana’s experience also shows the importance of investing in
human resources for health to ensure that the supply of health services can keep up with
increased demand as financial access barriers are reduced.
The country’s experience also, however, provides lessons related to the challenges of reaching
the informal sector with coverage that is in effect voluntary and relies on active enrollment by
the individual. It is now facing the challenges created by the political compromises that are
needed to get universal coverage programs off the ground, but that open the door for cost
escalation in the future.

1.     Avoiding fragmentation of the insurance pool
Ghana used CBHI schemes that were gaining popularity as a starting point for the NHIS, with
the national health insurance law, Act 650, mandating the establishment of district mutual
schemes in every district. The NHIA licenses and regulates the district mutual health insurance
schemes. To avoid fragmentation and ensure equity, however, the district mutual schemes were
brought together under the NHIS to follow a national policy framework, ensure cross-
subsidization across the district-level schemes, and to begin to build a single purchaser. The
consolidation of the pooling and purchasing functions of the NHIS has been undertaken step-by-
step, which also may have helped navigate the political and technical challenges of integrating
multiple schemes. Act 650 specified a system with highly decentralized management. The
district mutual schemes collected the premiums from the self-paying enrollees and had wide
discretion in payment to providers. The NHIA provided subsidies to the district schemes to cover
exempt groups, which led to a high degree of cross-subsidization among the district schemes.
The 2012 revision to the law (Act 852) further centralizes the collection of premiums at the
                                                 9
national level and therefore enhances pooling, and also standardizes provider payment systems
and other aspects of purchasing, making the NHIA a single purchaser managing a single pool of
funds.
Although fragmentation has been avoided within the NHIS, overall health financing remains
fragmented in Ghana, since more than half of government financing continues to be channeled
through supply-side subsidies.

2.     Diversified funding with emphasis on general taxation
The NHIS in Ghana is funded through a diversified mix of funding sources, but almost three-
quarters of the funding comes from earmarked general taxation. This earmarking of the VAT is
widely considered to be a health financing innovation. The funding arrangement has the benefit
of relying on a more progressive and efficient general tax, while the earmark has ensured a
stable and predictable funding stream. The small share of funding for the NHIS that comes from
premium contributions does, however, continue to pose a barrier to enrolling a larger share of
the informal sector.

3.     Investing in human resources for health to ensure the supply of services can meet
       increased demand
Ghana has made a concerted effort to address supply constraints and shortages of health
workers, as well as to slow the out-migration of qualified medical personnel. It has invested in
training, significantly increasing salaries, and incentive packages for health personnel working in
rural and remote areas. As a result, trends in the health worker shortages and supply
constraints in the service delivery system have begun to improve. Nonetheless, ensuring an
adequate supply and distribution of health workers who have the capacity to deliver high quality
services remains a challenge in the move toward universal health coverage.

4.     Continuous innovations to improve expenditure management, but need for greater
       capacity to manage complex purchasing arrangements
When the NHIS was established, some compromises were made that built in almost inevitable
cost escalation. The comprehensive benefits package with no-cost sharing combined with fee-
for-service payment to providers have contributed to ongoing cost escalation and financial
sustainability challenges. In fact, claims per beneficiary have increased by at least 20 percent
every year since the NHIS was established. Ghana has made serious efforts to address
expenditure management, particularly provider payment innovations, but these efforts are often
hindered by difficult politics with health care providers and constraints in the NHIA’s capacity to
manage new payment systems and other strategic purchasing strategies.
The lesson from Ghana is that political compromises will have to be made to get universal
coverage programs off the ground and to expand coverage. It is therefore critical to invest in the
systems and capacity needed for strategic purchasing and effective provider payment systems
and to constantly update the systems and approaches as experience is gained and challenges
evolve.
Ghana’s NHIS is at a critical juncture, and at this moment of reflection and course correction,
the NHIS experience shows that the path to universal coverage is not linear. Steps have been
taken, compromises made, and experience gained. The country is now at a moment of learning
from this experience and making adjustments to address the pressing challenges of expanding
coverage to all those entitled to subsidized coverage as well as to the informal sector, and
effectively balancing revenues and expenditures to ensure financial sustainability of the NHIS.

                                                10
11
                                        References
Afedo, James. Vibe Ghana. 2012. http://www.ghana.gov.gh/index.php/news/features/17620-
       ghanas-nhis-is-model-for-africa (accessed January 2013). November 2.
Agyepong, Irene, and Sam Adjei. 2008. "Public Social Policy Development and Implementation:
      A Case Study of the Ghana National Health Insurance Scheme." Health Policy and
      Planning 23: 150-160.
Akazili, J., B. Garshong, M. Aikins, J. Gyapong, and D. McIntyre. 2012. "Progressivity of Health
        Care Financing and Incidence of Service Benefits in Ghana." Health Policy and Planning
        Suppl 1: i13-22.
Appiah-Denkyira, E., C.H. Herbst, A. Soucat, C. Lemiere, and K. Saleh, editors. 2012. Toward
      Interventions in Human Resources for Health in Ghana: Evidence for Health Workforce
      Planning and Results. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ghana Times. 2012. http://www.ghana.gov.gh/index.php/news/features/17620-ghanas-nhis-is-
      model-for-africa (accessed January 2013). November 14.
Jehu-Appiah, C., G. Aryeetey, E. Spaan, T. de Hoop, I. Agyepong, and R. Baltussen. 2011.
      "Equity aspects of the National Health Insurance Scheme in Ghana: who is enrolling,
      who is not and why?" Social Science and Medicine 72: 157-165.
Makinen, Marty, Stephanie Sealy, Ricardo Bitran, Sam Adjei, and Rodrigo Munoz. 2011. Private
      Health Sector Assessment in Ghana. Working Paper No. 210, Washington, DC: World
      Bank.
Marquez, P.V. 2013. "Ghana: Towards Universal Health Coverage" in Investing in Health, World
      Bank. http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/ghana-towards-universal-health-coverage.
MOH (Ministry of Health, Ghana), 2011. “Human Resources for Health Country File 2011
     Edition?, Accra.
Nguyen, H., Y. Rajkotia, and Hong Wang. 2011. "The Financial Protection Effect of Ghana
      National Health Insurance Scheme: Evidence from a Study in Two Rural Districts."
      International Journal for Equity in Health 10, No. 4.
NHIA (National Health Insurance Authority). 2010. Annual Report 2009. Accra.
———-. 2012. Annual Report 2011. Accra
NHIS (National Health Insurance Scheme). NHIS. January 2013.
      http://www.nhis.gov.gh/?CategoryID=158&ArticleID=120 (accessed September 2013).
NPP Ghana. Peace FM Online. October 31, 2012.
     http://elections.peacefmonline.com/pages/politics/201210/143328.php (accessed
     January 2013).
Scheiber, G., C. Cashin, K. Saleh, and R. Lavado. 2012. Health Financing in Ghana.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.
Seddoh, Anthony, Sam Adjei, and Nazzar Alex. 2011. Ghana's National Health Insurance
      Scheme: views on progress, observations and commentary. Accra: Rockefeller
      Foundation.
SEND-Ghana. 2010. Balancing Access with Quality Health Care: An Assessment of the NHIS in
     Ghana (2004–2008). Accra.

                                              12
World Bank. 2010. International Development Association Program Document for the 7th
       Poverty Reduction Support Credit to the Republic of Ghana. Poverty Reduction and
       Economic Management 4, Country Department West Africa 1, Africa Region,
       Washington, DC.
———. 2011. "Republic of Ghana: Joint review of public expenditure and financial
    management; Country Department West Africa 1; Africa Region." Poverty Reduction and
    Economic Management 4.




                                            13
