                                                                                                                           91313

                                                                    Approach Paper

                                   World Bank Group Activities in Situations of Conflict and Violence: An
                                                            IEG Evaluation
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                        July 23, 2014


                               Introduction
                               1.      Fragility, conflict, and violence are at the heart of the World Bank Group
                               strategy to attain the twin goals of ending poverty and promoting shared prosperity.
                               Establishment of fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) as one of the cross-cutting solution
                               areas under the Global Practice Vice Presidency reflects the high level of priority attached to
                               this theme. The FCV cross-cutting solution area is expected to enhance a systematic and
                               coordinated approach across the Bank Group. The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) of
                               the World Bank Group contributed to this effort by undertaking an evaluation, “World Bank
                               Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: An Independent
                               Evaluation” (IEG 2014). This report focused on assessing Bank Group activities in low-
                               income countries classified as fragile and conflict-affected.

                               2.       It is against this background that the Committee on Development Effectiveness
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               (CODE) of the World Bank’s Board of Executive Directors agreed that there would be
                               a follow-up evaluation to focus on Bank Group activities in countries not classified as
                               fragile and conflict-affected. Recognizing the significant implications of conflict and
                               violence to the attainment of the Bank Group’s strategic goals the CODE agreed that the
                               follow-up evaluation would capture the different nature of fragility and manifestations of
                               violence in countries not on the World Bank Group list of fragile and conflict-affected
                               situations. The CODE noted that such forms of fragility and violence could include IBRD
                               and blend countries, small island states, fragility due to organized crime and violence, and
                               fragility due to ethnic tensions. The proposed evaluation is intended to respond to this
                               demand and to broaden the Bank Group’s perspectives on addressing the development
                               challenges arising from conflict and violence. 1

                               Context
                               3.      Conflict and violence are known to have significant adverse impacts on economic
                               development and poverty reduction. The World Development Report 2011 (WDR 2011),
                               Conflict, Security, and Development (World Bank 2011b) shows that on average, a country
                               that experienced major violence over the period from 1981 to 2005 has a poverty rate 21

                               1This evaluation will not cover the issues related to small island states as IEG plans to
                               prepare a separate evaluation on small states in FY2016.




                                                                              1
percentage points higher than a country that saw no violence. Collier (1999) examined the
costs of civil war and found that during civil conflict, the annual growth rate is reduced by
2.2 percent. The economic impact of violence containment to the world economy has been
estimated to amount to $9.4 trillion per annum, or almost 11 percent of World GDP (Institute
for Economics and Peace, 2014). Significant multiplier effects of conflict, crime, and
violence on the economy through depressed savings, investments, earnings, productivity,
labor market participation, international trade, tourism, and overall growth have also been
reported.

4.      Among development institutions, fragility, conflict, and violence have long been
associated with the lack of development progress in the country. For example, low-
income country status was a pre-condition to be classified under Low Income Country Under
Stress (LICUS)—the first classification of fragility by the World Bank. The current system
of classifying countries as fragile and conflict situations (FCS) relies heavily on the Country
Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) and excludes IBRD-only countries for which the
CPIA scores are not disclosed. 2

5.      However, significant levels of conflict and violence exist even in parts of the more
affluent countries, presenting cases which test the link between fragility, conflict,
violence, and low-income status. Conflict and violence are indeed prevalent in some parts
of vibrant middle income countries and even in highly developed countries, which are not on
the World Bank’s FCS list (see Attachment 1 on reported incidences in middle-income
countries).

6.      Many of these violent incidences create localized pockets of insecurity in parts of
these countries and pose considerable challenges for poverty reduction and shared
prosperity. These incidences often do not present an immediate threat to the overall stability
of the country, but have non-trivial development consequences. Conflict and violence harms
agriculture, livestock, enterprises, and other local industries creating structural barriers to
achieving shared prosperity. Conflict and violence also have direct human costs resulting in
loss of life, disability, and displacement. For example, Parks, Colletta, and Oppenheim
(2013) note that subnational conflict is the most deadly form of conflict in Asia—at least
1.35 million people have been killed in Asian subnational conflicts since 1946. Armed
violence was a key driver of internal displacement in Colombia, which continues to affect up
to 5 million people or about 10 percent of the population (World Bank Group 2014).

7.     Conflict and violence in countries not classified as FCS have been under the
radar screen of the international development community until recently, and the Bank
Group is beginning to make systematic efforts to address the associated challenges. The


2In addition to the CPIA rating, the presence of a United Nations and/or regional peace-
keeping or peace-building mission is used to designate a country as FCS. Based on this
criteria, four IBRD only countries—Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iraq, Libya, and Syria—are
classified as FCS.




                                               2
WDR 2011 is the first major analysis by the Bank Group that highlighted fragility and
conflict as a situation that could exist in parts of countries that, as a whole, are not classified
as, or considered to be, fragile. This analysis expanded the prevailing concept which used to
limit fragility as an attribute of entire countries classified as fragile and conflict-affected
states. (See Attachment 2 for the evolution of Bank Group support to fragile and conflict
states).

8.      The proposed evaluation is motivated by the growing need to better understand
how the Bank Group can play a role and be effective in situations affected by conflict
and violence in countries not classified as FCS. These cases occur and are sustained in
relatively affluent and stable countries with a functioning system of government. Thus they
pose a question to the widely accepted assumption that associates lack of development
progress with conflict and violence, and also to the activities developed, designed, and
implemented based on such an assumption. The Bank Group and the development
community as a whole are aware of this emerging challenge, but are still at the nascent stage
of taking a systematic approach to address it. Focused analysis on the cases of conflict and
violence in otherwise stable countries would help increase the robustness of the Bank Group
strategies and approaches toward fragility, conflict, and violence in general.

9.      The proposed report differs from the previous IEG repot (IEG 2014) on FCS in
the following three key aspects.

    •   Drivers of conflict and violence: The evaluation focuses on situations that go beyond
        the conventional assumption of low-income status and poverty as being the primary
        driver of conflict and violence. The drivers of conflict and violence could be
        subnational dispute, ethnic or religious tension, or insecurity due to organized crime
        or urban crime and violence. In addition to income poverty and state institutional
        capacity that the earlier report touched on, the new report will try to examine the
        Bank Group’s role in addressing such issues as actual or perceived social exclusion as
        well as relative (rather than absolute) deprivation that exist in pockets of insecurity.
    •   Localized situations: Many of the conflict and violent incidences in these countries
        are confined within certain parts of the territory. An important aspect of the proposed
        evaluation will be to review how the Bank Group helped countries tailor their
        measures to address the underlying causes to the local context. The earlier report
        (IEG 2014), on the other hand, focused on countries where measures directed to
        achieve broad based improvement across the country are still the primary focus of
        Bank Group support.
    •   Country engagement: While the previous report focused on IDA only countries, the
        proposed evaluation will include reviews of activities in IBRD and blend countries.
        The nature and modality of Bank Group’s engagement with these countries are
        different from those in IDA countries. The proposed evaluation will touch on the
        opportunities and challenges involved in policy dialogue and country program
        implementation in these countries.

10.     The following sections include more specific discussions on the purpose, objective,
scope, and the framework of this evaluation.


                                                 3
Purpose, Objectives, and Audience
11.     This evaluation seeks to identify lessons from past experinces that will inform
the Bank Group’s future activities in coping with conflict and violent situations in
countries not on the FCS list. These forms of conflict and violence have existed for a
sustained period of time, affecting the lives of a substantial number of people. As these cases
are often observed in countries with relatively higher per capita income and a better
functioning governance system, they point to limitation in the widely-accepted assumption
that links conflict and violence with lack of development progress. The proposed evaluation
aims to help broaden the perspectives on the drivers of conflict and violence, and help the
Bank Group increase the robustness of its strategy and approaches toward fragile, conflict,
and violent situations by undertaking systematic analysis of Bank Group experiences.

12.      This report is closely linked with the objectives in the IEG’s results framework.
It is particularly relevant to the goal to find out “what works” through deepening evidence
about the results of Bank Group programs and activities–and their effectiveness for
accelerating growth, inclusiveness, and sustainability–to contribute to the Bank Group’s
interim target of 9 percent poverty reduction and progress on shared prosperity by 2020.
Given the evolving nature of the Bank Group’s programs on fragile, conflict, and violent
situations, this evaluation is also related to the other IEG objective on real time learning.
This evaluation will help generate evidence on the early implementation experiences of the
Bank Group strategy to enable mid-course corrections, and promote a stronger internal
culture for results, accountability, and learning.

13.      The objectives of this evaluation are two-fold. First, it assesses and reports on the
quality and results of Bank Group programs and operations planned and implemented under
situations affected by localized conflict and violence. The assessment will be based on three
key areas of results and quality: relevance, effectiveness, and responsiveness. The
assessment will cover the Bank Group strategies and assistance programs, including lending,
and trust-funded operations, and analytical and advisory activities. Second, it will aim to
provide an analysis of the factors that lead to success or failure of Bank Group engagement in
these environments. Systematic efforts by the Bank Group to analyze activities in conflict
and violent situations in countries not classified as FCS started relatively recently. This
report aims to provide analyses that would facilitate Bank Group’s learning in this area.
Also, lessons will be drawn from the experiences reviewed in this evaluation to inform the
design of future strategies and assistance programs, and partnerships with relevant
institutions in similar environments.

14.      There are a number of key internal audiences for this evaluation. The primary
audience comprises Bank Group’s shareholders, the Board of Executive Directors, senior
staff in the Regional and Country Management Units addressing the challenges caused by
conflict and violence as well as in the new cross-cutting solutions area on fragility, conflict,
and violence. The findings will also be useful for many of the Global Practices such as
Governance as well as Urban, Rural and Social Development.




                                                4
15.     There is a high level of commitment in the Bank Group to this topic, given the
significant attention paid to fragility and conflict in the Bank Group strategy. The
Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations Unit in OPCS and the FCS Coordination Unit in
IFC functioned as the corporate level champion prior to July 1, 2014. With the establishment
of the Fragility, Conflict, and Violence cross cutting solutions area, it is likely that
champions will emerge within different Global Practices and regions. In addition, there is a
strong network of professionals who have been working on the related challenges for
sustained period of time exists across a wide variety of sectors. A high level of interest
among CODE/Board members about this subject has also been expressed in past discussions.
As a result, there seems to be a robust institutional vehicle and constituencies that can
implement the findings of this evaluation.

Scope, Results Chain, and Evaluation Framework
16.      This section discusses the overall evaluation approach. The discussion includes the
scope of the evaluation—the forms of conflict and violence expected to be relevant in the
proposed evaluation. The section then discusses the construct of a results chain of Bank
Group operations in addressing localized conflict and violence derived from existing
literature and related analyses. The descriptions of the evaluation framework, particularly on
the approaches for case study selection, will follow.

EVALUATION SCOPE

17.     Conflict and violence are often the manifestation of institutional fragility. The
WDR 2011 defines fragility as situations when states or institutions lack the capacity,
accountability, or legitimacy to mediate relations between citizen groups and between
citizens and the state, making them vulnerable to violence. The report also reinforces the
close link between institutional fragility and the risk of conﬂict. Conflicts and violent
incidences can further enhance fragile situations, creating a vicious cycle of fragility,
conflict, and violence.

18.     As this is an evaluation of Bank Group activities, the extent of real and potential
links with the Bank Group’s mandate and programs is an important factor defining its
scope. There are several organizations and databases that categorize the types of conflict and
incidences of violence (see Box 1). For the purpose of this evaluation, we classified the
conflict and incidences of violence into two broad types: cross-border and in-country. Given
the limited role that the Bank Group can play, the first type of conflict—contestation across
national borders over territory and regional influence—will not be covered in this evaluation.




                                              5
Box 1. Categorizing Conflict and Violent Incidences
There are several approaches to categorize the types of conflict and violent incidences.
Conflict intensity is a typical way to classify the nature of these incidences. Various
databases measure the intensity of conflict using such indicators as the number of reported
casualties and the presence of violent means in resolving the dispute.
The Uppsala Armed Conflict Dataset defines three types of organized violence based on the
nature of participating parties and use of force. They include armed conflict, one-sided
violence, and non-state conflict. The Heidelberg Conflict Barometer presents the types of
conflict items—materials or immaterial goods pursued by conflict actors—as one of the
concepts to classify conflict. These items include: system/ideology, national power,
autonomy, secession, decolonization, subnational predominance, resources, territory, and
international power. The references to types of violence in WDR 2011 include civil,
criminal, cross-border, sub-national, and ideological.
Source: IEG



19.     The forms of conflict and violence covered in this report are those that occur
within a country. The issues underlying these conflicts cover a wide range of areas and
include contestations over the political system, subnational conflict, and the sharing of
resource benefits (e.g. minerals, water, oil/gas, fish stock). Urban violence and organized
crime are also prevalent in some of these countries. These conflicts are manifestations of
contests over a variety of issues such as defiance of the central authority, real or perceived
inequities in resource sharing, gender-based violence, and gang rivalry. However, there may
also be similarities in the underlying socio-economic drivers such as social exclusion and
economic opportunities. This evaluation will review Bank Group experiences in different
types of conflict and violent situations and examine similarities and differences in how these
situations can be addressed effectively.

20.     The report will focus on Bank Group actions to assess what are the effective
approaches it can take toward its twin goals within its mandate. This report does not aim
to undertake its own analysis to define the nature, drivers, and political economy of conflict
and violence. The focus of this report is to draw lessons from Bank Group operations,
strategies, and policy dialogue in addressing these situations. Among the potential case
studies, the Bank Group has limited role in a situation where active and open conflict is
spread widely across the country (e.g. Syria). Thus, the cases in countries with widespread
active conflict zones will not be reviewed in this evaluation. The forms of conflict and
violence expected to be relevant in this evaluation are summarized in Table 1 below.




                                               6
Table 1. Forms of Conflict and Violence Relevant to the Proposed Evaluation
  Major Contestants                      Conflict Item/Type                       Covered by the Evaluation (Y/N)
In-country                 Political system and authority to govern the           Y, if localized conflict and violence
                           nation                                                N, if conflict zones are spread widely
                           Subnational issues (secession, autonomy, and                            Y
                           control over a subnational territory)
                           Sharing of resource benefits                                            Y
                           Crime and Violence                                                      Y
Cross-border               Territory                                                               N
                           Regional influence                                                      N
Source: IEG Staff


RESULTS CHAIN

21.     The results chain that guides this evaluation reflects the unique challenges
associated with the issues in conflict and violent situations. The framework developed for
this evaluation is shown in Figure 1 below. The following sections provide more specific
descriptions of the each segment of the results framework.

Figure 1. Results Chain of Activities to Address Pockets of Insecurity

                      •Sustained economic development and shared prosperity (OR improved living standards of the
    Long-term          bottom 40 percent) in the areas affected by conflict and violence
      Goals           •Break the recurrent cycle of conflict and violence


                      •Robust institutional and governance frameworks to analyze and deal with complex and difficult
                       issues involved in conflict and violence
                      •Equitable access to rule of law, justice, public goods and services
    Outcomes          •Private investment and employment opportunities
                      •Different social groups cooperate more with each other and with the government and participate
                       in public sector and non-state programs


                      •Inclusive decision making processes
      Outputs         •Capacity to effectively provide and demand critical public goods
                      •Programs designed to addresss the drivers of conflict and violence.


                      •Country program/sector strategies, lending/non-lending including trust funded activities
       Inputs         •Analysis of conflict and violence drivers
                      •Partnerships with relevant institutions (global, regional, and country)

Source: IEG Staff




                                                           7
LONG-TERM GOALS

22.     The twin goals of ending poverty and promoting shared prosperity call for the
Bank Group to strive for progress in economic development and living standards for all
citizens. Several factors including poverty, inequality, and scarcity of resources can lead to
conflict and violence. The WDR 2011 argues that the risks of violence increase when
internal and external stresses combine with weak institutions. The types of stresses are
diverse including those caused by threats to security at the personal or community level,
economic well-being (unemployment, price shocks), and just and fair treatment of citizens.
It suggests that there is a need for confidence building measures and interventions to
transform institutions that provide citizen security, justice, and jobs.

23.     High levels of inequality or increases in poverty are often associated with crime and
violence, while highly unequal societies may have a low propensity to invest in costly crime
deterrence measures (Bourguignon 1999). Competing claims over the benefits from natural
resources create tension among different groups in the area. There have also been concerns
that climate change may increase risks of violent conflict over increasingly scarce resources
such as freshwater and arable land, although considerable uncertainty exists in predicting the
scenarios that link environmental change and conflicts (Raleigh and Urdal 2007).

24.     An important channel that links violence—sometimes the fear of violence—with
slow development progress is incentives faced by businesses. Local entrepreneurs and
businesses face enormous challenges in dealing with conflict and violence. They face
various risks including those of: (i) being excluded from economic activities because of
coercion and provision of access to cheap (at times illicit) inputs to become the exclusive
provider of services; (ii) higher costs due to the need for increased security investments; (iii)
losing investments or business opportunities due to uncertain and negative image over
medium term outlook in the region; (iv) being affected by supply chain interruptions caused
by violent obstructions; and (v) losing talent through increased number of skilled workers
emigrating out of the region (Goldberg, Kim, and Ariano 2014). Violence can also affect the
behavior of families and incentives to invest in human capital. The fear of violence may
inhibit families sending children to schools or visit health care centers to receive basic
services such as vaccination.

25.     An analysis of 730 business ventures in Colombia over 1997 to 2001 found that with
higher levels of violence, new ventures were less likely to survive (Hiatt and Sine, 2012).
Incentives for long-term investments and employment would suffer with escalation in the
scope and coverage of violence, resulting in slower economic and productivity growth.

26.     A critical long term goal in addressing pockets of insecurity is to break this
recurrent cycle of conflict and violence. This would help countries and local communities
create an enabling environment for progress towards the other goals of economic
development and improvement in ending poverty and achieving shared prosperity. As
discussed above, the WDR 2011 suggest that this requires addressing a broad set of stress
factors that increase the risks of conflict and violence. In addition, establishing confidence in



                                                8
the state, and strengthening institutions to meet people’s needs, particularly for citizen
security, justice, and jobs, are key.

OUTCOMES, OUTPUTS, AND INPUTS

27.      Meeting these challenges in generally stable and often economically successful
countries poses a number of unique challenges. The expected role of international
financial institutions like the World Bank Group in these situations is likely different from
that in countries categorized as FCS. A standard response to strengthen the functioning of
state in LICUS and FCSs may not be relevant for some of these countries which have
established strong state institutions. Also, causes and actions associated with conflicts are
often political in nature. The willingness to engage with external parties like the World Bank
on such issues is often scarce. The challenge to engage in substantive dialogue with these
countries is compounded by the fact that many such countries have greater access to
international capital markets and large economies. The leverage that can be exercised by
external development institutions is typically limited as the volume of financial assistance
tends to be marginal compared to other sources of finance.

28.     Second, the cases of localized, but sustained, conflict and violent situations in
these countries indicate the need to go beyond the assumption that links low per capita
income with conflict and violence situation, and to examine the underlying drivers.
Underlying the notion to link the low-income status and fragility is an assumption that
poverty and weak state institutions are the dominant drivers of fragility. However, the
presence of collective violence and localized conflicts in relatively rich countries with
established institutions suggests that the conflict and violence is more complicated and is not
always fueled by impoverishment. Further sophistication in diagnosis of the causes of
conflicts and violence is required to address the needs in these areas. In particular, restoration
of confidence and trust in the government’s ability to maintain the rules of law and security
as well as legitimacy to govern in these areas become central.

29.     Parks, Colletta, and Oppenheim (2013) reviewed subnational conflicts in Asia
and found that most aid programs in these areas are not focused on core conflict
drivers in their design, implementation and monitoring. Many of the conflicts reviewed
in the report take place in dynamic middle-income countries. It found that in almost every
case, subnational conflict areas have lower income levels than the national average.
However, in a few cases, poverty rates in conflict areas are found to be lower than the
national average. Moreover, several key development indicators including infant mortality
rate and literacy rates show a remarkable degree of parity with the national average.

30.     Given these findings, the report calls for aid agencies to rethink their
assumptions and work differently. The implicit assumptions often seen in aid programs
include: i) violence is a consequence of weak state capacity; ii) economic growth will reduce
violent conflict; and iii) improved levels of development and service delivery will address the
underlying causes of conflict. The role of these underlying assumptions and how they are
linked with the corporate processes and policies would be an important topic of exploration
in the proposed evaluation.


                                                9
31.     There is also an increasing interest among scholars and practitioners on the
governance structure and institutional incentives that enable collective action against
violence. WDR 2011 recommends best-fit institutions and inclusive-enough coalitions,
cautioning against the excessive drive towards conversion into the Western institutions and
adherence to all-inclusive processes. Keefer (2013) points out the importance of
organizational arrangements that allow leaders to sanction free-riding behavior by members
and allow members to replace leaders if they shirk. North et al (2013) sees elite bargains as
the persistent core of developing societies: it presents a collection of cases analyzed through
a conceptual framework that emphasizes the manipulation of economic interests by political
system to create rents so that power groups and individuals find it in their interest to refrain
from using violence. Fukuyama (2011) argues that rule of law that restrains the most
powerful individuals and subordinates the state is a key component of political stability.

32.     As some of these findings are conceptual in nature, it might be difficult to apply them
directly as yardsticks to assess the relevance and effectiveness of individual operations on the
ground. However, they could potentially provide interesting perspectives when developing
the framework for conflict sensitive design as well as implementation and monitoring
arrangements of Bank Group supported activities in the future. In particular, considerable
discussions that have taken place on operationalization of the WDR 2011 since the
Development Committee paper on this subject (World Bank 2011a) could provide insights
into this assessment.

33.    These analyses and a body of literature point to a number of short-term and
medium term factors that help achieve the long term goal of ending the recurrent cycle
of conflict and violence. The enabling factors relevant to address pockets of insecurity
include:

   •   Robust institutional and governance frameworks to analyze and deal with complex
       and difficult issues involved in conflict and violence
   •   Equitable access to rule of law, justice, public goods and services
   •   Private investment and employment opportunities
   •   Different social groups cooperate more with each other and with the government and
       participate in public sector and non-state programs

34.    The central question for this evaluation is whether and how the Bank Group
contributed to creating these enabling factors or not. The vital underpinnings for those
outcomes are:

   •   Inclusive decision making processes that increases legitimacy of the governing body
   •   Strong capacity within government agencies and society to effectively provide and
       demand critical public goods including security, rule of law, and justice as well as
       enabling environment for investment and innovation
   •   Program designed based on detailed knowledge on the drivers of conflict and
       violence.




                                               10
35.     There is a wide range of tools through which the Bank Group can affect the
outcomes in these areas. These inputs include country and program sector strategies,
lending operations, non-lending work including analytical work and technical assistance,
various activities funded by trust funds, and partnerships with relevant institutions at global,
regional, and country levels. The contributions of Bank Group work can be direct or indirect
as well as positive or negative.

EVALUATION FRAMEWORK AND CASE SELECTION

36.      The framework of this evaluation is driven by the results chain that emerges
from past analyses on enabling factors that reduce the risks of conflict and violence. A
critical question to start off this evaluation is whether and how the Bank Group assessed the
potential and real drivers of conflict and violence, and incorporated appropriate measures in
the design and implementation of its activities. It is important for external agents like the
Bank Group to gauge the risk of exacerbating the situation by their interventions as there
could be unintended negative consequences on vulnerable groups in the community such as
women and poor households. The evaluation will also include analyses on how effectively
the Bank Group responded to evolving needs on the ground and demands from the client
government authorities—high-quality analysis of the causes of conflict and violence is vital
for this aspect as well.

37.     Achieving the ultimate goal of breaking the recurrent cycle of conflict and
violence requires a long timeframe and contributions from multiple actors. In fact, the
Bank Group is often not the major player in these efforts. Therefore, this evaluation will
focus its attention on the contributions of Bank Group activities at the outcome level—the
relevance and effectiveness of activities in creating the enabling environment toward the long
term goal.

38.     A key output of the proposed evaluation is the set of case studies of Bank Group
activities in selected countries, complemented by cross-cutting background studies.
There will be two types of case studies: in-depth analyses including country visits, and desk-
based review of operational documents and analytical work. It is expected that about 10-15
cases will be covered by the analysis. Findings from case studies will be complemented by
background papers on selected cross cutting issues. These papers will primarily be based on
surveys of existing literature and relevant analyses. Possible topics for background papers
include: (i) a review of political economy analyses undertaken in countries affected by
conflict and violent situations and how they helped design and identify interventions in such
an environment; (ii) Bank Group’s policies and guidelines related to its involvement in
strengthening client countries’ law enforcement capability; (iii) experiences in community
driven development approach in conflict and violent situations—an instrument often used in
these situations; and (iv) successful experiences in ending conflicts and violence—lessons
learned.

39.      Each case study will be based on multiple sources of data. These sources include:
project documents, reports and research work from various sources, key informant interviews
(i.e. staff from the government, Bank Group, other donors, non-governmental organizations


                                               11
operating in the contested areas, and researchers), focus group discussions, and geographic
information of project interventions and beneficiaries (as available). As the analysis will try
to draw lessons from experience, the conflict and violent situations that existed in the past
and have been stabilized will also be reviewed as needed.

40.     The similarities and differences between the findings of case studies will be
analyzed to draw lessons. The analysis will have special emphasis on identifying the
common features that lead to success and shortcomings in contributing to the creation of
enabling environment for the long term goal to break the cycle of conflict and violence.
Thus the composition of cases should include countries with differing characteristics in some
areas considered to be relevant in addressing conflict and violence, for example, institutional
capacity and the quality of government services at the national level.

41.     As vibrant and dynamic private sector activities are crucial to establish robust
foundation for sustained peace, IFC and MIGA activities are important elements of the
review. IFC support for local entrepreneurs through investment and creation of enabling
business environment is of considerable relevance to this evaluation. MIGA guarantees could
also play a vital role in encouraging foreign direct investment to help countries and
communities break the cycle of conflict and violence. Case studies will ask whether and how
Bank Group’s private sector support operations helped entrepreneurs cope with these
difficulties effectively.

42.   Case studies will be informed by analyses of three interlinked building blocks of
Bank Group operations. These blocks include:

   •   Assessments of country assistance strategies, country-level knowledge services, and
       country program management to examine whether and how the Bank Group
       addressed fragility, conflict, and violence at the country program level;
   •   Reviews of individual operations (Bank, IFC, and MIGA), technical assistance, and
       capacity building activities (including those funded by trust funds) with direct or
       indirect relevance to issues arising from conflict and violence; and
   •   Analyses of the knowledge services and advisory support by the central units
       (including OPCS and DEC), corporate policies (Bank Group-wide and Regional VPU
       level), and contributions to global dialogues and partnerships with substantial
       implications to activities in case study countries.

43.      A key theme that cuts across these multiple levels is coordination and collaboration
with development partners and multilateral agencies, particularly in areas where the Bank
Group does not have a mandate or expertise. The evaluation will focus on reviewing Bank
Group activities in the past ten years, starting from FY2004 to FY2014. The building blocks
of this evaluation are described below (Figure 2).




                                               12
Figure 2. Evaluation Building Blocks




Source: IEG staff


44.     Given that the evaluation assesses Bank Group activities, the scope and nature of
Bank Group operations in and around these situations will be a critical factor for the
selection the cases for review. However, the task is not entirely straightforward. The
analysis will focus on how the Bank Group and the country have dealt with development
challenges arising from localized conflict and violence in the policy dialogue, analytical
work, and country strategy formulation and implementation. Some Country Partnership
Strategies include enhancing security, bringing peace and stability, and reducing violence as
a key pillar or objective. For example:

    •    The Country Assistance Strategy for El Salvador in 2005 (FY05-FY08) includes
         Enhancing Security and Reducing Vulnerability as one of the three strategic pillars.
         One of the areas of focus for the Honduras Country Partnership Strategy (FY12-
         FY15) is improving citizen security.
    •    The Country Assistance Strategy for the Philippines in 2009 (FY10-FY12) has
         Stability and Peace as one of the Results Areas: the activities linked to this results
         area aimed to pursue fragility and conflict specific outcomes including: (i) enhanced
         impact and conflict-sensitivity of development programs implemented in
         communities in Mindanao affected by armed or violent conflict; and (ii) scaled-up
         provision of basic services and livelihood support through community-driven
         development in communities affected by armed or violent conflict.
    •    The Country Partnership Strategy for Pakistan in 2010 (FY10-FY13) includes
         Improving Security and Reducing the Threat of Conflict as one of the four outcome


                                               13
       pillars which aim to achieve: (i) increased employment and livelihood opportunities
       in conflict affected areas; and (ii) increased responsiveness and effectiveness of the
       state through improving service delivery and governance in areas affected by conflict.

45.     Explicit discussion of conflict and violence in the country strategies remains
relatively rare. Moreover, there is no comprehensive list of countries faced with localized
conflict and violent situations. The list of fragile and conflict situation countries are mostly
IDA-eligible countries, affected by the fact that CPIA score is not disclosed for IBRD-only
countries. There are three non-IDA eligible countries which, as a whole, are classified under
fragile and conflict situation in this list—Iraq, Libya, and Syria—because of the presence of a
United Nations and/or regional peace-keeping operation in the last three years, and
Zimbabwe.

46.    A similar identification challenge exists for selection of individual activities for
review. The Bank Group has a theme code, Conflict Prevention and Post-Conflict
Reconstruction, to tag the activities to help minimize internal and trans-boundary conflicts,
undertake post-conflict reconstruction, and address conflicts as part of the country’s overall
poverty reduction program. These operations will provide the initial set of activities to be
reviewed in this evaluation.

47.     However, the impact of conflict and violence can also be found in activities which
do not directly focus on conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction. Examples
of such activities include the programs for social safety nets, conditional cash transfers,
health care systems, and infrastructure networks that cover the entire countries including the
areas affected by conflict and violence. Hence the first step for the project-level evaluation
will be to identify the Bank Group operations relevant to this evaluation. Many such
operations have also been supported by trust funds including the State- and Peace-Building
Fund—these activities will be important parts of this review. See Box 2 for the planned
approach to identify the operations relevant to this evaluation.




                                              14
Box 2. Planned Approach to Identify Individual Operations
The first step to identify the operational activities relevant for this evaluation will be to
collect project level data from Bank Group databases. These sources include: World Bank
Business Warehouse Database, IFC projects database, World Bank Partnership and Trust
Funds operations database, and MIGA portfolio. The data will be collated with key
attributions such as project names, commitment amount, product line, sector board/Global
Practice affiliation, income level of the country, available socio-economic data (e.g. poverty
incidences, gender disaggregated data—if available by regions), sector/thematic codes, and
project locations. IEG databases will also be used to collect data on projects reviewed by
IEG.
The analyses of documents, reports, and evaluations of these activities will be summarized
and coded based on such attributes as the types of assessment undertaken to analyze the
causes of conflict and violence, measures taken to address the challenges, and involved
parties.
External databases on conflict and violent cases, for example, Uppsala Conflict Data
Program, Heidelberg Institute for International Conflict Research Conflict Barometer, and
others will be used to develop a list of reliable data sources and inventory of existing data
points on such items as countries, territories, nature of the conflict, participants, and
duration of the violent events. The team will also explore the possibilities for conducting
spatial analysis by overlaying the locations of conflict and violent situations with those of
Bank Group supported projects. This will depend on the availability of geocoded data.
Source: IEG Staff



48.    The IEG team will use several criteria and means to identify the country cases
and individual operations to be reviewed in this evaluation. The criteria applied in
determining the cases include the following.

    •    Severity of FCV effects: The presence of conflict and violent situations relevant to
         this evaluation (as indicted in Table 1)—countries affected by conflict and violence
         over a sustained period of time with significant level of human fatalities and costs to
         development progress;
    •    Bank Group activities: The presence of Bank Group activities (strategies, programs,
         projects, investments, guarantees, analytical works, technical assistance including
         trust funded activities) on issues related to conflict and violent situations in the
         country;
    •    Types of cases: Inclusion of three types of cases—subnational conflict, political
         transition as well as crime and violence—to identify commonalities and differences in
         addressing the underlying drivers of these events
    •    Types of countries and regional distribution: Coverage of countries with different
         characteristics such as varying levels of institutional strength and income (IBRD-




                                               15
          only, blend, and IDA-only countries); effort will be made to ensure as much regional
          representation as possible.

49.     Following these criteria, potential cases to be considered for desk or in-depth
reviews have been identified, but further analysis of Bank Group portfolio is required
to determine the final list. The lists of candidate cases of in-country conflicts and crime
and violence were developed based on the Heidelberg Conflict Barometer, the World Bank
Group LICUS/FCS list 3, and the data of projects with Conflict Prevention and Post-Conflict
Reconstruction code (Attachment 3). Attachment 3 also indicates the specific steps taken to
develop these lists. Nigeria is included in the list because it has not been classified as LICUS
or FCS since FY08 even though there have been episodes of major conflict and violence in
recent years. 4 With regard to the Middle East and North Africa Region, there is only one
country identified based on these criteria. To have a better regional representation and in
light of significant events that took place in the region recently, the list will be supplemented
by at least one other country (e.g. Egypt). In addition, the IEG team will draw on the
assessment in the recently completed country program evaluation for Tunisia.

50.     The final list of 12-15 case countries for desk and in-depth review will be determined
after undertaking more detailed analysis of Bank Group portfolio. The final list will likely
include more cases from the Latin America and Caribbean Region given that all the crime
and violence cases identified through this process are from that region. Several additional
databases of conflicts, including the Uppsala Armed Conflict Dataset, the Failed States Index
published by the Fund for Peace, the Correlates of War dataset, the UNODC Homicide
Statistics, and the Worldwide Governance Indicators will be consulted for such analyses.
The data on internally displaced persons and refugees across national borders will also be
referenced to gauge the severity of conflict and violent situations.

Evaluation Approach and Questions
51.     A key objective of the proposed evaluation is to assess and report on the quality
and results of Bank Group programs and operations planned and implemented under
situations affected by localized conflict and violence. The assessment will cover the Bank
Group strategies, programs, lending, non-lending and trust-funded activities in selected case
countries. It will also examine knowledge services for global or regional audiences,
corporate policies and partnerships with some bearings on the activities in the selected
countries.

52.    The evaluation will be guided by assessment on three areas of results and
quality: relevance, effectiveness, and responsiveness. To maintain consistency of
assessment across the cases, a common set of evaluation instruments will be developed.


3   LICUS list for FY06-09 and FCS list for FY10-15 were used for this purpose.
4   Nigeria was classified as LICUS in FY06 and FY07.




                                               16
53.      The first step of analysis in each case study is to define the nature of challenges
and opportunities of the conflict and violent situation. For this exercise, this evaluation
will use the framework used in WDR 2011—situation-specific challenge and opportunities—
with slight modification (Table 2). A review of the nature and scope of negotiation and
bargaining between involved parties based on a review of existing political economy
analyses was added to the five factors considered in the WDR 2011 framework. The political
economy analyses to be reviewed in this exercise will include those undertaken by the Bank
Group and other institutions. The types of violence are also modified from the original form
to suit the focus of this evaluation.

Table 2. Defining the challenges and opportunities
Types and description of              Subnational, criminal or other characteristics of the nature of conflict and incidences
violence:                             of violence such as ethnic, religious, involvement by international actors
Transition opportunity:               Opportunities can be gradual and limited, or can present more immediate or major
                                      space for change.
Key stresses:                         Situations pose different mixtures of internal versus external stresses; high versus
                                      low levels of division between groups
Key stakeholders:                     Stakeholder balances include internal versus external stakeholders, state versus
                                      non-state stakeholders, low-income versus middle- or high-income stakeholders.
Institutional challenges:             Degrees and mixtures of capacity, accountability, and inclusion constraints in state
                                      and non-state institutions affect strategy.
Nature and scope of ongoing        The possibility for negotiated settlement through political decision can affect the
and potential negotiation and      course of conflict and violence in short term.
bargaining between parties:
Source: World Bank 2011b and IEG staff


54.    The challenges and opportunities defined for each case will guide the assessment
on the relevance of Bank Group activities to the specific situations on the ground. The
findings will suggest the types of enabling environment needed toward the long term goal of
breaking the cycle of conflict and violence. A critical question to ask is whether and how the
Bank Group assessed the potential and real drivers of conflict and violence, and incorporated
appropriate measures in the design and implementation of its activities. It will then examine
how relevant these analyses and measures were in relation to the challenges and
opportunities defined. The specific questions on the relevance criteria include the following.

Relevance: To what extent have Bank Group country programs, and lending and non-lending
operations been relevant to the needs on the ground to create an enabling environment for the
long term goal of breaking the cycle of conflict and violence?

    •    Did the Bank Group assess the significance and risks of conflict and violence on the
         development prospects of the country?
    •    Did the Bank Group examine the potential and real drivers of conflict and violence
         relevant to the case?



                                                            17
   •   How did the Bank Group incorporate the measures to address these drivers in the
       country assistance strategy?
   •   How did the Bank Group incorporate the measures to address these drivers in the
       program design and implementation plan for its activities?
   •   Were the existing knowledge and analyses of conflict and violence used effectively?
   •   How relevant were the analyses and measures related to the drivers of conflict and
       violence to the opportunities and challenges on the ground and why?

55.     The effectiveness of Bank Group operations within the case study will be
assessed against contributions to short and medium term measures to create an
enabling environment toward the long term goal. As indicated in the results framework in
Figure 2, the types of environment which appear to help achieve the long term goal include
robust institutions and governance frameworks capable of analyzing and dealing with
complex and difficult issues involved in localized conflict and violence, availability of vital
public goods, environment and incentives for long-term investment and employment, and
enabling environment for exercising collective actions at the community level. It will also
examine how the results from the nationwide program may differ in areas affected by conflict
and violence from the rest of the country, and whether any differentiated approaches were
needed. This evaluation will also assess the gender implications of Bank Group strategies,
operations, and analytical work following the findings in IEG (2014) that insufficient
attention has been paid to conflict-related violence against women and economic
empowerment of women in low-income fragile and conflict-affected states. The specific
evaluation questions on the effectiveness criteria include the following.

Effectiveness: How effective has implementation of the Bank Group's assistance programs
and projects in contributing to the creation of enabling environment for the long term goal of
breaking the cycle of conflict and violence?

   •   How effective has the Bank Group’s analytical work and policy dialogue been in
       raising awareness of the effects of conflict and violence on the development potential
       of the country and Bank Group-assisted programs?
   •   How effective has the Bank Group’s assistance been in creating the enabling
       environment (robust institution and governance framework, availability of public
       goods, incentives for long-term investment and employment, environment for
       exercising collective actions at the community level) to address conflict and violence
       in the country?
   •   What have been the gender implications of Bank Group activities in situations
       affected by localized conflict and violence?
   •   How effective has the Bank Group been in working with multilateral and bilateral
       development partners in addressing conflict, violence and rule of law?
   •   Have national (or provincial) programs designed to include areas affected by conflict
       and violence been equally effective in those situations? Did the national (or
       provincial) programs need special implementation arrangements for the fragile
       situations? Did the results in fragile situations significantly affect the outcomes of the
       program(s) as a whole?


                                               18
56.     The responsiveness criterion is used to assess the agility and flexibility of Bank
Group activities in meeting specific needs on the ground. The focus will be on how the
monitoring of progress has been done and how it affected the decision on mid-course
correction and adjustments. The specific evaluation questions include the following.

Responsiveness: How responsive has the Bank Group been in tailoring its support to the
evolving needs in countries/regions affected by conflict and violence?

   •   To what extent did the Bank Group customize its approach to address the identified
       fragility and conflict drivers identified in the country?
   •   How did the Bank Group task team collect conflict-sensitive data, monitor risks and
       progress achieved, and make mid-course adjustments in the strategy or assistance
       program?
   •   How did the Bank Group task team respond to unanticipated changes on the ground?

57.     Lessons will be drawn from the analysis on Bank Group’s experience in
addressing localized conflict and violent situations. These lessons are expected to help
increase the Bank Group’s understanding of and engagement in fragile, conflict, and violent
situations. This effort will ask the following questions. The evaluations questions are
summarized in Attachment 4.

   •   What were the drivers of success and failure?
   •   Which of those drivers were under the control of the Bank Group?
   •   Were there any corporate policies and rules which prevented the Bank Group from
       taking certain actions or getting involved in certain topics?

LINKS WITH OTHER IEG EVALUATIONS

58.     Lessons and findings identified in previous IEG evaluations and efforts made for
future reports will form an important part of this evaluation. The recent evaluation on
fragile and conflict states, “World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and
Conflict-Affected States” (IEG 2014), provides a useful analytical base for the proposed
evaluation. The report found that the portfolio performance of Bank operations in low-
income fragile and conflict states has improved since 2001 compared to low-income
countries that are not fragile. However, it also points out the need to clarify the Bank
Group’s role on citizen security, justice and jobs—three areas identified by the WDR 2011 as
crucial to break the cycles of violence. Furthermore, the report suggests that there is room to
use the insights and lessons from considerable efforts made on fragility and conflict analyses
in Bank Group operations.

59.     A number of country program evaluations also offer insights into the relevance
and realism of the Bank Group’s assistance program in environments affected by
conflict and violence. A series of evaluations of countries affected by fragile and conflict
situations such as Timor-Leste (2011a), West Bank and Gaza (2011b), Afghanistan (2012a),
and Liberia (2012b) include findings that are likely relevant to the proposed evaluation. A
key message that cuts across these evaluations is that sustained support for core government


                                              19
functions, delivery of public goods and services, and citizen engagement can yield results for
peacebuilding, statebuilding, and promoting legitimacy of the state. The evaluations
identified programmatic approaches, including budget support for reforms and sectorwide
approaches, as well as partnerships with donors and civil society, as vital for effective
delivery of services. Security risks and restrictions have had significant bearings on Bank
Group support both due to risks to personnel and constraints on field supervision, as well as
due to constraints on the private sector and citizen engagement. A question that remains is
whether there are measures that can effectively address the need to ensure security and
enhance development results at the same time.

60.     Given that the proposed evaluation will include cases in middle-income
countries, some of the findings of the two recent country program evaluations—Brazil
and Tunisia—will also be relevant. Middle-income countries typically have good access to
the international financial markets and well-established fiscal or quasi-fiscal tools to finance
their development activities. They also have advanced institutions and a high level of human
capital. A critical challenge is to combine the flexibility that allows the Bank Group to
respond to demands as they emerge and the medium-term strategy that encompasses issues
with limited traction from the client in the short term. The Brazil country program evaluation
(IEG 2013b) shows that the Bank Group has a comparative advantage in sharing lessons
from cross-country experiences to provide customized support for specific policy needs.
Focusing on geographical areas that are less developed as well as on catalyzing replication of
good practices in the country would also enhance overall development impact. However, a
difficult balance needs to be struck through strong, candid dialogue with the relevant
authorities as well as candor in self-evaluation.

61.     The Tunisia Country Program Evaluation (IEG, forthcoming) also alludes to the
difficulty involved in candid dialogue with the government. It points out that the Bank
did not flag risks associated with domestic political turmoil and made public its concerns
over governance issues in several years leading up to the Arab Spring. The report notes that
such reticence may have been intended to keep business lines and dialogue open with a
regime that had little need for Bank assistance, but at a reputational cost. Similar challenge
exists in addressing conflicts and violence in parts of generally stable countries: governments
often prefer to deal with the challenges without involving external parties like the World
Bank.

62.      The evaluation on the World Bank’s country level engagement on Governance
and Anti-Corruption (IEG 2011c) found that the quality of governance and political
economy analysis was better in fragile than in non-fragile countries. However,
institutional strengthening had mixed results, particularly at the country-level. Given the
centrality of political economy analysis in addressing fragility, this is an important finding.
The issue of interest for the proposed evaluation would be a comparison between stable
regions and conflict affected regions in the same country—whether the country program has
explored the needs for differentiated approaches according to local needs within the country.

63.    A 2009 IEG evaluation assessed MIGA’s approach to engagement in conflict-
affected countries (IEG 2009). It points out that MIGA’s approach to underwriting


                                              20
guarantees in fragile and conflict states was ad-hoc. Sufficient time has passed since this
evaluation while the strategic importance of the topic has grown. The proposed evaluation
will review MIGA’s business development and product offering catered to the needs of
investments in fragile and conflict states.

64.     There are also ongoing evaluations which can provide insights. The clustered
evaluation on country programs in natural resource rich developing countries will cover the
issues related to management of resource rents—an important driver of conflict and violence
in some countries. All the project and activity level assessment for the Bank, IFC, and
MIGA in case study countries and beyond will be a major building block for the evaluation.
Several ongoing efforts to undertake in-depth evaluations of projects affected by conflict
situations are particularly relevant. They include the Project Performance Assessment
Reports for the Second National Fadama Development Project in Nigeria as well as
Community Development and Livelihood Improvement "Gemi Diriya" Project and the North
East Irrigated Agriculture Project in Sri Lanka.

65.     A useful guide for activity level assessment is the OECD-DAC guidelines for
evaluation of peacebuilding activities in settings of conflict and fragility (OECD 2012) .
A key focus in activity level analysis is to examine how well the Bank Group and country
counterparts understood the conflict dynamics and actors as well as the economic and
political context. Assessing the robustness of the theory of change these activities are
founded on would also indicate the extent of realism applied in project design. Progress
monitoring and flexibility exercised to adjust to evolving needs on the ground will also be
important areas for review.

66.     In summary, the proposed evaluation will use the following sources of evidence to
derive evaluative judgment on the relevance, effectiveness, and responsiveness of Bank
Group activities in addressing the challenges arising from localized conflict and violent
situations.

   •   Case studies of Bank Group operations in localized conflict and violent situations
       will be undertaken for 10-15 cases in countries not classified as FCS; 3-4 of which
       will involve country visits. The remaining cases will be examined based on desk-
       review. These case studies will involve reviewing the relevance, effectiveness, and
       responsiveness of individual activities as well as country partnership, corporate, and
       sector strategies to determine how the Bank Group incorporates and positions the
       challenges associated with conflict and violence within its strategies. The review will
       cover those activities with direct or indirect relevance to the issues related to conflict
       and violence. These activities are a subset of the entire country program in the
       selected case countries.
   •   Information collection from key informants and stakeholders such as country
       counterparts, NGOs, development partners, journalists, private sector operators, and
       other agencies operating in fragile and conflict areas, Bank Group Task Team
       Leaders, Country Management Unit staff, and operational leaders in the field. Semi-
       structured interviews will be the main means for information collection from key
       informants and stakeholders. Focus Group discussions will be explored for key


                                              21
       stakeholders to ensure rich qualitative information from those exposed to field
       operations, for example, NGOs, media, and project staff.
   •   Reviews of relevant policies and corporate-level or regional analytical work will
       be conducted to better understand the contributions made by global and regional wide
       activities and intellectual outputs. The information on the extent of Bank Group’s
       participation in global dialogue and partnerships on relevant topics will also be
       collected.
   •   Background papers will be commissioned to examine the good practices in some of
       the cross-cutting areas indicated above as well as to clarify understanding of how
       relevant corporate policies are interpreted and applied.
   •   Review of relevant literature, Bank Group analytical work, IEG evaluations and
       databases to build on existing knowledge on success factors for operations in fragile
       and conflict situations.

LIMITATIONS

67.     Limited access to some of the project sites and beneficiaries due to security
concerns will pose a significant challenge to the evaluation. It is expected that the IEG
team will need to rely on secondary data and analyses in some cases. The IEG team will seek
to collect information and perspectives from as many sources as possible to fill this
information gap at least partially.

68.     The significant diversity in the causes and nature of conflict and the limited
number of cases this evaluation can review, given the time and budget constraints also
raise an important challenge. This evaluation seeks to draw a set of lessons that can be
useful for future Bank Group operations. Yet the number of cases the evaluation can review
may be rather limited to present a representative landscape of development activities in
fragile and conflict situations. Collecting disaggregated data on poverty and other
development indicators for areas affected by conflict and violence will also be challenging.
This evaluation will seek to build on the existing literature and research work on broad topics
and a wide variety of cases worldwide to complement the findings from case studies. The
team will also explore the possibility to tap into the knowledge and databases of local
research institutions, particularly for in-depth case studies.

69.      An important implication of the proposed case selection process is that the
countries in which the Bank Group did not have related activities even though conflict
and violent situations exist are not covered. The nature and scope of Bank Group
activities are important criteria for case selection, because the evaluation aims to draw
lessons from past activities in addressing the challenges arising from conflict and violence.
However, it leaves an important gap in assessment of potential cases involving non-action by
the Bank Group despite the presence of conflict and violence.

Quality Assurance Process
70.    Quality will be assured through the use of peer reviewers and the IEG’s review
process. Peer reviewers for the evaluation are John Joseph Wallis (University of Maryland);


                                              22
Nat Colletta (University of Florida); and Michael Woolcock (Lead Social Development
Specialist, DEC, World Bank). The evaluation report will be prepared under the direction of
Nick York, Director, and undergo the usual IEG quality assurance process, involving review
by the Extended Leadership Team and final clearance by the Director-General, Evaluation.

71.     The proposed team consists of IEG staff and external consultants. The core team
consists of Jiro Tominaga (task team leader), Dinara Akhmetova, Carla F. Chacaltana,
Takatoshi Kamezawa, Xue Li, Chris Nelson, Kathryn Steingraber, Steven Webb, and Disha
Zaidi. Anis Dani, the task team leader for the IEG’s previous report on FCS, provided advice
during preparation of this approach paper. There will be additional expertise in such areas as
social development, community-driven development, social protection, and macroeconomics
added to the team.

Expected Outputs and Dissemination
72.     The primary output of the evaluation will be the report to the Committee on
Development Effectiveness (CODE), which will contain the main findings and
recommendations of the study. The report will also identify areas where further work is
needed for development of more in-depth reform proposals. The report will be disseminated
widely across the Bank Group in collaboration with the relevant departments in the Bank
Group. In addition, two or three of the background papers prepared for the study are
expected to be published separately as working papers. The portfolio data will be in the
public domain on completion of the evaluation. Background work undertaken for the
individual country case studies will be considered deliberative in nature and will therefore
not be disclosed.

73.     Continuous dialogue with key stakeholders during the evaluation process will be
undertaken to enhance the relevance and robustness of the evaluation. Dialogue with
Bank Group operational staff and external experts were initiated during the design phase as
inputs toward preparation of the Approach Paper. This dialog will continue during the
evaluation process to ensure that the IEG team has access to up-to-date information on Bank
Group activities and debate in other fora.

TIMELINE AND RESOURCES

74.    The evaluation work will be undertaken in FY15. The draft report will be reviewed
by IEG management in the third quarter of FY15 and a draft submitted for comments from
Bank Group managements in the fourth quarter. The revised evaluation report is expected to
be submitted to CODE in June 2015 for discussion before the 2015 Annual Meetings.

75.     The administrative budget for undertaking the evaluation is estimated at around
$928,000 including the dissemination costs which will be incurred after CODE discussion of
the evaluation.




                                             23
References
Bourguignon, François. 1999. “Crime, Violence, and Inequitable Development.” In Annual World
       Bank conference on development economics 1999/2000, ed. B. Pleskovic and J. Stiglitz, 199-220.
       Washington DC: World Bank
Collier, Paul. 1999. “On the Economic Consequences of Civil War.” Oxford Economic Papers, 51(1),
         168-183.
Fukuyama, Francis. 2011. The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution.
      New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Gertz, Geoffrey, and Laurence Chandy. 2011. “Two Trends in Global Poverty. Global Economy and
        Development.” Brookings. Washington, D.C.
Goldberg, Michael, Kwang Wook Kim, and Maria Ariano. 2014. How Firms Cope with Crime and
       Violence: Experiences from around the World. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Heidelberg Institute for International Conflict Research. 2014. Conflict Barometer 2013.
Hiatt, Shon, and Wesley Sine. 2012. “Clear and present Danger: Planning and New Venture Survival
         Amid Political and Civil Violence.” Working Paper 12-086. Harvard Business School
IEG. 2009. Independent Evaluation of MIGA’s Development Effectiveness—2009: Enhancing MIGA’s Risk
        Mitigation in IDA and Conflict-Affected Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank-MIGA.
______. 2010. The World Bank in Nepal, 2003-2008: Country Program Evaluation. Washington, DC: World
        Bank.
______. 2011a. Timor-Leste Country Program Evaluation, 2002-2011. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2011b. West Bank and Gaza Country Assistance Evaluation. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2011c. World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and Anticorruption: An Evaluation of
        the 2007 Strategy and Implementation Plan. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2012a. Afghanistan Country Program Evaluation, 2002-2011. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2012b. Liberia Country Program Evaluation, 2003-2011. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2013a. “Approach Paper: Restoring Confidence and Transforming Institutions: An IEG
        Evaluation of World Bank Group Assistance to Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations.”
        Washington DC: World Bank
______. 2013b. Brazil Country Program Evaluation FY2004-11: Evaluation of the World Bank Group
        Program. Washington DC: World Bank
______. 2014. World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: An
        Independent Evaluation. Washington, D.C.: World Bank
______. Forthcoming. Tunisia: Country Program Evaluation, FY05-13. Washington, D.C.: World Bank
IFC. 2009. “IFC Road Map FY10-12: Creating Opportunity in Extraordinary Times.” Washington DC:
        IFC.
Institute for Economics and Peace. 2014. The Economic Cost of Violence Containment: A Comprehensive
         Assessment of the Global Cost of Violence.
Keefer, Philip. 2013. “Organizing for Prosperity: Collective Action, Political Parties and the Political
        Economy of Development”. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank.



                                                   25
Kharas, Homi and Andrew Roberson. 2012. “Horizon 2025: Creative Destruction in the Aid
        Industry.” Overseas Development Institute.
Kreimer, Alcira, John Eriksson, Robert Muscat, Margaret Arnold, and Colin Scott. 1998. The World
       Bank’s Experience with Post-Conflict Reconstruction. A World Bank operations evaluation study.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
MIGA. 2011. “MIGA FY12-14 Strategy: Achieving Value-Driven Volume.” Washington DC: MIGA.
North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis, Steven B. Webb, and Barry R. Weingast (Eds.). 2013. In the
        Shadow of Violence: Politics, Economics, and the Problems of Development. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
OECD. 2012. Evaluating Peacebuilding Activities in Settings of Conflict and Fragility: Improving Learning
      for Results. DAC Guidelines and References Series. OECD Publishing.
Parks, Thomas, Nat Colletta, and Ben Oppenheim. 2013. The Contested Corners of Asia: Subnational
        Conflict and International Development Assistance. San Francisco: The Asia Foundation.
Raleigh, Clinodah, and Henrik Urdal. 2007. “Climate Change, Environmental Degradation and
        Armed Conflict.” Political Geography, 26 (2007) 674-694
Soares, Rodrigo R., and Joana Naritomi. 2010. “Understanding High Crime Rates in Latin America:
        The Role of Social and Policy Factors.” In The Economics of Crime: Lessons for and from Latin
        America, ed by Rafael Di Tella, Sebastian Edwards, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 19-55.
        University of Chicago Press.
World Bank. 1997. “A Framework for World Bank Involvement in Post-Conflict Reconstruction.”
       Washington DC: April 1997.
______. 2007a. “Toward a New Framework for Rapid Bank Response to Crises and Emergencies.”
        Operations Policy and Country Services, January 12, 2007. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2007b. “Strengthening the World Bank’s Rapid Response and Long-Term Engagement in
        Fragile States.” Operations Policy and Country Services, March 30, 2007. Washington, DC:
        World Bank.
______. 2011a. “Operationalizing the 2011 World Development Report: Conflict, Security, and
        Development (DC2011-0003).” Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2011b. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development. Washington, DC:
        World Bank.
______. 2013. Addressing Conflict and Fragility in World Bank Country Strategies. Washington, DC:
        World Bank.
World Bank Group. 2014. “Global Program on Forced Displacement: Annual Progress Report July
       2012-December 2013.” Washington, DC: World Bank Group




                                                    26
Attachment 1

Delinking Conflict and Violent Incidences from Low-Income Countries
The development community has often linked fragility and conflict with country’s lack of
development progress as represented by low per capita income. However, as Figure A1
shows, the incidences of conflict in middle-income countries has recently exceeded that in
low-income countries, suggesting that conflict and violence are no longer primarily a low-
income country problem. They have increasingly become a development problem for a
broader set of countries.

Figure A1. Incidence of Conflicts in 1992, 2002, and 2012

                                                  100                           90

                                                  80      71
                            Number of Conflicts




                                                                                                               57
                                                  60
                                                                44                                     42
                                                  40
                                                                                        24
                                                  20

                                                   0
                                                            1992                    2002                 2012

                                                        Low-income Countries         Middle-income countries


Source: The UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset Version 4-2013; UCDP Non-State Conflict Dataset Version 2.5-2013;
UCDP One-sided Violence Dataset Version 1.4-Decemer 2-013.
Note: The income group classifications applicable in 1992 and 2002 are used for data in corresponding years. The most
recent classification (FY14) is used for 2012 data.
Three types of incidences are included in the counting, including state base conflicts, non-state conflicts, and one-sided
violence. If the location of a conflict is across two/three countries, the incidence is recorded for all the countries involved.


There are nine middle-income countries which have had some form of conflict and violent
incidences in all three years shown in Figure 1. 5 The incidences in eight middle-income
countries are recorded for two of those three years. 6 Some of these countries are also home
to a growing share of the world’s poor—an emerging feature of the global poverty landscape
today is that a higher share of poor are living in fragile states as defined by OECD. These
states are unable to meet the expectations of their population or manage changes in
expectations through the political system. In 1990, one-fifths of the global poor lived in
countries listed in the 2010 OECD list of fragile states; in 2011, it is estimated that about half
of the poor people in the world lived in these states (Kharas and Rogerson 2012).


5
 These countries include Algeria, Colombia, India, Iraq, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Sudan, and Turkey.
6
 These countries include Angola, Azerbaijan, Ghana, Indonesia, Lebanon, Mexico, Papua New Guinea, and
Senegal.


                                                                               27
Of particular significance is the transition of fragile countries to middle-income status
leading to an increasing share of the world’s poor in such countries. Out of 64 countries
classified as low-income in 2000, 24 countries have attained middle-income country status in
2010. As some of these countries continued to have high level of inequality in income
distribution and poverty, this shift resulted in a growing share of poor people living in middle
income countries. One account indicates that in 2005, less than one percent of the world’s
poor lived in middle income countries considered fragile on the Fund for Peace’s Failed
States Index. By 2010, the share had grown to 17 percent (Gertz and Chandy 2011). Entry
of large middle income countries such as Nigeria and Pakistan into the fragile country
category since the 2006 version of this index is an important part of this shift. Although
these countries have been experiencing sustained conflicts and violence, many of them have
never been categorized as fragile and conflict states according to the World Bank’s
classification.




                                              28
Attachment 2

World Bank Group Support to Fragile and Conflict States
The World Bank’s work in post-conflict environments initially arose as an extension of its
work on emergency recovery in response to natural disasters. Operational Directive 8.50
Emergency Recovery Assistance, issued in 1989, emphasized emergency recovery after
natural disasters. In April 1997, the Bank issued a framework paper for post-conflict
reconstruction (World Bank 1997), which was later converted into an operational policy—a
revision consistent with recommendations of an evaluation by the Operations Evaluation
Department (Kreimer and others 1998). A policy on Development Cooperation and Conflict
(OP/BP 2.30) was issued in January 2001. OP 2.30 has undergone revisions in 2005, 2009,
and 2013, but it remains the overarching policy that sets the overall context and defines the
framework for Bank engagement in conflict-affected countries.

The Bank has also undertaken several steps to strengthen its operational framework for
supporting fragile and conflict affected states in recent years. These include a revised policy
framework for responding to emergencies (World Bank 2007a) and a revamped human
resources approach that increases staff incentives to work in fragile and conflict states
(World Bank 2007b). The WDR 2011 formulated an analytical framework for operations to
address fragility, conflict, and violence. The Bank also established a Global Center on
Conflict Security and Development in the Operations Policy and Country Services (OPCS)
vice presidency. There was an increased attention to IDA’s support to fragile and conflict
states in the IDA15 and IDA16 Mid-Term Reviews.

IFC launched the Post-Conflict Countries Initiative in 2007 and has used trust funds to support
advisory services in fragile and conflict states since 2008 through the Conflict-Affected States
in Africa initiative. In 2009, IFC added fragile and conflict states to its first strategic pillar by
including it in the definition of frontier markets (IFC 2009). In 2012, IFC designated two
directors to provide strategic leadership for fragile and conflict states and created a unit to
coordinate the relevant efforts within IFC, and with the World Bank, MIGA, and external
parties. IFC identified advisory services operations and short-term finance products as entry
points for early engagement in fragile and conflict states. IFC has committed to increasing
volume of investments in FCS by 50 percent by FY16 over the FY12 level.

Support to projects in fragile and conflict-affected states has been a strategic priority for
MIGA since 2005. MIGA has used special instruments to respond to demand for political
risk insurance in these economies, such as Bosnia-Herzegovina, West Bank and Gaza, and
Afghanistan. The FY12-14 strategy confirmed this priority (MIGA 2011). More recently,
MIGA has explored the establishment of a broader, multicountry trust fund to expand
insurance in certain high-risk fragile and conflict-affected states.




                                                 29
Attachment 3

List of cases to be considered for desk or in-depth review
In-Country Conflicts

The Conflict Barometer 2013 (Heidelberg Institute for International Conflict Research) was
used as the primary database to develop the list of countries to be considered for desk or in-
depth case studies on situations affected by subnational conflicts. The countries which have
been affected by subnational conflicts with the following features are listed in Table A1.

    •    Conflicts that started before 1994 to identify the cases that have been sustained for a
         long period of time
    •    Conflicts that are categorized as medium to high conflict intensity (also labeled as
         violent conflicts in the database) in the 2013 listing to capture the cases that are still
         actively affecting people’s lives after more than two decades since inception
    •    Conflicts in countries which have never been designated as FCS in the Bank Group
         FCS list since FY06 to FY15
    •    Countries in which Bank supported operations tagged to the Conflict Prevention and
         Post-Conflict Reconstruction theme code have been approved since FY 2000

Table A1. Countries not classified as FCS with in-country conflict sustained for two decades
Country                                     Region                      IBRD/IDA                      Income status
Ethiopia                                     AFR                           IDA                             LIC
Nigeria*                                     AFR                          Blend                           LMIC
Rwanda                                       AFR                           IDA                             LIC
Senegal                                      AFR                           IDA                            LMIC
Uganda                                       AFR                           IDA                             LIC
Indonesia                                    EAP                          IBRD                            LMIC
Papua New Guinea                             EAP                          Blend                           LMIC
Philippines                                  EAP                          IBRD                            LMIC
Thailand                                     EAP                          IBRD                            UMIC
Azerbaijan                                   ECA                          IBRD                            UMIC
Kyrgyzstan                                   ECA                           IDA                            LMIC
Russia                                       ECA                          IBRD                             HIC
Bolivia                                      LCR                          Blend                           LMIC
Colombia                                     LCR                          IBRD                            UMIC
Peru                                         LCR                          IBRD                            UMIC
Lebanon                                      MNA                          IBRD                            UMIC
Bangladesh                                   SAR                           IDA                             LIC
Pakistan                                     SAR                          Blend                           LMIC
Sri Lanka                                    SAR                          Blend                           LMIC
HIC=High Income Country, LIC=Low Income Country, LMIC=Lower Middle-Income Country, UMIC=Upper Middle-Income
Country. (*) Nigeria was classified as LICUS in FY06 and 07. There have been events of conflict and violence in recent
years, but It has not been classified as LICUS or FCS since then.


                                                            31
As indicated in paragraph 49, the IEG team will explore ways to cover more cases from the
Middle East and North Africa Region. The assessment will also build on the recently
completed country program evaluation for Tunisia.

Crime and Violence

The Conflict Barometer 2013 (Heidelberg Institute for International Conflict Research) is
again the primary database to develop the list of countries to be considered for desk or in-depth
case studies on situations affected by crime and violence. The countries which have been
affected by cases with the following features are listed in Table A2.

    •   Cases that involve organizations linked to criminal activities including drug
        trafficking, drug cartels, and gangs
    •   Conflicts that are categorized as medium to high conflict intensity (also labeled as
        violent conflicts in the database) in the 2013 listing
    •   Conflicts in countries which have never been designated as FCS in the Bank Group
        FCS list since FY06 to FY14

Table A2. Countries not classified as FCS with crime and violence cases
Country                               Region                     IBRD/IDA       Income Status
Brazil                                 LCR                         IBRD             UMIC
Colombia                               LCR                         IBRD             UMIC
El Salvador                            LCR                         IBRD             LMIC
Guatemala                              LCR                         IBRD             LMIC
Honduras                               LCR                          IDA             LMIC
Jamaica                                LCR                         IBRD             UMIC
Mexico                                 LCR                         IBRD             UMIC
LMIC=Lower Middle-Income Country, UMIC=Upper Middle-Income Country




                                                     32
Attachment 4
Evaluation Design Matrix

      Key Questions               Information required           Information sources               Data collection methods     Data analysis methods         Strengths and limitations
To what extent have Bank       • Country context in terms    •   Country strategies            • Document review             Examine such questions as:     Relevance is examined at two
Group country programs,          of the causes and scope         (ISN/CAS), country            • Literature review           • Did the Bank Group           levels: the country program
and lending and non-             of fragility                    evaluations (CAE/CPE),        • Interviews of Bank Group       examine the potential       level and the individual
lending operations been        • Analytical underpinnings        and CASCR Reviews               staff, researchers and         and real drivers of         project level
relevant to the needs on the     of country assistance       •   Project document                experts; government            conflict and violence
ground to create an              strategies and project      •   AAA and other                   counterparts and country       relevant to the case?       Case studies will be the core
enabling environment for         design                          assessments                     stakeholders                • How did the Bank Group       of the evaluation. It is
the long term goal of          • Country risk profiles and   •   Relevant research             • Case studies                   incorporate the             important to review a wide
breaking the cycle of            risk monitoring data            papers and databases                                           measures to address         variety of cases across
conflict and violence?                                       •   Relevant area experts                                          these drivers in the        regions.
                                                                 inside and outside of the                                      country assistance
                                                                 Bank Group                                                     strategy?
                                                                                                                             • How did the Bank Group
                                                                                                                                incorporate the
                                                                                                                                measures to address
                                                                                                                                these drivers in the
                                                                                                                                program design and
                                                                                                                                implementation plan for
                                                                                                                                its activities?
                                                                                                                             • Were the existing
                                                                                                                                knowledge and analyses
                                                                                                                                of conflict and violence
                                                                                                                                used effectively?
                                                                                                                             • How relevant were the
                                                                                                                                analyses and measures
                                                                                                                                related to the drivers of
                                                                                                                                conflict and violence to
                                                                                                                                the opportunities and
                                                                                                                                challenges on the ground
                                                                                                                                and why?

How effective has              • Outputs and outcomes of     •   ICR/XPSR reviews and          • Project/program             Examine such questions as:     As difficulty in accessing the
implementation of the Bank       the completed programs          PPARs                           document review             • How effective has the        project areas with ongoing
Group's assistance               and projects                •   Portfolio status and risks    • Outcome ratings analysis       Bank Group’s analytical     volatility is expected, desk
programs and projects in       • Emerging results from           information from              • Literature review              work and policy dialogue    review of existing materials

                                                                                              33
      Key Questions               Information required           Information sources             Data collection methods       Data analysis methods           Strengths and limitations
contributing to the creation     ongoing activities              business warehouse and      • Interviews of Bank Group         been in analyzing and         and interviews of
of enabling environment for    • The extent to which Bank        implementation status         staff, researchers and           raising awareness of the      stakeholders will form a
the long term goal of            Group supported                 report                        experts; government              effects of conflict and       crucial part of the evaluation.
breaking the cycle of            activities contributed to   •   CAE/CPE, CASCR                counterparts and country         violence?
conflict and violence?           observable results              reviews                       stakeholders                •    How effective has the
                                                             •   Bank Group task teams       • Case studies: site visits        Bank Group’s assistance
                                                                 and managers                  will be undertaken only          been in creating the
                                                             •   Government officials and      when security is ensured.        enabling environment to
                                                                 other country                                                  address conflict and
                                                                 stakeholders                                                   violence in the country?
                                                             •   Research and studies of                                   •    How effective has the
                                                                 relevant activities                                            Bank Group been in
                                                                 conducted by the Bank                                          working with multilateral
                                                                 Group and external                                             and bilateral
                                                                 institutions                                                   development partners in
                                                             •   Government statistics                                          addressing conflict,
                                                             •   External databases e.g.                                        violence and rule of law?
                                                                 Uppsala Armed Conflict                                    •    What have been the
                                                                 Dataset, Conflict                                              gender implications of
                                                                 Barometer, Failed States                                       Bank Group activities?
                                                                 Index)                                                    •    Have national (or
                                                                                                                                provincial) programs
                                                                                                                                designed to include
                                                                                                                                areas affected by conflict
                                                                                                                                and violence been
                                                                                                                                equally effective in those
                                                                                                                                situations?
                                                                                                                           •    Did the national (or
                                                                                                                                provincial) programs
                                                                                                                                need special
                                                                                                                                implementation
                                                                                                                                arrangements for the
                                                                                                                                fragile situations? Did the
                                                                                                                                results in fragile
                                                                                                                                situations significantly
                                                                                                                                affect the outcomes of
                                                                                                                                the program(s) as a
                                                                                                                                whole?




                                                                                            34
       Key Questions               Information required          Information sources             Data collection methods     Data analysis methods            Strengths and limitations
How responsive has the          • Evolution of program/      •   ICR/XPSR and PPARs          • Document review             Examine such questions as:        A counterfactual cannot be
Bank Group been in                project design over the    •   Implementation status       • Interviews of Bank Group    • To what extent did the          established; the analysis will
tailoring its support to the      implementation period          report and mission aide       staff, government              Bank Group customize           trace whether and how mid-
evolving needs in               • Nature and content of          memoire                       counterparts and country       its approach to address        course changes were made
countries/regions affected        dialogue with various      •   Bank Group task teams         stakeholders                   the identified fragility and   to reflect the reality on the
by conflict and violence?         stakeholders                   and managers                                                 conflict drivers identified    ground
                                • Processes of how           •   Government officials and                                     in the country?
                                  decisions were made            other country                                             • How did the Bank Group
                                  when there was a need to       stakeholders                                                 task team collect data,
                                  make changes to the        •   Research and studies of                                      monitor progress, and
                                  initial program/ project       relevant activities                                          make mid-course
                                  design                         conducted by the Bank                                        adjustments?
                                                                 Group and external                                        • How did the Bank Group
                                                                 institutions                                                 task team respond to
                                                                                                                              unanticipated changes
                                                                                                                              on the ground?

What are the lessons that       • Examples of good           •   High-quality evaluations    • Interviews                  Draw lessons on:                  The breadth and depth of the
can be applied in ongoing         practices and failed           from diverse sources        • Review of relevant          • What were the drivers of        lessons drawn depend on the
or future activities in           attempts                   •   Policy makers, project        research work and               success and failure?          availability of good practices
fragile, conflict and violent                                    stuff and other               document                    • Which of those drivers          and failed attempts.
affected situations?                                             stakeholders                                                  were under the control of
                                                                                                                               the Bank Group?
                                                                                                                           • Were there any
                                                                                                                               corporate policies and
                                                                                                                               rules which prevented
                                                                                                                               the Bank Group from
                                                                                                                               taking certain actions or
                                                                                                                               getting involved in
                                                                                                                               certain topics?




                                                                                            35
