                                 91322

CONTRACTING FOR PRIMARY HEALTH
CARE IN BRAZIL: THE CASES OF BAHIA
        AND RIO DE JANEIRO
 DISCUSSION PAPER       SEPTEMBER 2014




 Edson Araujo
 Luciana Cavalini
 Sabado Girardi
 Megan Ireland
 Magnus Lindelow
Contracting for Primary Health Care in Brazil: The Cases
              of Bahia and Rio de Janeiro




Edson Araujo, Luciana Cavalini, Sabado Girardi, Megan Ireland,
                   and Magnus Lindelow




                       September 2014
      Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Global Practice of the
World Bank Group. The papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary
results on HNP topics to encourage discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be
attributed in any manner to the World Bank Group, to its affiliated organizations or to members of
its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material
presented in this series should take into account this provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor, Martin
Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                                i
       Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

    Contracting for Primary Health Care in Brazil: The Cases of Bahia and Rio
                                   de Janeiro

Edson Araujo,a Luciana Cavalinib Sabado Girardic Megan Irelandd and Magnus Lindelowe

a
   Economist, Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, The World Bank Group,
Washington, DC, USA
b
  Adjunct Professor, Medical Sciences College, Rio de Janeiro State University, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil
c
  Researcher Fellow, Medical School, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, Brazil
Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, The World Bank Group, Washington, DC, USA
d
   Consultant, Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, The World Bank Group,
Washington, DC, USA
e
  Practice Leader, Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, The World Bank Group,
Brasilia, Brazil

Paper prepared by the World Bank Group and supported by funding from the government of
Japan through the Japan-World Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage
(P125669)

Abstract: This study presents two case studies, each on a current initiative of contracting for
primary health services in Brazil, one for the state of Bahia, the other for the city of Rio de
Janeiro. The two initiatives are not linked and their implementation has independently sprung
from a search for more effective ways of delivering public primary health care. The two models
differ considerably in context, needs, modalities, and outcomes.
This paper does not attempt to evaluate the initiatives, but to identify their strengths and
weaknesses, initially by providing a background to universal primary health care in Brazil, paying
particular attention to the Family Health Strategy, the driver of the basic health care model. It then
outlines the history of contracting for health care within Brazil, before analyzing the two studies.
The state of Bahia sought to expand coverage of the Family Health Strategy and increase the
quality of services, but had difficulty in attracting and retaining qualified health professionals.
Rigidities in the process of public hiring led to a number of isolated contracting initiatives at the
municipal level and diverse, often unstable employment contracts. The state and municipalities
decided to centralize the hiring of health professionals in order to offer stable positions with
career plans and mobility within the state, and chose to create a State Foundation, acting under
private law to manage and oversee this process. Results have been mixed as lower than
expected municipal involvement resulted in relatively high administrative costs and consequent
default on municipal financial contributions. The State Foundation is undergoing a governance
reform and has now diversified beyond hiring for primary care.
The municipality of Rio de Janeiro, which until recently relied on an expansive hospital network
for health care delivery, sought in particular to expand primary health services. The public health
networks suffered from inefficiency and poor quality, and it was therefore decided to contract
privately owned and managed, not-for-profit, Social Organizations to provide primary care
services. The move has succeeded in attracting considerable increases in funding for primary
health and coverage has increased significantly. Performance initiatives, however, still need fine-
tuning and reliable information systems must be implanted in order to evaluate the system.

Keywords: Primary Care, Contracting, Health System, Brazil



                                                  ii
Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely
those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or
the countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Magnus Lindelow, World Bank (mlindelow@worldbank.org).




                                                iii
                                                   Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................................................ V
PREFACE ................................................................................................................................. VI
INTRODUCTION.........................................................................................................................1
PART 1: BACKGROUND ...........................................................................................................3
   1.1        THE FHS AND PUBLIC SECTOR RIGIDITIES ........................................................................ 3
   1.2        NEW CONTRACTING MODALITIES IN THE HEALTH SECTOR .................................................. 4
   1.3        TWO CASE STUDIES .......................................................................................................6
PART 2: BAHIA CASE STUDY: THE STATE FOUNDATION EXPERIENCE.............................. 8
   2.1        BACKGROUND ................................................................................................................8
   2.2.       THE STATE FOUNDATION FOR FAMILY HEALTH CARE IN BAHIA ............................................ 9
   2.3.       ACHIEVEMENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES ................................................................. 10
   2.4.       THE FUTURE OF THE FESF ........................................................................................... 13
PART 3: RIO DE JANEIRO CASE STUDY: THE OS EXPERIENCE......................................... 15
   3.1.       BACKGROUND .............................................................................................................. 15
   3.2.       THE OS MODEL FOR PRIMARY CARE IN RIO DE JANEIRO ................................................... 16
   3.3.       ACHIEVEMENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES ................................................................. 18
   3.4.       THE FUTURE OF OSS IN RIO DE JANEIRO ........................................................................ 22
PART 4: DISCUSSION ............................................................................................................. 24
REFERENCES.......................................................................................................................... 26
ANNEX 1 .................................................................................................................................. 28
ANNEX 2 .................................................................................................................................. 30
ANNEX 3 .................................................................................................................................. 32




                                                                     iv
                               ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank the Japan World Bank PHRD Partnership Grant for Universal
Health Coverage for financing this report as well as the case studies in Bahia and Rio de Janeiro,
on which this report is based.
We would also like to acknowledge input and support to the Bahia case study from Alice Werneck
Massote and Lucas Wan Der Maas as part of Sabado Girardi’s research team; José Santos
Souza Santana, the executive secretary of the Fundação Estatal Saúde da Família da Bahia
(FESF), for his continued support throughout the field study, for his valuable comments, and his
patient revision of the text; and Carlos Alberto Trindade, director of the FESF and Silvio Lopes,
planning manager of the FESF.
The Rio de Janeiro case study benefited from support from Clara Carneiro and Ana Carolina
Lara, of primary care superintendence; Shaina Albacete, coordinator of contracts and
management of social organizations; and André Lopes, coordinator of family health medical
residencies, all from the Municipal Health Secretariat of Rio de Janeiro. We are also grateful for
support from Hortense Marcier and José Carlos Prado from the Municipal Health Secretariat in
Rio de Janeiro.
Finally, we acknowledge valuable comments on an earlier version of this paper from April
Harding, André Medici, Ezau Pontes, and David Souza.




                                                v
                                         PREFACE

In 2011, Japan celebrated the 50th anniversary of achieving universal health coverage (UHC). To
mark the occasion, the government of Japan and the World Bank conceived the idea of
undertaking a multicountry study and share rich and varied country experiences from countries at
different stages of adopting and implementing strategies for UHC, including Japan itself.
This led to the formation of a joint Japan–World Bank research team under the Japan–World
Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage. The Program was set up as a two-year
multicountry study to help fill the gap in knowledge about the policy decisions and implementation
processes that countries undertake when they adopt the UHC goals. The Program was funded
through the support of the government of Japan.
This Country Report on Brazil is one of the 11 country studies on UHC that was commissioned
under the Program. The other participating countries are Bangladesh, Ethiopia, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Japan, Peru, Thailand, Turkey, and Vietnam. A synthesis of these country reports is in
the publication “Universal Health Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: A
Synthesis of 11 Country Case Studies,” available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/uhc-japan
These reports are intended to provide an overview of the country experiences and some key
lessons that may be shared with other countries aspiring to adopt, achieve, and sustain UHC.
The goals of UHC are to ensure that all people can access quality health services, to safeguard
all people from public health risks, and to protect all people from impoverishment due to illness,
whether from out-of-pocket payments or loss of income when a household member falls sick.
Although the path to UHC is specific to each country, it is hoped that countries can benefit from
the experiences of others in learning about different approaches and avoiding potential risks.




                                                vi
                                        INTRODUCTION

Brazil formally embarked on its path to universal health care some 25 years ago with the creation
of the Unified Health System or SUS (Sistema Único de Saúde). Health care as the right of the
individual and duty of the state was written into the 1988 constitution and was the culmination of a
broad-based reform process throughout the 1980s that sought democratization and improved
                                                                                                   1
social rights. In particular, the “Sanitary Reform Movement” (Movimento da Reforma Sanitária)
strove for a fundamental break from the prevailing “curative privatizing model” that promoted
expanded social security coverage and prioritized curative personal medical care in favor of a
“collective public health model” built on the premise of universal access, equity, integrality
(comprehensiveness), decentralization, and social participation.
Prior to the SUS, the Ministry of Health (MOH) focused on public health and disease-specific
programs, while the social security institutions provided medical coverage. Initially, coverage was
only provided to formal sector workers, and was then expanded to any self-employed workers
who made social security contributions, while states and philanthropic organizations provided
services for the rest of the population, but coverage remained limited (Gragnolati, Lindelow, and
Couttolenc 2013). Primary care was delivered through Basic Care Units, but the coverage was
inadequate, poorly distributed geographically, and suffered from a lack of trained providers.
In a political decision to reorient and reorganize health care delivery away from a facility-centered,
passive, curative care approach toward a more comprehensive primary health care approach, the
                                                                         2
Family Health Strategy (FHS) was created at national level in 1994. The FHS was designed to
expand coverage of primary care with an emphasis on whole-person care and the social context,
and to provide a first point of contact with the broader health system.
Since its launch, coverage of the FHS has expanded rapidly across the country. There are
currently over 35,000 Family Health Teams, present in 96 percent of municipalities, and with
estimated population coverage of 57 percent accordingly with Department for Basic Care
                                                           3,
(Diretoria para Atencao Basica - DAB) database). 4 The expansion was accompanied by
decentralization, with the growth in outpatient facilities occurring almost entirely at municipal level.
Priority expansion of services into more rural, poorer municipalities, and to poorer communities
within them, has enhanced equity of access. Utilization rates have risen across all states and
particularly in those with lower levels of income. The FHS has also affected the way Brazilians
use public services, reducing the role of hospitals as the “usual source of care” (from 35 percent
in 1998 to 21 percent in 2008) and increasing reliance on primary care facilities (from 42 percent
to 57 percent of the population) (Macinko 2011). Several studies have also demonstrated that the
FHS has had a significant impact on outcomes, including infant mortality (Gragnolati, Lindelow,
and Couttolenc 2013).




1
  An informal coalition of health professionals, academics, and others who demanded both a public health
system responsive to and controlled by the public and health as a fundamental human right to be
guaranteed by the constitution.
2
  The FHS was initially known as the Family Health Program. From early on, however, it became clear that
the actions and principles of the Family Health Program were more far reaching than a program per se and it
was renamed the FHS. For simplicity, this report refers to FHS throughout.
3
  Coverage is determined by a person’s residence within the defined catchment area of a Family Health
Team.
4
  Data from Jan 2014,available at: http://dab.saude.gov.br/portaldab/historico_cobertura_sf.php


                                                    1
The rapid expansion of primary care over the last two decades is an impressive accomplishment,
due in large part to a massive increase in federal spending on primary care since 1995. Primary
health care now accounts for 20 percent of federal spending on health, of which 65 percent goes
to the FHS. At the same time, states and municipalities have also expended investment and
recurrent spending in primary care.
After a rapid expansion over the first 10 years of implementation, coverage started to stagnate
around 2006. In particular, expansion in larger municipalities and metropolitan areas has lagged.
In addition, there has been a growing concern with the quality of care, ranging from quantity and
quality of human resources to a concern with the effectiveness of care provided at primary level.
The constraints to expanding coverage and improving quality are in large part related to human
resources. Rigidities within the public system over employment and services, in particular the
requirement to contract health professionals as civil servants on long-term contracts with limited
remuneration flexibility has led to significant problems in the hiring and retention of professionals.
Many municipalities have therefore resorted to diverse and often unstable and short-term forms of
hiring, but these have been increasingly criticized and challenged on legal grounds, thus
undermining the long-term effectiveness and sustainability of the FHS.
Given these challenges, many states and municipalities started searching for ways to circumvent
public sector rigidities that hampered expansion of primary care coverage. Contracting out the
provision of health services has emerged as one option, and initiatives have been adopted
throughout the country. This paper looks at two particularly noteworthy experiences: that of
contracting a State Foundation (Fundação Estatal) in the state of Bahia, and contracting with
Social Organizations (Organizações Sociais or OSs) in the city of Rio de Janeiro. Both
specifically contract for the provision of primary health services, and both have contracted with
not-for-profit entities operating under private law.




                                                  2
                                 PART 1: BACKGROUND


    1.1 THE FHS AND PUBLIC SECTOR RIGIDITIES
The FHS is based on Family Health Teams composed of a doctor, nurse, nurse assistant, and
four to six community health workers, organized by geographic regions, with each team providing
primary care to around 1,000 families (about 3,500 people). The teams are either based in the
Basic Care Units or operate from purpose-built Family Health Clinics that host numerous Family
Health Teams. The Family Health Teams are expected to provide comprehensive and integrated
primary care to the target population, through services provided in the facility and through
outreach activities. In 2004, oral health teams were added to the program, consisting of a dentist
and either an oral health technician or an assistant.
Key to the rapid expansion of the FHS was the creation of the Basic Health Transfer (Piso da
Atenção Básica), which made available significant amounts of federal funding for primary care in
the form of block grants from the federal government to the state and municipal level. The Basic
Health Transfer has two components: a fixed amount transferred directly to the municipalities on
a per capita basis; and a variable amount for the implementation of strategic priorities such as the
FHS based on the number of Family Health Teams registered. The creation of this funding source
was fundamental to expanding the FHS, both because it entailed a shift from funding based on
volume or procedures toward one based on population, and because the funding was related to
the number of Family Health Teams, creating an incentive for expanding primary care.
As part of the decentralization of the SUS, municipalities have responsibility for management and
delivery of the FHS, and are required to adhere to constitutional norms and public law on
employment (recruitment, contracting, and payment of professionals) and services. Direct
employment options are limited to three types contract (as defined by the constitution and
administrative law):
    •    Public civil servant contracts are permanent positions that must be contracted through
         public competitions (merit-based). These positions, which require municipal legislation,
         are characterized by a statutory regime that defines rights, social protection, and
         permanent (open-ended) contracts, and are hence considered “protected employment”.
    •    Temporary contracts are allowed under circumstances of “exceptional public interest”.
                                                                                               5
         These positions also require the adoption of specific legislation at municipal level.
    •    Commissioned positions are reserved for directorial or high-level managerial functions.
In all cases, levels of remuneration are defined by the municipality. However, salaries are
harmonized within municipalities, and there is limited scope for variation across specialization,
geographic location, or performance. Municipalities may, however, opt not to manage the health
services directly, but instead to contract all or parts of their services to external bodies such as
State Foundations, OSs, cooperatives, or other private sector entities, but must adopt legal
frameworks to do so.
In addition to the direct constraints on public hiring, other federal laws, such as the law of fiscal
responsibility (Lei de Responsabilidade Fiscal) that limits municipal spending on personnel to a
maximum of 60 percent of the municipal budget, also indirectly present barriers to expanding




5
  Since the constitutional provision for temporary employment was regulated in 1993, there have been
extensive debates and rulings concerning what constitutes “exceptional public interest” and what categories
of staff can be contracted through this modality.


                                                     3
social services. There is also shortage of medical doctors with an interest and appropriate
qualifications for working in primary care, particularly in underserved parts of the country.6

    1.2 NEW CONTRACTING MODALITIES IN THE HEALTH SECTOR
Taken together, the above constraints severely limit the ability of many municipalities to expand
the number of Family Health Teams and create the stability and accountability for performance
required for these teams to operate effectively. The rigidities of public sector employment extend
beyond primary health care and the health sector, and both federal ministries and local
government entities have long tried to find ways to circumvent them. Initially, at national level,
federal ministries, including the MOH, established contracts with universities or public foundations
that could provide services such as research or technical cooperation under simpler mechanisms.
Later, the MOH established technical cooperation agreements with international organizations, in
particular United Nations (UN) agencies. By the end of the 1990s, the majority of health
professionals working for the MOH were hired indirectly through foundations or international
organizations. However, over time, federal auditors imposed restrictions on these practices, and
                                                                                       7
although indirect contracting remains important, it has declined over the last decade.
Recognizing the need to increase flexibility in public contracting and service provision, the
Programa Nacional de Publicização was approved as part of the State Reform process in 1998.
The law authorized the transfer of responsibility for running public services and management of
public goods and personnel to a specific set of qualified entities, including OSs, civil society
organizations (Organização da Sociedade Civil de Interesse Público - OSCIP), nongovernmental
organizations, philanthropic organizations, cooperatives, and private companies. The objective of
the reform was to create an instrument that allowed the transfer of certain activities carried out by
the state that would be better served by the private sector, without needing state permission or
concessions. It would be a new form of partnership that called upon the “third sector” (i.e. neither
public nor private) to provide services of social interest and public use, but that do not necessarily
need to be undertaken by public bodies.
One form of contracting that has emerged as particularly important for the health sector is that of
                                             8
OSs. As part of the State Reform process of the 1990s, the Programa Nacional de Publicização
paved the way for the production of goods and services in the nonexclusive government domain,
including health, education, culture, scientific research, and the environment, by not-for-profit
entities. It was a new model of public administration based on setting up strategic alliances
between state and society that sought to mitigate operational dysfunctions of public
administration, while maximizing results of social action—in other words, providing an institutional
framework for the transfer of state activities to the third sector and thereby helping improve state
and non-state governance (Ministério da Administração Federal e Reforma do Estado 1998).
Formally, OSs are legal entities under private law, operate on a not-for-profit basis, carry out
activities of social value and operate in partnership with the state. They are primarily financed by
public funds and must adopt governance arrangements that allow for state representation. They
are subject to public audit (by the Tribunal de Contas) and ministerial supervision. Given that OSs
operate outside the scope of public administration and have greater flexibility in the areas of
human resource management and procurement, they are expected to generate significant quality
and efficiency gains (Conselho Nacional de Secretários de Saúde 2012).


6
  See also Girardi and Carvalho (2007) for reasons behind municipalities’ irregular hiring of health
professionals.
7
  The scale of these types of contracts was so significant that audit authorities could not simply ban them.
Instead, Adjustment of Conduct Terms (Termo de Ajuste de Conduta) were introduced that required the
substitution of these professionals with public officials, and the contracts with the international organizations
were not renewed.
8
  Guided by the Plan for the Reform of the State Apparatus (Plano Diretor da Reforma do Aparelho de
Estado—PDRAE).


                                                       4
The first experiences with contracting of OSs was in science and technology, with some
laboratory services contracted out immediately after the new legislation in 1998. The state of São
Paulo was also an early adopter of the OS model as a more flexible alternative for hiring
professionals while incorporating private sector management practices, initially focusing on the
health sector. The state contracted the management of some hospital services in 1998, and today
OSs are involved in most aspects of health service delivery, including hospital management,
ambulatory clinics, urgent and emergency care, specialist services, care for the aged, laboratory
and imaging services, logistics, and referrals. Inspired by the São Paulo experience, other local
governments have adopted the OS model in health, including the state of Para for some hospital
services, a number of states for urgent and emergency care facilities, and the municipality of Rio
de Janeiro for primary health care.
Over the last decade, some states in Brazil have also pursued other options for improving the
delivery of health services. Specifically, the possibility of using State Foundations started in 2005,
when the federal government, through the Ministry of Planning, Budget and Management and the
MOH, and aided by the National School of Public Health and a group of lawyers, began studying
broader legal and institutional options for overcoming the rigidities in the health system
(Fundação Estatal Saúde da Família 2009). State Foundations are decentralized administrative
                                                                           9
institutions that carry out public activities and provide social services. Hence, although the State
Foundations are public sector entities, they can contract and manage staff under private sector
law.
A number of states and municipalities have established State Foundations in recent years,
including Sergipe, Rio de Janeiro, Parana, and Curitiba. Most State Foundations focus on
contracting staff for the hospital system, and on providing continuing education and other support
services to staff and the health secretariats. However, the State Foundation in Bahia was
established as a partnership with municipalities with the explicit goal of supporting the expansion
and strengthening of primary care in the state.
Third-party contracting of medical doctors in primary care is still limited, accounting for just under
7 percent of all contracts, with OSs the most important modality (Figure 1). Permanent public civil
servant contracts or other form of public contract (temporary or commissioned positions) are the
predominant form of contracting of medical doctors in primary care (nearly 80 percent of all
doctors), but irregular forms of contracting through stipends and other means are also rather
important in many states.




9
 A key difference between a State Foundation and an OS is that a State Foundation is a public (state-
owned) institution, albeit operating under private law, whereas an OS is a privately owned institution.


                                                     5
Figure 1: Contracting modalities for doctors in primary care (2013, by state)




Source: Data from Cadastro Nacional de Estabelecimentos de Saúde; compiled by the authors.




    1.3 TWO CASE STUDIES
Although third-party contracting of staff in primary care remains low nationally, it is an important
modality in some states, and given continued rigidities of public sector contracting, it is likely to
grow as states and municipalities seek not only to expand primary care but also improve
performance.
This paper looks at two cases of contracting in Brazil. The first is that of contracting a State
Foundation in the state of Bahia, and the second is the contracting of OSs in the city of Rio de
Janeiro (see Table 1 for a comparison of the two models). In both cases, the aim was to expand
primary care in underserved areas and improve performance through enhanced accountability
and more flexible management. However, the means for achieving these goals were very
different in the two locations, as were the results.




                                                  6
Table 1: Comparison of contracting models
                                               Bahia                                 Rio de Janeiro
When started                   2009                                       2009
Contracting entity             Participating municipalities and           Municipality of Rio de Janeiro
                               the state government of Bahia


Contracted                     State Foundation                           Social Organizations
entity/entities
Stated aims                    To formalize and expand                    Provide primary health services
                               employment in primary care and
                               improve quality
Main responsibilities          Hiring and training of professional        Hiring and managing complete
of contracted entity           and management support to                  Family Health Teams and the
                               primary care                               services they provide in facilities
                                                                          provided by the municipality
Full-service                   No                                         Yes
management
Legal regime                   Private law                                Private law
Employment regime              Consolidation of Labor Laws                CLT
                               (CLT)1
Ownership                      Public                                     Private
                                                                      2
Supervision                    Office of the Comptroller General          Office of the Comptroller General
Funding                        Public                                     Public
SOURCE: Compiled by the authors.

1. CLT is the main piece of legislation relating to Brazilian labor law and procedural labor law. It was created
by in 1943, unifying all the existing labor legislation in Brazil. Its main aim is the regulation of individual and
collective labor relations. Other labor laws, such as for those working as legal entities (Pessoa Jurídica),
independent/freelance contract workers, or public civil servants, are covered under a federal statutory legal
regime.
2. CGU (Controladoria-Geral da União) or “Comptroller General” is the federal agency responsible for
technical supervision, internal control, and public audit.




                                                        7
      PART 2: BAHIA CASE STUDY: THE STATE FOUNDATION
                        EXPERIENCE
     2.1 BACKGROUND

With 14 million inhabitants, Bahia is the fourth most populous state and the sixth largest economy
in Brazil, in a territory slightly larger than France. Bahia has 417 municipalities, and 72 percent of
the population lives in urban areas. The largest city by far is Salvador with 2.9 million inhabitants,
but there are a further five cities with over 200,000. Bahia, like other states in the Northeast—the
poorest region in Brazil—lags behind the rest of Brazil in socioeconomic development. Although
the state has seen a dramatic fall in poverty in recent years, 14 percent of the population is still
living in extreme poverty (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics and Institute of Applied
              10
Economics).
Over the last decade, the state has increased spending on primary health care, reaching 14
percent of the total budget in 2010, but progress on key health indicators has been slow. Even
when compared with other states in the Northeast, Bahia has the highest rate of maternal
mortality, the highest proportion of children with low birth weight, and the highest incidence of
tuberculosis (Fundação Estatal Saúde da Família 2009). In 2009, 31 percent of women’s deaths
were associated with pregnancy and delivery, and the maternal mortality ratio is 73 per 100,000
live births, one of the highest in Brazil and almost double the Millennium Development Goal
target.
Implementation of the FHS in Bahia started in 1997 and since then has been the principal
strategy for strengthening primary care in the state. Since its introduction, FHS coverage has
increased continuously, and in 2007, after a decade of implementation, coverage had reached
nearly 50 percent. By 2011, FHS implementation had reached all the municipalities, with 2,748
Family Health Teams in place, covering close to 60 percent of the population. Similar to other
parts of Brazil, expansion of coverage has been slower in larger municipalities, with coverage of
less than 40 percent in large municipalities (over 80,000 inhabitants), against over 80 percent in
small municipalities (under 20,000 inhabitants) (Diretoria de Atenção Básica 2013).
Although many municipalities in Bahia have managed to expand FHS coverage, they have also
faced multiple implementation challenges, including, as elsewhere in Brazil, attracting and
retaining health professionals, in particular doctors. This has led to a high reliance on temporary
or irregular work contracts (e.g. contracting through private companies, cooperatives, or
nongovernmental organizations), relatively high salaries, concern about fiscal and contractual
irregularities, high turnover and instability of teams, and excessive competition between
municipalities for scarce health professionals. Moreover, as a result of contractual arrangements,
accountability for performance (e.g. complying with the 40 hours a week requirement for doctors)
has often been weak, and there has been little systematic effort to ensure continuing education
for health professionals in primary care facilities (Fundação Estatal Saúde da Família 2009).




10
  The extreme poverty line is defined as the cost of the basic food basket that supply the minimum
individual calorie intake. This varies between regions, states, and urban, rural, and metropolitan areas.


                                                      8
     2.2.    THE STATE FOUNDATION FOR FAMILY HEALTH CARE IN BAHIA

The human resource challenges of the health sector in Bahia were far from unique, tackled by a
unique approach developed by the state. In 2005 Bahia, along with a few other states (Rio
Grande do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, and Sergipe), started a process of defining options for
overcoming the rigidities of human resource management and other operational functions in the
health system. The objective was to create an institution within the public domain that was subject
to government oversight but that had the administrative agility of the private sector.
In Bahia, the primary focus was on primary care, the responsibility of municipalities rather than
                            11
state-run hospital services. The model would hence need to permit governance arrangements
involving both the states and municipalities. The OS model was considered but rejected on the
grounds that the state wanted a solution within the public domain. There was also a feeling that
an OS would not allow for the long-term approach to career management of health professionals
that the state wanted. Another option considered was a state consortium of municipalities, but it
                                                                                   12
was also rejected based on the legislative requirements associated with the model.
In January 2007, after seminars, debates, and meetings with stakeholders from the executive,
judiciary, as well as civil society, the Bahia State Health Secretariat (Secretaria de Estado da
Saúde da Bahia—SESAB) proposed the State Foundation as the most appropriate solution. A
State Foundation is a state-owned, not-for-profit institution that integrates indirect public
administration, but operates within private law and with private sector governance mechanisms,
                                  13
such as employment contracts. It was expected that this solution would offer budgetary and
operational agility, and create conditions for offering inter-municipal career paths for health
professionals. A Complementary Law that laid the foundation for the State Foundation for Family
Health Care in Bahia (Fundação Estatal Saúde da Família da Bahia or FESF) was passed by the
                                                14
State Legislative Assembly in December 2007.
The FESF was designed as a strategy for municipalities with the greatest problems in attracting
and retaining health professionals and in improving the quality of primary care in a coordinated
          15
manner. It entailed a tripartite contract between the participating municipalities, the state, and
the foundation, and would allow both municipalities and health professionals to plan for the
medium to long term based on formal contracts, clear career paths, and professional
development. At the same time, the population in the municipalities would benefit from greater
stability and quality of services provided, which was expected to encourage mayors to participate.
The most important function of the FESF is to contract health professionals, in particular doctors,
nurses, and dentists, for primary care on behalf of participating municipalities. All recruitment by
the FESF is governed by the Plan for Employment, Careers and Salaries (Plano de Empregos,
Carreiras e Salários or PECS), which is based on public competitive processes and formal labor

11
   In other states, such as Sergipe, State Foundations have been created to administer the hospital network
and perform other functions.
12
   The legislation for consortiums imposes defined governance arrangements involving an assembly of its
mayors. In Bahia, with 417 municipalities, this would have meant drafting complex legislation that could only
be amended with authorization by every municipality. It was hence felt that this option would likely be
cumbersome and slow.
13
   Its legal basis is similar to a state-owned company, except that it functions in the social rather than
economic domain and hence it may not commercialize its services on the market (Fundação Estatal Saúde
da Família 2009).
14
   Consultation and approval involved the State Health Council (Conselho Estadual de Saúde) and a
specially created Joint Commission (Comissão Paritária) that included users, professionals, and
management.
15
   The key strategic objectives of the FESF defined in the founding documents were to formalize the
employment contracts of health professionals in Family Health Teams; expand the coverage of the FHS;
and improve the quality of the actions, services, and management involved in primary health care.


                                                     9
contracts that allow for mobility across health teams, for career advancement by merit, for
continuing education, and for employment stability. This is a pioneering feature of the FESF that
was explicitly designed to address the challenges faced by many municipalities in attracting staff
by offering both financial and career incentives for professionals to accept positions in
underserved areas. By centralizing the hiring of professionals for primary health across the state,
the FESF would create economies of scale and help reduce competition between municipalities
and the high rotation of professionals.
The FESF was also expected to provide support to participating municipalities for the
management and organization of Family Health Teams and the development of primary health
care, including training, limited supervision, and the introduction of management practices
supporting quality improvement in primary care.

       2.3.     ACHIEVEMENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
After approval of the law that laid the foundations for the FESF by the State Legislative Assembly
in December 2007, mayors, municipal secretaries of health, municipal councils, professional
bodies, and other stakeholders continued deliberations throughout 2008. By the second half of
that year, municipalities started approving authorizing laws for participation in the FESF. In March
                                                            16
2009, the commission for the creation of the FESF approved the statute of the State
Foundation, elected the Inter-Federative Council, and conducted the election for the Board of
Trustees (Conselho Curado), and in July 2009 the FESF was finally registered as a legal entity
(Fundação Estatal Saúde da Família 2009).
In total, 256 mayors signed terms of Commitment and Adherence to the FESF and 110
proceeded to pass authorizing laws. However, when the contracting process began in September
2009, which entailed signing technical cooperation agreements and management contracts
between the municipalities and FESF, only 40 municipalities actually contracted the FESF to hire
health professionals.
Reflecting municipalities’ low participation, the FESF contracted only around 180 Family Health
Teams, well below the earlier expected roughly 1,000. Two open public competitions have been
carried out. In early 2010, 500 positions opened for doctors, 298 for dentists, and 326 for nurses.
This competition experienced delays due to legal issues and the successful candidates were only
invited to take up their positions in early 2011. The second competition was held in 2012 and
opened 137 positions for doctors. In addition to the competitions, 12 temporary professionals
were hired through a simplified selection in 2012 and another 20 in 2013. The number of staff
contracted by the FESF peaked in late 2011and started declining in mid- to late 2012 (Figure 2).




16
     Composed of the state governor, the state minister of health, and Council of Municipal Health Secretaries.


                                                       10
Figure 2: Number of health care workers contracted by the FESF
100

 90

 80

 70

 60

 50

 40

 30

 20                         Doctors
 10                         Nurses
                            Dentists
   0
       Feb




       Feb




       Feb
       Oct




       Oct




       Oct
       Jun




       Jun




       Jun
         Jul




         Jul
       Dec




       Dec




       Dec




         Jul
       Aug




       Aug




       Aug




       Aug
       Sep




       Sep




       Sep




       Sep
       Apr




       Apr




       Apr
        Jan




        Jan




        Jan
       Mar
       May




       Mar
       May




       Mar
       May
       Nov




       Nov




       Nov
          2010                2011                          2012                    2013
Source: Girardi 2014.


With few municipalities participating, the FESF also accounted for a low share of total health
professionals in the state: at the peak in 2011 this was just under 8 percent of primary care units,
but less than 2.5 percent in 2013 (Table 2).


Table 2: Evolution of primary health facilities
                                             2010                  2011             2012           2013a
 Primary health facilities                   4,100                 4,103            4,165          4,294
 Primary health facilities with FESFb         163                   316              307            104
 % primary health facilities with FESF               3.98           7.70             7.37          2.42
Source: Girardi 2014
a. Data until September 2013.
b. Facilities with at least one FESF-contracted health professional (doctor, nurse, or dentist).


There are a number of reasons for the lower than expected participation by municipalities in the
FESF. One concerned costs. The fact that FESF offered stable contracts with social security
benefits and competitive salaries meant that the cost of hiring professionals through the FESF
was comparatively expensive. Nor did the expected economies of scale materialize. As a result,
administrative costs for participating municipalities were high, and the FESF was not able to
achieve significant bargaining power in the state labor market. Some municipalities were also
reluctant to surrender their autonomy to hire and manage their publicly employed health
professionals.
Of the 40 municipalities contracted in 2009, only 12 still had a contract in 2014. One of the main
reasons for the decline has been the high proportion of municipality–FESF contract defaults.


                                                       11
Many municipalities were not transferring funds to the FESF, partly because of a perception that
the costs were too high, and yet retained the staff until their contracts were terminated. In late
2012 the default rate on management contracts with municipalities reached 80 percent of
revenues. In addition, municipal elections were held at the end of 2012 that changed
management in some municipalities, to the detriment of FESF.
Other factors against the FESF also came into play, such as the simultaneous implementation of
other national programs aimed at supplying medical staff to underserved areas, in particular the
Program for the Enhancement of Professionals in Primary Care (Programa de Valorização dos
                                             17
Profissionais na Atenção Básica—PROVAB) and, more recently, the “More Doctors” program
                 18
(Mais Médicos). Some municipalities dismissed FESF-hired professionals in preference for
professionals hired under these programs at lower cost.
Beyond trying to centralize and coordinate the contracting of health professionals for Family
Health Teams, the FESF intended to increase the quality of services through various strategies.
First, the professionals hired by FESF were expected to be better qualified for their positions as a
result of a more rigorous hiring process. Moreover, the conditions offered by the FESF (stability,
social security, career development, etc.) were also expected to help attract qualified
professionals.
Second, professionals hired by the FESF undergo six months of compulsory (and remunerated)
training (Formação Inicial do Trabalhador), during which they assess population health and
propose action plans under the supervision of FESF tutors. All FESF professionals are offered
                                                             19
continuing education for specialization or masters programs.
Third, health professionals contracted by the FESF are also offered performance incentives
(Gratificação por Produção e Qualidade). This is a bonus of 25–50 percent of base salary, paid
monthly, dependent on meeting the goals set by the FESF. These goals are monitored
quantitatively and qualitatively through a dedicated Primary Care Monitoring System (Sistema de
Monitoramento de Atenção Primária), with payment based on the number of days worked and
results.
Fourth, all contracts between municipalities and/or the state with the FESF include targets and
goals, to which a 10 percent variable portion of payments from municipalities to the FESF is
linked. The evaluation of the targets and goals is based on trimestral reports drafted and sent by
the FESF to the Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (Comissão de Acompanhamento e
                         20
Avaliação do Contrato). Decisions are reached by consensus and the variable funds are only
paid once the trimestral report is approved. To achieve these targets and goals, the FESF
provides support to contracting municipalities and Family Health Teams.
It is very difficult to assess whether the FESF has helped improve the quality of primary health
care in the contracting municipalities, because implementation is recent and because contracting
with the FESF was voluntary and the participating municipalities cannot be compared in a
straightforward manner with other municipalities. However, the recent performance evaluation of
primary care under the National Program for the Improvement in Access and Quality of Primary

17
   PROVAB is a federal program that encourages education of Brazilian doctors by offering a one-year,
mainly practical, postgraduate course in family health, in which they are placed within primary health
facilities in underserved locations, under institutional supervision. The program intends to benefit around
1,500 municipalities.
18
   Mais Médicos is a federal program that aims to attract Brazilian and foreign doctors to expand the number
of family doctors in underserved areas. The program also invests in primary health infrastructure and
foresees, from 2015, medical students spending two years in medical residency in primary care facilities, as
a precondition of graduation.
19
   By distance from the University of Rio Grande do Sul or the University of Feira de Santana.
20
   The Monitoring and Evaluation Commission in made up of the FESF (Director General, Director of Service
Management, Director of Internal Management and Procurement) and SESAB (Directors who have services
contracted with the FESF and the Legal Counsel’s office).


                                                    12
Health Care (PMAQ), provides some points of comparison. The survey evaluated Family Health
Teams based on five criteria: municipal management; structure and operating conditions of the
units; access and quality of care and organization of the work processes of teams; employee
enhancement; and access, utilization, participation, and user satisfaction.
Table 3 shows the score per criterion for the PMAQ evaluation of doctors, nurses, and dentists,
according to membership in FESF teams. Any team with at least one professional hired by the
FESF active in 2013 is considered an FESF team. Where teams do not have an FESF
professional one year, it was recorded if they had an FESF professional active the previous
year/s (2010 to 2012) or had never had an FESF team member. The data show that those teams
with current FESF staff have consistently better ratings, while teams with FESF staff in the past
are very similar to those that never had FESF contracted staff. The differences cannot be
attributed to the FESF of course, but warrant further investigation.


Table 3: Average score of Family Health Teams in PMAQ evaluation (FESF vs. non-FESF)
                                  Teams with
                                                 Teams with    Teams never
                                     FESF
Dimension                                       FESF member     having had     Total
                                  member in
                                                  in the past FESF member
                                      2013

General evaluation                             1.71               2.09               2.07        2.05

I Municipal management and                     2.05               2.39               2.20        2.21
development of primary care
II Structure and operation of                  2.11               2.45               2.46        2.43
primary care units
III Recognition and support of staff           1.47               1.95               2.28        2.19

IV Access, quality, and                        2.08               2.38               2.34        2.33
organization of work processes
V Utilization, participation, and              2.13               2.37               2.50        2.46
client satisfaction
Source: Girardi, 2014.
Note: For each criterion, the teams were scored on a scale 1–3 (1 = very good, 2 = good or above average,
3 = regular or average or below average).



    2.4.     THE FUTURE OF THE FESF
The FESF model depended on a significant share of municipalities in the state contracting out
human resource management in primary care to the foundation, but for a range of reasons this
did not happen, and over time the number of municipalities doing so declined even further. The
leadership of the FESF undertook an administrative and governance reform to reduce
administrative costs, seeking to strengthen the focus on quality, productivity, and efficiency by
finding a balance between administrative costs for the number of employees and ensuring an
appropriate administrative structure for strategic planning and management for results.
In practice, the FESF was obliged to diversify its activities from contracting the workforce to
include contract with SESAB to hire professionals to develop its home care services linked to the
state hospital network, regulatory activities, institutional support to PMAQ, and other services.
Hence, although the FESF continues to engage on primary health and work with municipalities,
the share of revenues from SESAB has increased steadily. In 2013 the “humanization program”


                                                   13
accounted for 62 percent of FESF employees, home care 14 percent, and the FHS only 6
percent. The FESF is therefore now 75 percent financed from SESAB and 25 percent from the
municipalities.
While the implementation of the FESF did not work out as planned, SESAB management remains
favorable to the State Foundation as a management model for public health, and the state is
looking into expanding the scope of foundation activities further to also include the development
of pharmaceutical technology and health education. There is an understanding among municipal
and state policy makers as well as the wider health sector actors in the state, that in the future
State Foundations must receive tripartite funding, from the federal, state, and municipal levels, to
offer formal, fully protected employment contracts.




                                                14
 PART 3: RIO DE JANEIRO CASE STUDY: THE OS EXPERIENCE
     3.1.    BACKGROUND
After the federal capital was moved to Brasília in the 1960s, Rio de Janeiro suffered a long
economic decline and only started picking up in 2005. Now with around 6 million inhabitants, Rio
de Janeiro is the second largest city in Brazil. The city is marked by social and economic
inequality. The poor make up about 10 percent of the population and income inequality,
measured by the Gini index, is greater than for the country as a whole. About a third of the poor
live in favelas, where the poverty rate is 15 percent. Life expectancy at birth of men living in the
wealthiest parts of the city was 12.8 years longer than that of men living in deprived areas, which
in part is explained by extremely high homicide rates in the favelas (Szwarcwald et al. 2011).
With the creation of the SUS and a focus on decentralization and primary care, a network of
Basic Health Units was implanted in areas of the city underserved by the hospital network, but the
two systems ran in parallel. When the FHS was created its implementation was slow off the mark
and despite the good results of the piloting phase it did not take off, and in fact there existed
some antagonism between the traditional Basic Health Units and the newer Family Health Clinics.
Traditionally, Rio de Janeiro has had an extensive hospital network, including facilities under
federal, state, and municipal management, but very limited primary health care provision. For
many years, the hospital network ensured access to basic care through outpatient departments
and emergency rooms, as well as critical inpatient services and specialist care. However, access
to the poorer segments of the population has long been problematic, and has become
increasingly so as the population, and health care needs, have grown. Moreover, the hospital
network does not provide preventive services or health promotion, and integration and
coordination of care has been weak.
In 2001, a new management team at the Municipal Secretariat of Health of Rio de Janeiro drew
up details for a project creating 600 Family Health Teams, including the conversion of some Basic
Health Units. But this new impetus also met some resistance from District Health Councils, which
feared a loss of control of existing facilities, as well as from professionals and the population,
which did not fully understand the proposed changes. By the end of 2001, only 23 Family Health
Teams had been set up, and by 2005 the FHS was still practically nonexistent with only 57 Family
Health Teams covering just 3.3 percent of the population.
When the FHS was initiated and the federal government increased its investment in primary care,
many of the smaller municipalities were quick to make the most of the funding available to boost
service provision. However, in the large municipalities such as Rio de Janeiro with extensive
hospital and ambulatory services, the response was slower. In 2005, the MOH therefore decided
to provide financial inducements to encourage expansion of the FHS in cities with over 100,000
             21
inhabitants.
With the launch of the Saúde Presente program in 2009, a newly elected government in the
municipality of Rio de Janeiro started an effort to expand FHS coverage. But in light of the
challenges faced in earlier efforts to expand coverage, linked to cumbersome recruitment and
procurement processes and limits on municipal spending on personnel imposed by the Fiscal
Responsibility Law, the municipal government decided to break with direct management and
                                                                         22
instead contract with OSs for delivering primary health care services. In this way, the


21
    This was done through the Project for Expansion and Consolidation of Family Health (Projeto de
Expansão e Consolidação da Saúde da Família—PROESF), which provided federal support for equipment,
training, and other costs associated with the expansion of the FESF, as well as the support to recurrent
costs that all municipalities were entitled to.
22
   The administrative rigidities associated with human resource management have been referred to in earlier
sections. On procurement, an oft-cited example is Federal Law 8.666/1993, which limits any public body


                                                    15
municipality would also signal an attempt to break with the perceived lack of coordination and
efficiency of the existing health network managed by municipal, state, and federal governments.



    3.2.    THE OS MODEL FOR PRIMARY CARE IN RIO DE JANEIRO
The interest in the OS model in Rio de Janeiro was in large part inspired by São Paulo’s
experience with OSs in the hospital sector and increasingly in other areas of health care. Yet the
proposal to contract with OSs to expand the FESF model met significant resistance, including
from professional interest groups, although the proposal was eventually adopted with two
conditions: first, that OSs could only be contracted for provision of primary care, namely the FHS;
second, OSs could only provide care in new facilities (and could not take over management of
existing facilities).
OSs are an institutional innovation, but do not constitute a new legal from as they have been
included under the existing legal framework for civil not-for-profit associations (Ministério da
Administração Federal e Reforma do Estado 1998). They are a model of partnership between the
state and/or the municipality and society. The municipality continues to promote and exercise
strategic control over the social actions through entering into a management contract with OSs
that foresee that public policy objectives are met. The management contract is the instrument that
governs the actions of the OS, with which performance targets are agreed to ensure the quality
and effectiveness of services.
As noted, OSs operate outside public administration and within private law. This design was
conceived to give these entities greater administrative autonomy than possible within the state
apparatus. In return, their management must assume greater responsibility, with social
participation, in managing the facilities and in improving efficiency and quality of services, with an
emphasis on results (Ministério da Administração Federal e Reforma do Estado 1998).
Contract annexes detail the responsibilities and goals for the OS, as follows:
    •   Basic Aspects of Organization: Communicating with the target population, receiving
        and referring users to the appropriate services, and recording all medical procedures and
        other activities, including administrative data.
    •   Best Clinical Practices: Adoption of clinical protocols, in consensus with experts, on
        clinical workflows defined by the MOH and the Municipal Secretariat of Health of Rio de
        Janeiro.
    •   Users Services: Channels of information and communication individualized and
        personalized care, and evaluation of user satisfaction.
    •   Referral with other levels of care: Defining conditions sensitive to primary care
        (Gibbons et al, 2012), and adhering to the Regionalization Plan of the State Secretariat of
        Health of Rio de Janeiro.
    •   Health Promotion and Disease Prevention: Including these activities with health care
        in Family Health Clinics.
    •   Health Information Systems: maintain the official Health Information System as defined
        by the ministry of health and send regularly these data to the Municipal Secretariat of
        Health of Rio de Janeiro. These are the Sistema de Informações sobre Atenção Básica
        (SIAB) - or Primary Care Information System - and the Sistema de Informações
        Ambulatoriais do SUS (SIA-SUS) - or SUS Ambulatory Information System).
All contracts between OSs and the municipality of Rio de Janeiro are standardized. Their main
objective is to provide primary health services within the new Family Health Clinics and Basic


from spending more than R$ 8,000 (under US$ 3,500) on any goods or services without issuing a public
tender. The tendering process is usually slow and ineffective and does not necessarily guarantee the
transparency it is intended to provide.


                                                 16
Health Units. The contracts contain a defined set of health services that are to be managed,
maintained, and equipped with human resources by OSs. The only difference between the
contracts is the geographic area. Contracts are signed for two years and are renewable if at least
80 percent of the objectives and goals are met.
As defined in the contracts, there are two methods of payment:
     •   Fixed payments, which are calculated per the number of Family Health Teams and Oral
         Health Teams and an estimate of resources required to cover the Portfolio of Basic
         Services (Carteira Básica de Serviços de Atenção Básica); and
     •   Variable payments, which relate to performance-based payment. Health units are
         required to produce trimestral reports relating to agreed-on indicators. The variable
         payments are made based on performance in three sets of indicators:
         1. Variable part 1—incentives paid to the OSs based on adoption of management
             practices. Specifically, they are based on the trimestral reports of productivity and
             quality of services offered, defined by a set of indicators (Annex 1). The maximum
             amount is 2% of the total contract value, and is associated with achieving 80–100%
             of the targets set and 1% for achieving 60–79% of targets. If less than 60%, the OSs
             will still receive this payment, but it must then be invested (infrastructure, equipment,
             training, etc.) in those units that are not achieving their targets.
         2. Variable part 2 —incentives to health units based on a set of specific indicators as
            reported in trimestral reports (Annex 2). Targets are not defined in the contract but
            are agreed between the OS and the administrative area it covers. When goals are
            achieved, each health unit receives a trimestral direct transfer of R$ 3,000 for each
            Family Health Team. If the goals are not achieved, the funds are then invested in the
            health unit, as above.
         3. Variable part 3—incentives for each Family Health Team or Oral Health Team based
            on a set of specific indicators (Annex 3). If the targets are achieved a performance
            incentive is paid to each team member, to a maximum of 10% of the monthly base
            salary. This performance incentive is measured by accounting units (Unidades
            Contábeis), and the target involves performing 300 accounting units. If less than 20%
            of the indicators (the equivalent of 60 accounting units) are achieved by a given
            team, the corresponding amount is invested as above.

The OSs are monitored by the Technical Evaluation Commission (Comissão Técnica de
                  23
Avaliação—CTA). The monitoring indicators linked to the three variable sources of funding
define the scope of evaluation. The Commission is required to produce quarterly monitoring
reports, assess the financing and economic indicators of the OSs, and report to the Municipal
Health Secretariat and district council.
Since 2010, the OSs have opened several recruitment procedures in the form of public selection,
as recommended by the municipality of Rio de Janeiro, in order to ensure transparency in the
selection process. Employment contracts are established for an indefinite period, and the
conditions for termination of contracts follow the CLT. All members of the Family Health Team
undergo a compulsory introductory course, in which the basic principles of the FHS are presented
as well as the Family Health Clinics’ general workflow. In addition, all the OSs operating in Rio de
Janeiro offer continuing medical education courses to their employees and to other health
professionals.




23
  The CTA consists of representatives of the cabinet of the Municipal Secretary of Health, the
Subsecretariat of Primary Health Care (SUBPAV), the Management Secretariat (SUBG), as well as
representatives from the administrative regions where the OSs operate.


                                                  17
The health facilities managed by the OSs are responsible for providing their patients with the
basic medication included in the Municipal Register of Medicinal Products. They have an interest
in providing essential medicines to the most prevalent chronic diseases (diabetes, hypertension,
asthma) and programmatic diseases (AIDS, tuberculosis, and Hansen’s disease) as the supply of
these drugs is evaluated as an indicator of the variable part of the financial transfers. The supply
of drugs must, however, be balanced against efficiency indicators that seek to minimize medical
consultation costs. In most cases, the municipality owns all primary health care facilities.



    3.3.      ACHIEVEMENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
In Rio de Janeiro, the contracting of OSs in primary health care was made possible by Law 5026
enacted in May 2009. The law defined the process that qualifies the OSs to manage the financial,
physical, and human resources of the municipal treasury to maintain and structure the provision
of primary health services in Family Health Clinics and Basic Health Units. To qualify, the OSs
must be private not-for-profit entities acting in the health sector. As soon as Law 5026 was
enacted a number of tenders were opened to select OSs to manage primary care with respect to
the city’s territorial divisions.
Since the municipality of Rio de Janeiro started contracting OSs to implement the FHS, the city’s
primary health facilities have been classified into three “types” depending on their participation
with the FHS.
    •     Type A: Entirely OS-managed Family Health Clinics, with all of health professionals hired
          by OSs. These include new purpose-built Family Health Clinics since 2009, as well as
          previously existing Basic Health Units that were fully converted into Family Health Clinics.
          However, in the case of the later, the public officials already working there were assigned
          to the new Family Health Teams while their employment contracts remained with the
          municipality;

    •     Type B: Partially OS-managed Basic Health Units, in which Family Health Teams hired
          by OSs were incorporated into the existent health facilities;

    •     Type C: Basic Health Units that do not have any Family Health or OS participation.
Family Health Clinics are being implanted all over Rio de Janeiro, primarily by the construction of
new clinics (85 new units since 2009), but also be converting Basic Health Units into Family
Clinics (the 49 units that existed before 2009). The conversion of Type C units to Type B units will
be completed by 2014 (Table 4).

Table 4: Evolution of Primary Health Care facilities by type A/B/C in Rio de Janeiro
                                               Year established
  Type of
  facility       Pre-2007     2007     2008    2009      2010   2011   2012    20131     Total

 Type A              38         10        1     4        21       41    18        1       134
 Type B              46          2        1     -         1        -     1        2       53
 Type C              6           -        -     -         -        -     -        -        6
 Total               90         12        2     4        22       41    19        3       193
Source: Anuário CEMAPS-RJ.
1. Data from January to September 2013.




                                                    18
To date, six OSs (Table 5) have won tenders to manage Family Health Teams in 10 health areas
(Áreas de Planejamento—APs). However, only five are still in operation as one of the contracts
was cancelled due to not meeting minimum standards, and the contract for that territory was
passed to another OS.
Table 5: OSs operating in primary care in Rio de Janeiro 2009-2013
                  Year of
    OS             first    # type A   # type B                       Description of OS
                 contract    clinics    clinics
                                                  Established in 2009 as a branch of the NGO Viva Rio to
         1
Viva              2009        22         41       provide primary health to the favelas in Rio de Janeiro’s
                                                  Southern Zone.
                                                  Fiotec was established in 1998 to manage the financial
                                                  resources of Fiocruz research, development and
                                                  innovation projects. In 2009 it initiated the
                                                  management of Family Clinics in the Manguinhos
                                                  neighborhood, where Fiocruz is located. It also
Fiotec2           2009         1          1       contracts personnel for the four biggest general
                                                  hospital emergency room in Rio de Janeiro.
                                                  Established in 1933 in São Paulo to hire health
                                                  professions for the Escola Paulista de Medicina. It now
                                                  operates in 6 states in Brazil contracting for all levels of
SPDM3             2009        21         26       health professionals. Its primary care health program
                                                  was established in 2001 in São Paulo.
                                                  Established in 1998 and only operates in Rio de Janeiro,
Fibra4            2011         3         21       managing financial and human resources for primary,
                                                  hospital and emergency care.
                                                  Established in 2008 to provide public healthcare
                                                  management in three states (São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro,
                                                  and Maranhão). In Rio de Janeiro it operates in primary
             5
IABAS             2011        23         53       care, geriatric care, ambulatory clinics and school
                                                  health.
Source: Cavalini, 2014.
1
  Viva Comunidade.
2
  Fundação para o Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico em Saúde (Fiotec).
3
  Associação Paulista para o Desenvolvimento da Medicina (SPDM).
4
  Fibra Instituto de Gestão e Saúde.
5
  Instituto de Atenção Básica e Avançada à Saúde (IABAS).


The financial reports of the OSs are only available for the last two years (2012-2013). They show
a concentration in the hiring of community health agents, doctors, nurses, nurse technicians and
administrators. This is to be expected as the FHS assumes a large number of community health
agents working over small territories in direct contact with the families within them. Equally,
doctors, nurses and nurse technicians form the base of Family Health Teams, as are
administrators that help manage them. The OSs have not encountered any problems in attracting
professionals. In fact, a critical feature of the OS model is the simplified hiring and the flexibility to
pay differentiated (and higher) salaries. Doctors, hired by OSs can earn over twice much as
public officials, nurses can earn up to 36 percent more, dentists can earn up to 65 percent more,
and yet nurse technicians are paid as much as 36 percent less. The higher salaries for the more
qualified positions has facilitated hiring and hence created the conditions for the expansion that
has been observed. While some have benefitted from higher salaries, the increased wage
inequality may negatively impact the provision of care.


                                                   19
The new Family Health Clinics were successful in rapidly increasing coverage, in part due to the
characteristics of Rio de Janeiro whereby large populations live in favelas (Figure 3). The clinics
were implemented in underserved areas with high population density. They were often very large
and in some cases managed to incorporate laboratories, medical imaging centers, social services
and emergency services within the clinics.


Figure 3: Estimates of FHS Coverage, in Rio de Janeiro, 2006-2013
45%
                  Family Health Coverage (% of pop.)
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
 5%
 0%
        2006     2007     2008     2009    2010     2011     2012    2013
Source: Sistema de Informações sobre Atenção Básica—SIAB.
Note: This figure only shows coverage for the FHS, but the population continues to have access to primary
health services at Basic Health Units. Due to different reporting systems however, coverage estimates are
not available for the Basic Health Units.


Reflecting the rapid expansion of the FHS, the last half-decade has seen has seen a significant
increase in government health spending in Rio de Janeiro (Figure 4). From 2006 to 2012, total
spending more than doubled in real terms. There has also been an important shift in spending
toward primary care. Before 2010, spending on primary care in Rio de Janeiro was less than half
the national average, but since 2010 spending on primary care has tripled and is now equivalent
to a third of total health spending per capita.




                                                    20
Figure 4: Total and primary health spending in Rio de Janeiro, 2006-2012, and total
spending by OS in 2012
  700                                                                                        40%

  600                                                                                        35%

                                                                                             30%
  500
                                                                                             25%
  400
                                                                                             20%
  300
                                                                                             15%
  200
                                                                                             10%
  100                                                                                        5%
                              govt. health exp. p.c. (constant $R) (left axis)
                              % of govt. health exp. on PHC (right axis)
    0                                                                                        0%
           2006      2007      2008       2009      2010      2011       2012      2013
Source: SIOPS.


The expansion of the FHS in RJ was expected to result in improved coverage of priority
interventions (antenatal care, management of patients with chronic diseases, etc.) and, ultimately,
improved outcomes. It is still early to assess the extent to which these goals have been achieved.
Nonetheless, available data suggest that relative to 2007, the municipality has seen a near
doubling of primary care consultations, a large increase in the number of chronic disease patients
under active management, and a reduction in avoidable admission from diabetes and associated
complications. However, there has only been a modest increase in the share of pregnant women
with seven or more prenatal consultations (Table 6).

Table 6: Trends in Key Indicators in Rio de Janeiro Municipalities (2007-2013)
                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                  change
                                                                 2007               2013
Population                                                       6,178,762         6,429,923               4
Primary health care consultations                                3,566,747         6,846,453              92
Pregnant women with 7 or more prenatal                               68.5%             70.8%               3
consultations
Number of diabetics under management                               125,317           231,960              85
Number of hypertensive patients under                              544,414           791,951              45
management
Avoidable admission: diabetes and complications                       3.6%                1.0%            -71
Source: Official administrative data provided by the Health Secretariat of Rio de Janeiro Municipality.


The contracting of OSs is intended to improve performance due to their increased management
capacity and flexibility as well as the introduction of performance incentives for both professional
and health facilities. To date, however, the performance incentive modality has not operated as

                                                      21
planned. For the time being the payment of the variable part of the funding appears disconnected
to achieving the targets. The data available indicate that targets have not been met, while the
variable funding has been paid. This is likely to do with problems of information collection rather
than poor quality care, and increased reporting of targets in 2013 indicates that reporting is
improving. In addition there also appear to be distortions with respect to the financing of
incentives. Currently the municipality transfers the variable part of the funding to the OSs
regardless of their performance. The OSs on the other hand, only transfer these funds to the
Family Clinics if they attain their targets and goals, and retain them if they do not. While any
retained incentive funds are foreseen to be invested in the health facilities most in need, the fact
that the OSs stand to capitalize on the poor performance of the Family Clinics they run, can
represent disincentives for performance and quality.



    3.4.    THE FUTURE OF OSS IN RIO DE JANEIRO
In light of the remarkable expansion of FHS coverage from 8 percent in 2008 to 41 percent in
2013, the contracting of OSs can be considered a great success, especially taking into account
that many of the Family Health Clinics were constructed from scratch. It can also be said, that this
reform in the provision of primary health care has succeeded in attracting significant amounts of
government funding to the health sector and in particular a huge increase in primary health
spending.
Contracting with OSs is an interesting model that is based on longer-term relationships between
the organizations and the municipality. The model requires a high-level of cooperation given that
they share responsibilities in primary care, with the municipality responsible for policy and
providing the infrastructure, while the OSs manage the provision of care and supply of basic
drugs and some equipment.
The close relationship has provided conditions for close monitoring and problem-solving, and may
have contributed to improving performance in ways that are hard to measure. On the other hand,
the harder forms of performance accountability envisaged in the contract, in particular
performance-based variable payments, still need to be fine-tuned in order to establish a
mechanism that delivers on its intended aims and is workable, without inadvertently giving rise to
distortions of incentives.
The model has also introduced a potentially problematic dynamic between health workers with
regards to compensation. Currently, despite the standardized contracts between the municipality
and the OSs, there is no correlation between the resources received by OS per contract and the
salaries they pay. In fact wage inequality exists across the whole primary health network in Rio de
Janeiro. Salary disparities exist between public officials assigned to OSs and professionals
directly hired by them, between professionals hired by different OSs but within the same
professional category, as well as between professional working in different geographical
locations. OSs covering more remote, and often poorer areas of the city tend to pay lower
salaries. They are therefore more prone to hiring the less qualified, younger professionals for
shorter periods of time. Thus, arguably the introduction of OS has increased the inequality with
the primary health system from the traditional management model that had standardized levels of
pay. Now the more central, wealthier areas of the city are better able to attract and retain more
qualified professionals, due to the higher wages, and thus arguably the quantity and quality of
services provided to the wealthier areas of the city is higher than those offered to the more
disadvantaged areas. Financial data, however, has only been available since 2012 and therefore
the effects of such wage differentials have yet to be determined.
Although it is probably safe to say that the municipality would not have been able to expand
coverage to the extent it has based on the traditional model, some of the gains in terms of quality
and effectiveness of primary care may have as much to do with the Family Clinic model
(combining multiple teams in purpose-built facilities) as with the OS model. In other words, the


                                                22
ability to hire and manage staff in a flexible way has been an important gain, but the extent to
which contracting out of management of facilities as opposed to simply providing staff is an
important aspect of the model is not clear.
There is also insufficient data on costs and efficiency to assess the merit of the OS model relative
to alternatives. This is partly an issue of the costs of increased salaries but also administrative
costs must also be taken into account, both within the OSs as well as within the municipality.
Assessments of efficiency and performance however must take a comprehensive analysis of
performance. For instance, higher salary and administrative costs may be justifiable if associated
with increased productively and quality of care.
In order to carry out rigorous assessments, however, there is a need for implementation of
reliable and accurate information systems, that as of yet, are not in place. Medium-term indicators
are necessary for the measurement of the effectiveness of the system while long-term indicators
are needed for the assessment of the impact on the morbidity and mortality of the population
covered.




                                                23
                                 PART 4: DISCUSSION

Over the last couple of decades, international experience with contracting in the health sector has
been growing. Although there are significant differences in context and processes behind these
experiences, they have often been motivated by a desire to improve quality and efficiency of
service delivery. The "traditional" model of service delivery through public sector providers, with
salaried staff on long-term contracts has been seen as insufficiently responsive or dynamic due to
problems of low-powered incentives, lack of management flexibility and a bureaucratic
institutional culture. In contrast, private sector entities are often smaller and unconstrained by the
myriad of administrative rules and constraints of the public sector. Hence, at least in principle,
contracting can help improve both quality and efficiency by combining management flexibility with
more high-powered incentives. Today, both for-profit and nonprofit providers play an important
role in many health systems, in part because of the historic roots of these systems, but also as a
result of policy decisions to “autonomize” providers or contract with the private sector as a means
to improve the performance of service delivery.
As the experience with contracting has grown, so has the associated literature. Part of this
literature is concerned with the conditions under which contracting the delivery of public services
is likely to be effective, given the uncertainty and information asymmetry that is pervasive in the
health sector (Bennett and Mills, 1998; Besley and Ghatak, 2003; Eggleston and Zeckhauser,
2002; Mills, 1998). There is also a growing body of evidence on specific experiences, including
efforts to evaluate to what extent the performance of contracted service providers is superior to
other models for delivering services (see, e.g. Liu et al.,2007; 2008; Loevinsohn and Harding,
2005; Perrot, 2006; Schlesinger and Grey, 2006).
Private sector provision of health services has long played an important role in the public health
system in Brazil. When the SUS was established in the late 1980s, a significant share of health
services, in particular in the hospital sector, was in private hands, including both philanthropic and
for-profit institutions. States and municipalities have established volume-based contracting
arrangements with these institutions to provide services for the SUS, and although the share of
services provided by the private sector has declined, it remains significant.
However, this paper has focused on more recent experiences with contracting in primary health
care in Brazil as a means to address rigidities and fiscal constraints in the public sector. One of
these approaches is the reliance on nonprofit OSs in Rio de Janeiro. This approach dates back to
the late 1990s and was first introduced in the health sector in São Paolo in 1998. Although the
focus was initially on the hospital sector, the model has since expanded into other areas of health
care, including primary care, and the municipality of Rio de Janeiro adopted the approach in 2009
as part of its effort to rapidly expand coverage of the FHS and improve the quality of services.
The second case focused on the experience of the State of Bahia with the foundation model.
Unlike OSs, which are private entities, state foundations are autonomous entities within the public
sector. Over the last few years, foundations have been established in numerous states and
municipalities in Brazil. What is unique about the Bahia experience, however, is the foundation’s
focus on primary care, which means that it needs to involve not only state-level agencies, but also
municipalities. The Bahia state foundation was established with the goal of providing a more
coordinated and organized form of contracting doctors, nurses and dentists for family health
teams in the state’s municipalities, and in this way support the expansion of FHS coverage and
also improve the performance. Hence, in the case of Bahia, the municipalities contracted with the
foundation, which in turn contracted health professionals and performed some limited
management functions.
The two cases that are the focus of this paper are both relatively recent. Nonetheless, given the
interest in these contracting experiences both in Brazil and internationally, it is worth asking how
they have fared. In terms of achieving the goals of expanding coverage and improving the quality


                                                 24
of primary care services, the picture emerging from the two cases is mixed. The municipality of
Rio de Janeiro successfully managed to expand the coverage of primary health care through the
FHS. This expansion, in turn, has been associated with a large increase in utilization of primary
care services, which is expected to contribute to improved outcomes over the longer term.
Inevitably, a number of implementation issues remain, in particular concerning the collection and
compilation of data costs and performance, which is a critical element of the system of
performance-related financial incentives that form part of the contract between the municipality
and the OSs. At this point, there is hence limited basis on which to assess the quality of OS
performance, and to compare services provided by OSs with those delivered based on alternative
models.
In the case of Bahia, the FESF managed to contract a number of health professionals for
participating municipalities, contributing to an expansion of coverage in these locations. However,
despite a high level of initial support, the number of municipalities that actually established a
contract with the FESF when it was established was very low, and has fallen further since. By the
end of 2013, only 12 municipalities retained contracts with the FESF, accounting for 22 doctors,
38 nurses and 28 dentists. As a result, the intended economies of scale were not achieved,
undermining the appeal of the model for municipalities. There are some indications that the FESF
has contributed to improved performance where it is operating, but data are limited and by no
means conclusive.
In assessing contracting experiences and comparing them against other approaches,
performance in terms of coverage and quality is important, but the cost implications of the
approach also need to be considered. It is often claimed that contracting will improve the
technical efficiency of service delivery, although such gains may be partially offset by increases in
administrative and transaction costs. However, evidence on these dimensions of contracting
experiences if often scant, as is also the case for the two Brazilian cases. There is some limited
evidence that the productivity of health providers has increased due to performance incentives
and new forms of management. In both models, personnel costs have however increased,
although this would perhaps have been required in the alternative models as well in order to
attract staff. There is currently very little information on administrative costs associated with the
respective models. However, it is clear that both the foundation and the OSs incur nontrivial
administrative costs, and there are also transaction costs to be considered in state and municipal
administration related o monitoring and oversight of contracts.
What will future look like? By now, the OS model has a relatively long history Brazil, and is
increasingly used for staffing and managing health care provision in different parts of Brazil.
Experiences to date have shown that it takes time for the approach to mature, with the need for
significant capacity on both the OS and government side (management of services, design of
contracts, monitoring of costs and performance, oversight, etc.). Nonetheless, as OSs with a
focus on health care become more plentiful and experienced, and with continued pressures to
contain civil service wage bills at state and municipal level, the approach will likely continue to
grow, in particular in larger municipalities. The state foundation model brings some important
strengths, but has suffered from significant implementation problems. Some of these are related
to the complex governance and contracting arrangements that arise between the foundation, the
state and the municipalities. However, the foundation model has also, for better or worse, been
undermined by federal initiatives such as Mais Médicos, which emerged to address some of the
same problems that the FESF was expected to help solve. The future of the foundation model for
primary care in Bahia and elsewhere hence depends in large part how it relates to federal human
resource initiatives, and on how efforts to diversify into other areas will permit the foundation to
maintain a significant focus on primary care.




                                                 25
                                      REFERENCES

Bennett, Sara, and Anne Mills. 1998. "Government capacity to contract: health sector experience
     and lessons." Public Administration and Development 18, no. 4: 307-326.
Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2003. "Incentives, choice, and accountability in the
     provision of public services." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 19, no. 2: 235-249.
Cavalini, Luciana Tricai. 2014. “Modalidades de Contrato e Performance da Atenção Básica no
     Rio de Janeiro. Report to the World Bank Group, Brazil, Brasilia.
Conselho Nacional de Secretários de Saúde. 2012. “Gerência de Unidades Públicas de Saúde:
     Organização       Social,     Fundação     Estatal    e      Parceria   Público     Privado.”
     http://www.conass.org.br/NOTAS%20T%C3%89CNICAS%202012/NT%2040_2012%20-
     %20Gerencia%20de%20unidades%20p%C3%BAblicas.pdf.
Diretoria de Atenção Básica. 2013. “Boletim de Avaliação e Monitoramento da Atenção Básica -
     Bahia.” http://www.saude.ba.gov.br/dab/arquivos/coampdf.pdf.
Eggleston, Karen, and Richard Zeckhauser. 2002. "Government contracting for health
     care." Market-based governance: 29-65.
Fundação Estatal Saúde da Família. 2009. “A Bahia Unida Por Um Novo Caminho Para a Saúde
     da                                                                                  Família.”
     http://www.fesfsus.ba.gov.br/old/attachments/article/1/Cartilha%20do%20Gestor.pd
Gibbons, Daniel, Andrew B. Bindman, Michael A. Soljak, Christopher Millett, and            Azeem
     Majeed. 2012. “Defining primary care sensitive conditions: a necessity for effective primary
     care delivery?” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 105, no. 10: 422-428.
Girardi, Sabado Nicolau, and Cristiana Leite Carvalho. 2007. “Trends In Labor Contracting In The
     Family Health Program In Brazil: A Telephone Survey.” Cahiers de Sociologie et de
     Démographie Médicales 48 (2): 271–88.
Girardi, Sabado Nicolau. 2014. “Contracting and Performance of Primary Health Care in Bahia”.
      Report to the World Bank Group, Brazil, Brasilia.
Gragnolati, Michele, Magnus Lindelow, and Bernard Couttolenc. 2013. Twenty Years of Health
      System Reform in Brazil: An Assessment of the Sistema Único de Saúde.
      http://hdl.handle.net/10986/15801.
Liu, Xingzhu, David R. Hotchkiss, and Sujata Bose. 2008. "The effectiveness of contracting-out
      primary health care services in developing countries: a review of the evidence." Health
      Policy and Planning 23, no. 1: 1-13.
Liu, Xingzhu, David R. Hotchkiss, and Sujata Bose. 2007. "The impact of contracting-out on
      health system performance: a conceptual framework." Health Policy 82, no. 2: 200-211.
Loevinsohn, Benjamin, and April Harding. 2005. "Buying results? Contracting for health service
      delivery in developing countries." The Lancet 366, no. 9486: 676-681.
Macinko, James. 2011. “A Preliminary (FHS) in Brazil”. Consultant Report World Bank.
      Washington DC.
Mills, Anne. 1998. "To contract or not to contract? Issues for low and middle income
      countries." Health Policy and Planning 13, no. 1: 32-40.
Ministério da Administração Federal e Reforma do Estado. 1998. “Organizações Sociais”.
      Cadernos MARE da Reforma do Estado. Brasília DF.
Ministerio de Saúde. 2013. “Número e distribuição dos vínculos de médicos na ESF, segundo
      tipo de contratação e UF.” Cadastro Nacional de Estabelecimentos de Saúde.
Perrot, Jean. 2006. "Different approaches to contracting in health systems." Bulletin of the World
      Health Organization 84, no. 11: 859-866.




                                               26
Schlesinger, Mark, and Bradford H. Gray. 2006. "How nonprofits matter in American medicine,
    and what to do about it." Health Affairs 25, no. 4: W287-W303.
Szwarcwald, Celia Landmann, Jurema Corrêa da Mota, Giseli Nogueira Damacena, and Tatiana
    Guimaraes Sardinha Pereira. 2011. “Health Inequalities in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Lower
    Healthy Life Expectancy in Socioeconomically Disadvantaged Areas.” American Journal of
    Public Health 101 (3): 517.




                                            27
                                            ANNEX 1
Performance indicators related to Variable Part 1 of OS contracts


        Action                  Indicator           Source        Periodicity of the         Goal
                                                                     evaluation
                                                     6
Implementation       of    Proportion of PHC      SO            Quarterly, from the 7th   80%
Medical            File    units with Medical     quarterly     month of the contract
Committee in       the     File     Committee     reports
    1
PHC units                  implemented
Update of the PHC          Proportion        of   CNES          Monthly                   90%
Units in the CNES2         professionals
                           registered       on
                           CNES
Percentage         of      Percentage        of   EMR    and    Monthly, from the 3rd     60-80%
medical        visits      medical       visits   SIA-SUS7      month
performed by the           performed by the
patient’s own Family       patient’s      own
Physician                  Family Physician
Follow up on the oral      Proportion        of   Local         Monthly, from the 6th     80%
health work plan           discharges        in   information   month of dental clinic
                           dental treatments      system        implementation
Annual planning      of    Proportion of PHC      SO annual     Annual                    80%
activities                 units with annual      report
                           planning submitted
Percentage            of   Proportion of PHC      SO            Quarterly                 80%
schools in the territory   units with school      quarterly
covered               by   health     planning    reports
promotion, prevention      submitted
and         healthcare
activities
Computerization      of    Proportion        of   SO            Quarterly                 70%
workstations               medical offices and    quarterly
                           other rooms with       reports
                                5
                           EMR
Percentage of oral         Percentage of oral     SO            Quarterly                 10%
health kits distributed    health        kits     quarterly
in    community       or   distributed            reports
individual activities
1. PHC = primary health care. 2. CNES = Cadastro Nacional de Estabelecimentos de Saúde (National
Cadastre of Healthcare Facilities). 3. BPA = Boletim de Produção Ambulatorial (Ambulatory Production
Bulletin). SIAB = Sistema de Informação sobre Atenção Básica (Primary Care Information System). 5. EMR
= Electronic Medical Record. 6. OS = Social Organization. 7. SIA-SUS = Sistema de Informações
Ambulatoriais do SUS (SUS Ambulatory Information System)




                                                  28
Performance indicators related to the Variable Part 1 of the OS contracts (cont).
       Action                  Indicator              Source          Periodicity of the      Goal
                                                                         evaluation
Regular supply of        Proportion of PHC      SO reports           Monthly                     80%
PHC units                units attesting
                         being regularly
                         supplied by the
                         manager
Average cost of          Average cost of        EMR                  Quarterly,   from         Max =
medications              medications                                 the 7th month of       (variable)
prescribed by user       prescribed by user                          the contract
Average cost of          Average cost of        EMR                  Quarterly,   from         Max =
diagnostic and           diagnostic and                              the 7th month of       (variable)
therapeutic services     therapeutic                                 the contract
prescribed by user       services prescribed
                         by user
Decentralization of      Proportion of PHC      SO      quarterly    Quarterly                   90%
insuline provision       units that provide     reports
                         insuline
Decentralization of      Proportion of PHC      SO      quarterly    Quarterly                   80%
asthma medication        units that provide     reports
provision                asthma medication
Decentralization of      Proportion of PHC      SO      quarterly    Quarterly                   80%
anti-retroviral          units that provide     reports
medication provision     anti-retroviral
                         medication
Regularity in the        Proportion of PHC      SO reports           Monthly                   100%
submission of            units that inform
                  3
productivity (BPA        the BPA and SIAB
          4
and SIAB systems)        systems on time
1. PHC = Primary Health Care. 2. CNES = Cadastro Nacional de Estabelecimentos de Saúde (National
Cadastre of Healthcare Facilities). 3. BPA = Boletim de Produção Ambulatorial (Ambulatory Production
Bulletin). SIAB = Sistema de Informação sobre Atenção Básica (Primary Care Information System). 5. EMR
= Eletronic Medical Record. 6. SO = Social Organization. 7. SIA-SUS = Sistema de Informações
Ambulatoriais do SUS (SUS Ambulatory Information System)




                                                 29
                                          ANNEX 2
Performance indicators related to the Variable Part 2 of the OS contracts.


                    Indicator by dimension                                Goal
Access
Percentage of medical visits performed by the patient’s own               70%
Family Physician
Percentage of spontaneous demand (reception of the                        40%
                                             1
nonprogrammed demand or referred by other PHC units) in
relation to the programmed demand
Rate of household visits per 1,000 registered users                       0,25
Rate of educational groups performed per 1,000 registered users          0,010
Rate of items in the service portfolio implemented                        80%
Care Performance
Percentage of women aged 25 to 64 years with pap smear                    80%
recorded over the past three years
Percentage of diabetics with at least two recorded visits in last 12      80%
months, in two different semesters
Percentage of hypertensive patients with a blood pressure record          80%
in the last 6 months
Percentage of children up to 2 years with updated vaccination             80%
schedule
Percentage of children up to 6 years with updated vaccination             80%
schedule
Percentage of first consultation for prenatal care in the first           80%
trimester of pregnancy
Percentage of first childcare consultation made in the first 28 days      80%
of life
Proportion of discharges in dental treatments from registered             80%
patients
User Satisfaction
Percentage of satisfied and very satisfied users (Note: If the goal    Not defined
for this indicator is not reached the others will not even be
analyzed)
Efficiency
Average cost of medications prescribed by user                          Variable
Average cost of diagnostic and therapeutic services prescribed by       Variable
user




                                                30
                    Indicator by dimension                                      Goal
Percentage of drugs prescribed from the REMUME2 list (Appendix                  90%
4)
Percentage of patients referred to other services                               10%
Percentage of absenteeism of visits/procedures scheduled by the                 30%
        3
SISREG system
1. PHC = primary health care. 2. REMUME = Relação Municipal de Medicamentos (Municipal Medication
List). 3. SISREG = Sistema Nacional de Regulação (National Regulation System).




                                                31
                                             ANNEX 3
Performance indicators related to the Variable Part 3 of the OS contracts
Indicator by Dimension                                                                     UC
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) in birth control planning of one woman in fertile age, per       1
year
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) in birth control planning of one woman in fertile age, in        3
                        1
the waiting list for IUD insertion or pre-surgical evaluation for tubal ligation
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) of one pregnancy                                                 8
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) of one child over the first year of life, per year               7
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) of one child over the second year of life, per year              3
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) of one diabetic patient, per year                                4
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) of one hypertensive patient, per year                            2
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) of one tuberculosis patient discharged by cure, per year         8
Follow-up (‘surveillance’) of one leprosy patient discharged by cure, per year             10
Teams with undergraduate students or medical residents (preceptor teams)                   10
                                                                                 2
Family physician registered as the technical responsible at the CREMERJ for                10
the PHC3 unit of work


1. IUD = intra-uterine device. 2. CREMERJ = Conselho Regional de Medicina do Estado do Rio de Janeiro
(Rio de Janeiro State Regional Medicine Council). 3. PHC = primary health care.




                                                   32
This study presents two case studies, each on a current initiative of contracting for primary health
services in Brazil, one for the state of Bahia, the other for the city of Rio de Janeiro. The two initiatives are
not linked and their implementation has independently sprung from a search for more effective ways of
delivering public primary health care. The two models differ considerably in context, needs, modalities,
and outcomes.

This study does not attempt to evaluate the initiatives, but to identify their strengths and weaknesses,
initially by providing a background to universal primary health care in Brazil, paying particular attention to
the Family Health Strategy, the driver of the basic health care model. It then outlines the history of
contracting for health care within Brazil, before analyzing the two studies.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and
the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies
of papers in this series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries
about the series and submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@
worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                                 1818 H Street, NW
                                                                                 Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                                 Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                                 Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                                 Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                                 E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
