                              91324

THE PRODUCTION, DISTRIBUTION, AND
   PERFORMANCE OF PHYSICIANS,
NURSES, AND MIDWIVES IN INDONESIA:
            AN UPDATE
 DISCUSSION PAPER      SEPTEMBER 2014




 Ian Anderson
 Andreasta Meliala
 Puti Marzoeki
 Eko Pambudi
THE PRODUCTION, DISTRIBUTION, AND PERFORMANCE OF
  PHYSICIANS, NURSES, AND MIDWIVES IN INDONESIA:


                          An Update




 Ian Anderson, Andreasta Meliala, Puti Marzoeki and Eko Pambudi




                        September 2014
             Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Global Practice of the World Bank
Group. The papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics
to encourage discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank
Group, to its affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they
represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional
character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor, Martin Lutalo at
mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.
          Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

The Production, Distribution and Performance of Physicians, Nurses and Midwives
                                  in Indonesia:
                                   An Update


Ian Anderson,a Andreasta Meliala,b Puti Marzoeki,c and Eko Pambudic
a
  Ian Anderson, Economics Pty Ltd, Canberra, Australia
b
  Center for Health Service Management, University of Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia
c
  Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice, the World Bank Group, Washington, DC, USA
d



Paper prepared by the World Bank Group and supported by funding from the government of Japan
through the Japan–World Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage (P125669).

Abstract: Indonesia launched the national health insurance program - Jaminan Kesehatan National (JKN)
- on January 1, 2014, and aims to achieve universal health coverage (UHC) by 2019. Achieving UHC
means not only increasing the number of people covered but also expanding the benefits package and
ensuring financial protection. Although the JKN benefits package is comprehensive, a key challenge
related to the capacity to deliver the promised services is ensuring the availability, distribution, and quality
of human resources for health (HRH). Of Indonesia’s 33 provinces, 29 do not have the WHO
recommended ratio of 1 physician per 1,000 population, although Indonesia regularly produces 6,000 to
7,000 new physicians annually. The shortage of nurses in hospitals and health centers (puskesmas) is
noticeable despite the large number of graduates. The government’s health worker contract policy (PTT
[Pegawai Tidak Tetap]) was the main policy lever to improve the distribution of physicians and midwives; it
offered a shorter contract and higher monetary benefits for rural and remote postings. Nevertheless,
evolution of the policy over more than two decades of implementation indicates that the outcome has not
been totally satisfactory and that distribution problems remain. Physician maldistribution has been
particularly affected by the number and concentration of hospitals in urban areas, as well as by
government’s policy of allowing dual practice. Aside from HRH production and distribution figures, key
information on the quality of Indonesian physicians, nurses, and midwives is limited. The latest data from
the 2007 Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS) vignettes, which measured diagnostic and treatment ability,
showed low average scores across these three integral health worker categories. Indonesia is addressing
the quality issue by improving the quality assurance system of health professional education through
school accreditation and graduate certification and by strengthening health professional registration and
recertification systems. With these issues in mind, if Indonesia is to attain UHC by 2019, significant and
concerted effort to improve the availability, distribution, and quality of human resources for health is
required.

Keywords: Universal health coverage, human resources for health, Indonesia health system, health
professional education.

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely those of the
authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they
represent.

Correspondence Details: Puti Marzoeki at pmarzoeki@worldbank.org.
                                                             Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .................................................................................................................................. II
PREFACE...................................................................................................................................................... III
ACRONYMS AND GLOSSARY......................................................................................................................IV
CURRENCIES ................................................................................................................................................V
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY................................................................................................................................VI
   CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND ......................................................................................................................... vi
   PRODUCTION, AVAILABILITY, DISTRIBUTION, AND PERFORMANCE OF HEALTH W ORKERS IN INDONESIA .................. vi
PART 1: CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND ..................................................................................................... 1
   HEALTH W ORKERS AS A DEVELOPMENT ISSUE: THE INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE .............................................. 1
   HEALTH CHALLENGES IN INDONESIA ................................................................................................................ 1
PART 2: THE PRODUCTION, AVAILABILITY, DISTRIBUTION, AND PERFORMANCE OF HEALTH
WORKERS IN INDONESIA............................................................................................................................. 7
   METHOD, APPROACH, AND DATA SOURCES...................................................................................................... 7
   FINDINGS ABOUT PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY ............................................................................................. 8
   FINDINGS ABOUT DISTRIBUTION .................................................................................................................... 16
   FINDINGS ABOUT QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE............................................................................................... 23
   POLICIES, REGULATIONS, AND INCENTIVES IN THE LEAD-UP TO UHC ................................................................ 28
PART 3: CONCLUSION AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS ................................................................................ 38
   CONCLUSION .............................................................................................................................................. 38
   POLICY IMPLICATIONS .................................................................................................................................. 39
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................. 42
                                     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This report is published by the World Bank Office, Jakarta, as part of the Japan–World Bank Partnership
Program for Universal Health Coverage. The Task Team Leader for managing the exercise was Puti
Marzoeki, Senior Health Specialist, World Bank. Original analysis was led by Andreasta Meliala, Center for
Health Service Management, University of Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia. Data management and
analysis was conducted by Ki Hariyadi and Tiara Marthias from University of Gadjah Mada (UGM), and by Eko
Pambudi from the World Bank. Report writing was led by Ian Anderson, Director, Ian Anderson, Economics
Pty Ltd, Canberra, Australia.
Valuable comments on the draft report were received from Ajay Tandon, Senior Economist, World Bank;
Pandu Harimurti, Health Specialist, World Bank; and Darren Dorkin, Senior Operations Officer, World Bank.
The report was peer reviewed by Professor M. Jimba, Department of International Community Health,
Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan; Edson Correia Araujo, Economist, World Bank; and
Christopher Herbst, Health Specialist, World Bank.
The authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP Discussion Paper.
                                              PREFACE

In 2011, Japan celebrated the 50th anniversary of achieving universal health coverage (UHC). To mark the
occasion, the government of Japan and the World Bank conceived the idea of undertaking a multicountry
study to respond to this growing demand by sharing rich and varied country experiences from countries at
different stages of adopting and implementing strategies for UHC, including Japan itself.
This led to the formation of a joint Japan–World Bank research team under the Japan–World Bank Partnership
Program for Universal Health Coverage. The program was set up as a two-year multicountry study to help fill
the gap in knowledge about the policy decisions and implementation processes that countries undertake when
they adopt the UHC goals. The program was funded through the generous support of the government of
Japan.
This country report on Indonesia is one of the 11 country studies on UHC that was commissioned under the
program. The other participating countries are Bangladesh, Brazil, Ethiopia, France, Ghana, Japan, Peru,
Thailand, Turkey, and Vietnam. A synthesis of these country reports is in the publication “Universal Health
Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: A Synthesis of 11 Country Case Studies,” available at
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/uhc-japan.
These reports are intended to provide an overview of the country experiences and some key lessons that may
be shared with other countries aspiring to adopt, achieve, and sustain UHC. The goals of UHC are to ensure
that all people can access quality health services; to safeguard all people from public health risks; and to
protect all people from impoverishment due to illness, whether from out-of-pocket payments or loss of income
when a household member falls sick. Although the path to UHC is specific to each country, it is hoped that
countries can benefit from the experiences of others in learning about different approaches and avoiding
potential risks.
                                          ACRONYMS

Askeskin    Health insurance for the poor (now called Jamkesmas, see below)
HPEQ        Health Professional Education Quality Project (a World Bank–supported government of
            Indonesia project)
IMA         Indonesia Medical Association
IMC         Indonesia Medical Council/KKI
Jamkesmas   Health insurance for the poor and near-poor
LMICs       Lower-middle-income countries. Economies are divided according to 2011 gross national
            income per capita, calculated using the World Bank Atlas Method. The groups are low income,
            $1,025 or less; lower-middle income, $1,026–$4,035; upper-middle income, $4,036–$12,475;
            and high income, $12,476 or more
MoEC        Ministry of Education and Culture
MoH         Ministry of Health
PHO         Provincial Health Office
Puskesmas   Health center at the subdistrict level, part of the primary health care network (Pusat
            Kesehatan Masyarakat)
PPP         Purchasing Power Parity
PTT         Pegawai Tidak Tetap — government’s health worker contract policy
PNS         Pegawai Negeri Sipil — Indonesian civil servant
UHC         Universal Health Coverage
UGM         University of Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia
WHO         World Health Organization
                                                GLOSSARY

Fiscal space is defined as “the capacity of a government to provide additional budgetary resources for a
desired purpose without any prejudice to the sustainability of its fiscal position” (Heller 2005). Fiscal space
exists “when a government has budgetary room to increase spending and can do so without impairing fiscal
solvency: that is, the government’s present and future ability to cover its recurrent expenditures and service its
debt” (Tandon and Cashin 2010).
Universal health coverage is defined as “ensuring that all people can use the promotive, preventive, curative,
rehabilitative, and palliative health services they need, of sufficient quality to be effective, while also ensuring
that the use of these services does not expose the user to financial hardship” (WHO 2013b).
Purchasing power parity is a measurement that seeks to avoid distortions caused by market fluctuations in
exchange rates. PPP recognizes that actual costs in a country may be lower than in another country, so that
the actual purchasing power of the local currency may be higher than might otherwise be the case. PPP often
uses a notional “international dollar” to distinguish it from exchange rate US$.



                                               CURRENCIES

All $ are current United States dollars unless otherwise stated
One US$ = Indonesian rupiah (Rp) 10,200 in August 2013
One Indonesian rupiah = US$0.000098 in August 2013
                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


                                       CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND
Health workers play a critical role in health service delivery but also in the economy more broadly. Despite
significant progress in improving health outcomes, Indonesia still faces some important health sector
challenges. The maternal mortality ratio (MMR) and stunting rates are still high, and there are health outcome
disparities among the provinces and by socioeconomic characteristics. Indonesia aims to achieve universal
health coverage by 2019. This major reform is an opportunity to address existing and future challenges, but
also presents challenges of its own. On the supply side of health services, the production, availability, and
distribution of the health workforce is an important challenge for Indonesia. Economic shocks and other
developments have had implications for health financing, health workers, and the movement to UHC.
The World Bank in collaboration with the Center for Health Service Management, University of Gadjah Mada
(CHSM-UGM) conducted a study in the period October 2012 to August 2013 to update the information on the
production, distribution, and performance of health workers in Indonesia; particularly physicians, nurses, and
midwives. The study comprised literature reviews and reviews of selected previous CHSM-UGM HRH studies,
in depth interviews, and a survey of students from selected medical schools. Secondary data analysis includes
the analysis of PODES (the Village Potential Statistics) 2011; SUSENAS (National Socioeconomic Survey)
2012; Ministry of Health data (Bureau of Personnel estimates (2008-2012), Board of Human Resources for
Health Empowerment and Development [BPPSDM] estimates 2013, RS Online 2013); and was funded
through the Japan–World Bank Partnership Program for Universal Health Coverage.


     PRODUCTION, AVAILABILITY, DISTRIBUTION, AND PERFORMANCE OF HEALTH WORKERS IN
                                        INDONESIA
Production and Availability
Like most developing countries, Indonesia has the challenge of increasing the number of trained health
workers to meet growing demands. Indonesia has been capable of regularly and reliably producing new
physicians from both private and public medical schools. Around 60 percent of graduating physicians are
female; an important characteristic in the context of international experience, but women may be facing
particular barriers to deployment in rural and remote areas. Most of the increase in health workers is now from
an expansion in the number of private medical schools. Despite increases in the supply of physicians, there
are still substantial staffing gaps today. Greater progress has been made with respect to increasing the relative
targets for midwives, but rapid increases are still needed to meet government targets. Ministry of Health (MoH)
estimates that an additional 118,788 health workers were needed at hospitals in 2012. There are also
significant gaps in key health worker positions at the puskesmas level. The shortage of nurses — despite large
numbers of graduates — at hospitals and puskesmas is particularly noticeable and deserves more detailed
analysis. Looking to the future, the current annual increase in the number of physicians seems unlikely to meet
government’s 2019 target of 1 physician per 1,000 population. Workforce numbers will need to adapt to
changes in the size, age, and disease profile of Indonesian society; the movement to UHC; and changes in the
economy over time. The changing disease profile in Indonesia has important implications for the skill mix of
the health workforce, as well as other complementary investments if UHC is to be effective.
Distribution
Maldistribution of health workers is a challenge in virtually all developing countries, including Indonesia. The
central government has implemented an HRH contract policy (PTT, Pegawai Tidak Tetap) to improve the
distribution of health workers, mainly of physicians and midwives. Although the PTT policy has evolved over
time, the distribution problems have remained. Of Indonesia’s 33 provinces. 30 do not have the WHO
recommended ratio of 1 physician per 1,000 population. According to PODES (2011), virtually all villages in
Java have a physician. However the situation is different — and often even reversed — when physicians are
mapped per 100,000 population rather than per village. The wealth and fiscal capacity of a province is not a
good predictor of availability of physicians. The number and location of hospitals is a “pull factor” influencing
the distribution of physicians and specialists in favor of Java. Geographical location of medical schools can
reinforce the urban bias and maldistribution of health workers. Workforce distribution does not appear to be
well aligned to the current national health challenges such as the high MMR. There is also a wide dispersion
in the MMR for a similar availability of midwives. Strengthening the evidence base will help Indonesia plan its
expansion of UHC in a rational and efficient way. Private health providers create both opportunities and risks
for health outcomes and the expansion of UHC. On the other hand, a UGM study found that dual practice also
presents policy and practical challenges, especially when the dual practice system remains largely
unregulated and unsupervised. Furthermore, a UGM study shows that specialist physicians tend to be
associated with private hospitals.
Quality Issues and Performance
Since Indonesia does not have enough health workers, it must ensure it is getting maximum benefit from those
that it does have. The rapid growth of schools raises questions about standardizing the schools’ quality.
Indonesia through the Ministry of Education and Culture (MoEC) is addressing the issue by improving the
quality assurance system of the health professional schools. The recently introduced internship program for
new medical school graduates can potentially enhance the quality of their services, while also improving the
geographical distribution of health workers. Regarding the introduction of national health insurance (JKN) to
attain UHC, the UGM study found that there is a low level of training about UHC in medical schools or
discussion about the implications of UHC for health workers. One UGM study found that the current sources of
income for physicians are fragmented, and income from insurance payment is the smallest.
Government oversight on the private sector is limited despite the growing number of private providers. There is
little knowledge on their number and distribution, and about the scope and quality of their services. The
Indonesian Medical Council (Konsil Kedokteran Indonesia, KKI) has recently set up a comprehensive system
for setting and maintaining the quality assurance of existing physicians, but it would be useful to test this
independently as part of the scale-up of UHC.
The study analyzed immunization patterns as an indicator for assessing health workforce performance and
found negative correlation between immunization coverage and midwife and nurse density per 100,000
population, although midwives/nurses are the main immunization providers at the primary level. This suggests
the need to strengthen workers who do strategic planning to ensure scarce resources are allocated where they
will meet the greatest need; strengthen frontline and supporting health workers who provide the immunization;
and strengthen health workers responsible for supervision, monitoring, evaluation, and accountability.
Policy Implications
In the lead-up to UHC, Indonesia needs to consider moving from norm-based approaches to a labor
market approach to address human resources for health (HRH) issues and to broaden the scope of
health workforce deployment approaches responding to the differing circumstances in Indonesia. The
evolution of the PTT policy indicates that Indonesia has not been totally satisfied with the contract
arrangements; changes have been made quite frequently. The changes and evolution of policy demonstrate
Indonesia’s determination to make improvements and achieve better, fairer results for its people. Decision
making to solve complex HRH issues would benefit from an understanding of health labor market dynamics
influencing health worker supply and demand. Most policy implications illustrated in the paragraphs below are
pieces relevant for a labor market analysis. Moreover, the various stages and changes to the PTT policy have
not been systematically, independently, or rigorously evaluated, so it is not possible to say with confidence
what has worked, in what circumstances, at what cost, and what has not been successful.

There is a need to better understand factors affecting the willingness and ability to move to
underserved areas. The central government allocates about Rp 1.7 trillion (US$1.7 million) under MoH
Regulation 7/2013 as incentive payments for health workers. Physicians may receive an additional US$485
per month for working in remote areas, and an additional US$715 for working in very remote areas, which is
significantly larger than the salaries of their civil servant colleagues in urban areas, who earn approximately
US$205. Local governments may also offer additional incentive payments from their own budgets, up to
US$1,000 extra per month for a physician in Morotai, North Maluku. However, according to the Indonesian
Medical Association financial incentive payments may not be the only — or even the main — factor influencing
health workers’ willingness to transfer to remote locations. Nonmonetary factors influencing their decisions
include lack of ongoing training opportunities for workers; lack of education opportunities for their children;
inability to continue practicing specialized skills; fears of being overlooked for promotion; unhealthy
environments in remote provinces that might affect their families; and lack of security. Earlier studies found
that offering specialist training is enough of an incentive for some physicians from Java to serve in remote
areas, without having to also offer a civil service appointment, although there were problems of cost and
potential inefficiency in such schemes (Chomitz et al. 1998). In sum, there may be other — and less
expensive — ways of encouraging health workers to stay in remote areas other than offering large financial
incentives. Increasing the number of well-conducted trials would provide an evidence base the government
could use to better tailor incentive packages to the real needs of health workers considering postings to
remote locations.

Indonesia may benefit more from diverse deployment policies rather than monolithic or “one size fits
all” approaches. Indonesia is a large country spread over 17,000 islands with 33 provinces and
approximately 500 districts. It has enormous variety within its borders, ranging from densely populated urban
cities in the island of Java to sparsely populated rural and remote islands of Nusa Tenggara Timur (NTT) and
Maluku. UHC implies a degree of equity and equality for all citizens, but this does not necessarily mean a
single or small choice of instruments to expand insurance coverage, as tends to occur with the single contract
regulation strategy (PTT) applied across all of Indonesia.

On the one hand, Indonesia should not introduce further fragmentation of the health system, but on
the other, there is an argument for Indonesia to trial different approaches to incentivize health
providers. This would include different ways of paying — and supporting — health professionals who are
better tailored to the particular social, health, and economic characteristics of differing districts and regions
within Indonesia. There is room — and need — to trial other staff deployment approaches.

Indonesia could, and should, experiment with different mixes of physicians, nurses, midwives, and
community health workers to find a combination that generates best the health outcomes for the
lowest cost. This might be done through task shifting, for example, allowing nurses and midwives to prescribe
certain essential drugs if no physician is available, or through other mechanisms. It would also be useful to
systematically assess the cost-effectiveness of expanding UHC to remote and marginalized communities. In
some cases, policy makers might find that expanding public services to remote areas is more cost-effective
than expanding services in urban areas. That is because while the costs of reaching more remote
communities may be higher than in nearby urban areas, the actual disease burden in remote areas might be
much larger than in urban areas. In such circumstances, allocating resources to remote and rural areas would
cost more, but would have a bigger impact than allocating resources to urban areas, where private sector
services are already dominant. Much depends upon the actual situation and context. Good quality research
can help policy makers allocate scarce resources according to their best use.

There is a need to better understand the overlaps, gaps, and potential inconsistencies between the
different health workforce regulations among various agencies.                    There are many institutional
stakeholders issuing regulations about how and where health workers ultimately perform their duties. At the
national level these institutions include the Ministry of Education and Culture (which has responsibility for
producing the medical staff), the Ministry of Home Affairs (responsible for hiring policy), the Ministry of Finance
(responsible for payment policy), and the Ministry of Health (responsible for using health workers). Local
governments must also abide by strong powers and regulations that affect the hiring and placement of health
workers, as well as the financial flows to hospitals and health centers. Each professional association also has
its own policies and regulations, which affect its members, including those for physicians, nurses, and
midwives. The end result is that policies and regulations are complex, lack coherence, and blur lines of
accountability and responsibility. There would be advantages in rationalizing, simplifying, and unifying the
regulations, while at the same time providing scope for regulations to adapt to local needs and circumstances.

More systematic monitoring and impact evaluation is essential for future policy development if
Indonesia is to receive the best return from its health expenditure in the lead-up to UHC. The central
message of World Health Report 2013 is that achieving UHC requires applied research and a good evidence
base. Given scarce health resources, proper, well-designed, systematic monitoring and impact evaluation
should be undertaken to generate an evidence base for future investments in alternative approaches.
Importantly, well-conducted impact evaluations that generate insights and new lessons could quickly become
“global public goods,” read and used to influence policy around the world. Indonesia could be a major opinion
maker and global “thought leader” in how to scale up UHC in a decentralized setting if it invested more in basic
applied research.

Indonesia may benefit from other countries’ experiences in implementing various health worker
distribution strategies. A recent study of scaling up UHC in 11 countries, including Indonesia, noted various
policies aimed at improving distribution of health workers, including to remote and rural areas (World Bank
2013a). Strategies included “recruiting students from underserved areas, encouraging their enrollment through
scholarships, setting quotas in schools, ensuring that curricula include rural service components, and offering
monetary and nonmonetary support for career development. Compulsory service through bonding is also
common policy for deployment in underserved areas. Another important strategic approach is to invest in
primary care workers, both because investments in the hospital sector tend to skew the health workforce
distribution toward urban areas and because investments in these health workers have additional benefits for
health outcomes” (Ibid.).
                          PART 1: CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND
HEALTH WORKERS AS A DEVELOPMENT ISSUE: THE INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
1.1. Achieving good health is a central issue in international development. At the global level, three of
     the eight Millennium Development Goals are directly health related, and each of these interacts with the
                        1
     other key goals. At the national level, good health has the potential to improve a country’s productivity
     and international competitiveness. This includes better learning outcomes for students, reduced
     absenteeism for workers, improvements in the size and structure of a nation’s population, the potential for
     “demographic dividends,” and avoidance of subsequent health costs to governments through effective
     health promotion programs (WHO, Commission on Macroeconomics and Health 2001; Dodd and Cassels
     2006; Spence and Lewis 2009; Bloom and Williamson 1998). At the household level, good health
     facilitates individuals reaching their full social and economic potential and averts preventable — and
     sometimes impoverishing — out-of-pocket, health-related costs (Xu 2003; Yates 2009). Improved
     maternal nutrition can help break the cycle of ill health and reduced productivity in the next generation
     (Adair et al. 2013; Barker 1990; Bhutta 2013).

1.2. Health workers play a critical role in delivery of health services, as well as in the economy more
                                                                                          2
     broadly. WHO specifically states that human resources for health are one of six key components or
     building blocks of a well-functioning health system (WHO 2010). International literature confirms the
     importance of health workers as key components of health services, but notes the common problem of
     maldistribution of health workers (Rowe et al. 2005; Willis-Shattuck et al. 2008; Kanchanachitra et al.
     2011; Chen et al. 2004; Fritzen 2007; Dussault and Franceschini 2006; Beaglehole and Dal Poz 2003).
     WHO estimated in 2006 that there was a global shortage of approximately 4.3 million health workers.
     They estimated that 57 countries around the world had a critical shortage of health workers, defined as
     having fewer than 2.3 health care professionals (physicians, nurses, and midwives) per 1,000 population,
     normally required to achieve 80 percent coverage of basic health services. While the greatest relative
     shortages were in Sub-Saharan Africa, the greatest absolute shortages were in Asia and especially in
     Bangladesh, India, and Indonesia (WHO 2006). The number and nature of health workers also has
     broader fiscal and macroeconomic implications for countries. Expanding the number of health workers
     can provide significant labor- and skill- intensive employment opportunities including for females in the
     formal sector, which in turn can increase incomes, consumption, savings, and income tax revenue. On
     the other hand, large and growing numbers of health workers can put additional strains on public health
     budgets, squeezing out expenditure on drugs and other necessary expenditure. Some countries,
     including lower-middle-income countries such as Indonesia, experience a Baumol Effect: rising costs
     (including wages) in the health sector that are not accompanied by productivity increases (Hartwig 2008;
     Baumol 2012). This can occur when wages in manufacturing and other sectors of the economy increase
     as a result of productivity increases in those sectors. The wage increases then flow across to the health
     sector and other service sectors of the economy where it is sometimes harder to achieve or demonstrate
     productivity increases (Clements et al. 2011). Aside from HRH numbers and distribution, HRH quality is a
     critical element for health service delivery. The quality of preservice and continuing education of those
     already in the workforce is often a challenge for many countries.

HEALTH CHALLENGES IN INDONESIA

1.3. Despite significant progress in improving health outcomes, Indonesia still faces some important
     challenges. Indonesia has achieved substantial and sustained progress in increasing life expectancy and

1. Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 4, 5, and 6 aim to reduce child mortality, maternal mortality, and communicable
diseases, respectively. These three MDG goals interact with other MDG goals including reducing poverty and
undernutrition (MDG 1); improved education and gender equity (MDGs 2 and 3, respectively); and improved water and
sanitation (MDG 7).
2. The six key components of a well-functioning health system are leadership and governance, health information systems,
health financing, human resources for health, essential medical products and technologies, and service delivery.



                                                           1
          reducing child mortality (World Bank 2009). Despite improvements, maternal mortality is high and
          undernutrition remains a persistent problem: approximately one-third of children are stunted (World Bank
          2013b). Moreover, there are large health outcome disparities among provinces, and by socioeconomic
          characteristics. Health outcomes are lower in the Eastern provinces, such as Papua and West Papua,
          North Maluku, and Maluku; in rural areas; and in the lowest wealth quintile. For example, child mortality in
          most Western provinces is less than 10 per 1,000 live births. The level is about 2.5 times higher in
          Maluku and North Maluku; while in Papua, it is 6.5 times higher. Urban child mortality is two-thirds of rural
          child mortality; while child mortality in the highest wealth quintile is about a third of that in the lowest
          quintile (IDHS 2012).

1.4. Demographic and epidemiologic challenges are substantial. Indonesia has a large population (246
     million), spread across more than 900 islands, 3 from densely populated Java to the sparsely populated
     outer islands. The population is ageing with a growing number of people in the 55-to-74 age group.
     Indonesia has not yet completed the epidemiological transition: stroke is now the leading cause of
     premature death in Indonesia, but tuberculosis ranks second. Five of the top ten causes of premature
                                                                                                   4
     death in Indonesia are still communicable or maternal-related, and four are noncommunicable (IHME
     2013). More than one-third of male NCD deaths, and more than one-quarter of female noncommunicable


  , now

  Box 1.1 Indonesia Health Development Progress — and Challenges

  “Since the 1970s, the government has constructed more than 9,000 public health centers (puskesmas),
  22,000 auxiliary health centers (pustu), and more than 450 public hospitals. As of 2005, these public
  facilities alone employed about 415,000 people. Approximately 6 percent of all Indonesian civil servants
  are health workers. The private health sector grew even faster during the period, in part as a result of
  government policies allowing public health sector workers to work part-time as private providers, a
  practice generally referred to as Indonesia’s ‘legal dual practice.’ In international comparisons, however,
  Indonesia’s ratios of physicians and health workers, as well as hospital beds, to population are low. The
  number of hospital beds per 1,000 population is one of the lowest in the East Asia and Pacific region,
  lower even than those of countries with much lower income, such as the Lao People’s Democratic
  Republic and Vietnam. On a global scale, Indonesia has significantly fewer beds than other countries of
  a similar income level” (World Bank, 2010).



          disease (NCD) deaths, are premature: below age 60 (WHO 2011). Indonesia has to confront the rise of
          road injuries — now the third-leading cause of premature death — and newly emerging diseases
          including H5N1.




3. Indonesia has more than 17,000 islands; approximately 922 are inhabited.
4. In order of rank of importance they are stroke, tuberculosis, road injury, diarrheal diseases, ischemic heart disease,
lower respiratory infections, diabetes, neonatal encephalopathy, preterm birth complications, and cirrhosis.



                                                             2
           Figure 1.1 Total Expenditure on Health as Percentage of GDP

                                         Total health expenditure, 1995-2011

                8
                7
                6   5                                             East Asia Pasific region




                                             Lower middle income countries
            % of GDP
                4




                                                                                   Total health expenditure
           3    2




                               Public health expenditure
                1
                0




                        1995           1998                2001         2004                 2007             2010
                                                                    year
                         Source : WDI 2013




1.5. Indonesia has distinctive health financing arrangements. As shown in figure 1.1 above, total health
     expenditure (public and private) in Indonesia has been significantly and consistently lower as a
     percentage of GDP than in other lower-middle-income countries globally, or in other neighboring
     countries in the region. Table 1.1 shows that key health outcomes in Indonesia tend to be better than for
     other lower-middle-income countries, but not as strong as in other neighboring countries in Asia.


Table 1.1 Selected Socioeconomic, Health Outcomes, and Health Expenditure Data
 Selected Indicators                                       Indonesi       All lower-                                                  East Asia
                                                                   a middle-income                                                   and Pacific
                                                              (2011)      countries                                                  developing
                                                                     globally (2011)                                                  countries
                                                                                                                                          (2011)
 Socioeconomic data
 GDP per capita (current US$)                                                                                        3,471   1,890        4,693
 GDP per capita (PPP) current international dollars                                                                  4,615   3,795        7,283
 GDP per capita growth (annual %)                                                                                      5.1     3.9          7.5
 Health outcomes
 Life expectancy at birth (total) years                                                                               69.3    65.7         72.4
 Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)                                                                    31.8    63.0         21.0
 Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)                                                                        24.8    47.0         17.0
 Health expenditure
 Total health expenditure as % GDP                                                                                    2.71    4.26          4.84
 Public health expenditure as % GDP                                                                                   0.92    1.54          2.63
 Public health expenditure as % of government expenditure                                                              5.3     7.6         -54.3
 Public expenditure as % of total health expenditure                                                                  34.1    36.4
 Out-of-pocket health expenditure as % total health expenditure                                                       49.8    55.3         35.9
 Per capita government health expenditure at average exchange                                                           30      27           21
 rate (US$) in 2010 (WHO 2013d)
 Per capita government health expenditure (PPP) international                                                          44      55            43
 dollars in 2010 (WHO 2013d)
Source: World Bank 2013c.




                                                                                         3
                                       1.6. Table 1.1 also shows that absolute and relative levels of
Box 1.2 The Evolution of Policies      expenditure on health are generally low compared to Indonesia’s
and Programs toward Universal          peer countries. WHO estimates that per capita government
Health Coverage in Indonesia           expenditure on health was US$30 in Indonesia in 2010. Private
                                       out-of-pocket expenditure (OOPE) is still the dominant source of
In 2001 government introduced          health expenditure in Indonesia, accounting for nearly half (49.8
the Fuel Tax Compensation              percent) of total health expenditure. Of that private expenditure,
Scheme to compensate the poor          only 4 percent is covered by prepaid plans. Importantly, high
for the reduction of fuel subsidies.   absolute and relative levels of annual OOPE on health occur for
                                       those with, and without, health insurance coverage. Indeed, those
 In 2005 government introduced         with insurance coverage tend to pay more OOPE on health as a
the Askeskin program of health         share of household consumption than those with no insurance
                                       coverage. This is shown in figure 1.2 below. High levels of out-of-
care financing for the poor. In
                                       pocket expenditure have adverse consequences for access,
2007 this was expanded to cover        equity, and even possible impoverishment in Indonesia, especially
the near-poor and renamed              when 43 percent of the population live on less than US$2 a day
Jamkesmas.     This now covers         PPP (World Bank 2013c).
around 76.4 million poor and
near-poor beneficiaries, or almost                           Figure 1.2 OOP Expenditure by Insurance Type
a third of Indonesia’s population.
However this still leaves about                                                                      All
two-thirds of the population                                   OOP health spending per capita                                   OOP share of household consumption
                                                 500000




without coverage. Even those




                                                                                                                            3
with coverage have to pay out of
                                                                                         $45

pocket for essential care. Benefit
                                                 400000




packages are broadly appropriate,
but there are constraints in terms


                                                                                                                            2
                                                   300000




                                                                                                           Percentage (%)
of the quantity and quality of
                                               Rupiah




services being provided in                                     $22
                                         200000




practice.                                                                  $18                                              1


The Jamkesmas program is fully
                                                 100000




financed    out     of   central
government      revenues    and
absorbs about a quarter of the
                                                 0




                                                                                                                            0




central   government’s   annual                             No insurance Jamkesmas Other insurance
                                                                 Type of insurance coverage
                                                                                                                                No insurance Jamkesmas Other insurance
                                                                                                                                     Type of insurance coverage
health budget.
                                       Source: SUSENAS, 2011

The Jamkesmas program is               1.7. Indonesia is expanding universal health coverage; this is an
expected to be merged into a           opportunity to address existing and future challenges, but brings
single payer universal health          challenges of its own. The goal of universal health coverage
coverage social insurance system       (UHC) is “to ensure that all people obtain the health services they
by 2014.                               need without suffering financial hardship when paying for them”
                                       (WHO 2013b). A government-financed health insurance program
                                       for the poor and near-poor, called Jamkesmas (previously called
                                       Askeskin), has been managed and financed by the Ministry of
                                       Health since it became operational in 2005. It currently provides
Source: World Bank 2013b.              coverage to more than 76 million people in Indonesia. Jamkesmas
                                       is to be integrated and merged with all other social insurance
                                       programs under a single-payer umbrella by 2014 (see box 1.2).
                                       Jamkesmas has both strengths on which to build, and areas for
                                       improvement, as Indonesia moves to increase the breadth
                                       (population covered), depth (scope of services covered), and



                                                                4
     height(level of financial protection) of UHC. As noted in a recent analysis of Jamkesmas (World Bank
     2013b):

1.8. On the positive side, about 40 percent of poor and near-poor households are covered under the program,
     outpatient and inpatient utilization rates have increased among program cardholders, levels of
     catastrophic payments have declined, and there is generally a positive perception with regard to the
     program among those who are enrolled. There is increasing participation of the private providers under
     Jamkesmas, and more than 300 complementary local Jamkesmas-inspired programs have been initiated
     across the country. On the negative side, there is evidence of high levels of mistargeting and leakages to
     the non-poor, low levels of socialization and awareness of benefits, low utilization and relatively low
     quality of care, regional inconsistencies in the availability of the basic benefits package, relatively shallow
     levels of financial protection, and poor accountability and feedback mechanisms.


          Table 1.2 Health Workforce per 1,000 Population 2005–12, International Comparison
       Country or region                 Physicians              Nursing and                Pharmacists 5
                                                              midwifery personnel



 India                                         0.65                         1.00                   0.54
            6
 Indonesia                                     0.20                         1.38                   0.10
 Malaysia                                      1.20                         3.28                   0.31
 Philippines                                   1.03                         5.55                   0.62
 Thailand                                      0.40                         2.15                   0.13
 Vietnam                                       1.22                         1.00                   0.07
 WHO South-East Asia                           0.55                         0.99                   0.42
 Region
 Lower-middle      income                      0.78                         1.34                   0.44
 countries globally
 Source: WHO 2013d.

1.9. The production, availability, distribution, and quality of the health workforce are also challenges
     for Indonesia. Table 1.2 above shows the availability of key members of the health workforce for
     Indonesia and comparable countries (public and private). While this table should be interpreted with
              7
     caution, it does tend to confirm the view that Indonesia has a shortage of key health workers, especially
     physicians and pharmacists. The distribution of health workers (geographically, as well as by levels of
     care) is also a challenge, as discussed in the next section. The success or otherwise of UHC will be partly
     dependent upon the actual number, location, skill level, skill mix, and supervisory arrangements of health
     workers in Indonesia over the coming years. The most recent information on health workforce quality is
     the 2007 Indonesia Family Life Survey, which includes a vignette study to assess the quality of
     physicians, nurses, and midwives. The percentage of correct responses to the vignette questions for the
     three groups of providers was poor: 45 percent for antenatal care, 62 percent for child curative care, and
     57 percent for adult curative care (World Bank 2010).

1.10.    Despite the rapid growth of service provision by the private sector, oversight by the public
     sector remains limited. Physicians providing private services have increased by 48 percent during


5. As noted in paragraph 2.3, this report focuses on physicians, nurses, and midwives. However, WHO estimates are
available for pharmacists in Indonesia and other countries and have therefore been included in this instance.
6. MoH reported 0.46 physicians per 1,000 in 2013 based on physicians registered with the KKI (Indonesian Medical
Council), see also table 2.1.
7. The estimates cover a wide period, 2005–12; they include richer countries including Malaysia; other countries do not
have the same geographical spread and number of islands as Indonesia.



                                                          5
     1996–2006 (World Bank 2010). It is known that many public health providers, particularly physicians and
     midwives also have their own private practice. There is little knowledge about the number and distribution
     of private providers, how many hours they work, or the scope and quality of their services.

1.11.     Economic shocks and other developments had implications for health financing, health
     workers, and the movement to UHC. Economic pressures and external shocks have affected the
     government’s capacity to finance health and other sectors over the recent decades. Among other things,
                                                                                                   8
     government applied a zero-growth policy on civil service numbers in the early 1990s. However to
     mitigate adverse effects on access to medical care, it allowed the growth of private schools; legalized
     dual practice (individuals could work simultaneously in the public and private sectors since the early
     1970s government salaries were recognized to be low); and liberalized hospital ownership. Political and
     economic pressures led to a rapid rollout of fiscal decentralization from 1999 onwards, offering the
     possibility of more localized responsiveness and accountability, but also causing the fragmentation of
     financing sources. Although the decentralization policy devolved health service delivery authority and
     responsibilities to local governments, these have limited authority in managing staff. Local governments
     can propose recruitment of new staff, but staff hiring and firing remains with the central government. The
     fiscal transfer formula from the central to the local government contains staff salaries; therefore, local
     governments have little incentive to introduce staffing efficiency. Natural disasters have increased the
     demand for health workers, at least in the short term. All of these factors have influenced the evolution of
     health insurance for the poor in Indonesia and the movement toward UHC.




8. Data on the trends of PNS (Pegawai Negeri Sipil or civil servant) and PTT (Pegawai Tidak Tetap or contract) physicians
since the introduction of the zero-growth policy to assess the impact of the policy will not be available until the report is
finalized.



                                                              6
      PART 2: THE PRODUCTION, AVAILABILITY, DISTRIBUTION, AND
         PERFORMANCE OF HEALTH WORKERS IN INDONESIA
                                  METHOD, APPROACH, AND DATA SOURCES

2.1. New quantitative and qualitative research was undertaken in Indonesia over the October 2012 to August
2013 period to inform the production, availability, distribution, and performance of health workers in Indonesia.
The World Bank contracted researchers at the Center for Health Service Management at Gadjah Mada
University (UGM), Yogjakarta, to conduct the study financed by the Japan–World Bank Partnership Program
for Universal Health Coverage. UGM undertook literature reviews, review of MoH HRH documents and
presentations, and engaged with a range of key stakeholders in Indonesia. This included a survey with four
               9
representative medical schools to assess willingness to serve in rural areas, interviews with policy makers,
and interviews with the professional associations. Other studies conducted by UGM and used in this report are
a study of internship in collaboration with the Ministry of Health in 2013; and a study of medical fees conducted
in 2006 for the Indonesian Medical Association.
Secondary data analysis includes the analysis of PODES (the Village Potential Statistics) 2011; SUSENAS
(National Socioeconomic Survey) 2012; Ministry of Health data (Bureau of Personnel estimates (2008-2012),
Board of Human Resources for Health Empowerment and Development [BPPSDM] estimates 2013, RS
Online 2013).
2.2. There are strengths and limitations to the approach taken. One strength of the approach is that the
data generated are up to date, including some as recent as August 2013. Further, systematic efforts were
made to reduce potential bias: universities selected were both public and private, and from Java as well as
outside Java. Although up to date, much of the data were drawn from multiple sources, which were not
specifically designed for this study. It was often difficult to obtain data disaggregated by gender or wealth
quintiles.

2.3. The scope of the analysis extended to the public and private sectors. That is particularly important
and relevant given the movement to UHC, and the prominent role of the private sector in all aspects of the
health sector in Indonesia (health professional schools, hospitals, employment of health workers). The
definition of health workers was confined to physicians, nurses, midwives, and six categories of specialist
doctors (anesthesia specialist, internal medicine specialist, obstetrician/gynecologist (OB/GYN), pediatrician,
radiologist, and surgeon), where statistical data were readily available. Lack of readily available data meant
that this study could not extend to community health workers, traditional healers, or other ancillary health
workers. 10




9. Four medical schools were purposively selected for the study; these include one older (pre-1997) public university
(Gadjah Mada University/UGM in Yogyakarta), one new public university (Universitas Tanjung Pura in West Kalimantan),
one older private college (Universitas Maranatha in West Java), and one new private college (Universitas Muhammadiyah
Yogyakarta). All final semester students in each medical school were given a self-administered questionnaire to assess
their willingness to serve in remote areas.
10. WHO takes a very broad definition of the health workforce, namely “all people engaged in actions whose primary intent
is to enhance health” (http://www.who.int/topics/health_workforce/en/). This report accepts that definition. However, there
was limited statistical and other data on the stock, location, and trends of community health workers and other health
workers in Indonesia. They were therefore excluded from the original scope of analysis.



                                                            7
                              FINDINGS ABOUT PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY 11

2.4. Like most developing countries, Indonesia faces the challenge of increasing the number of trained health
workers to meet growing demands. A very recent global study of scaling up UHC confirmed that all nine
developing countries, including Indonesia, face the challenge of increasing the stock of trained health workers
                                                                                (World Bank 2013a). The study
                                                                                estimated that Indonesia would
                                                                                need to increase the stock of
                                                                                health workers by 78 percent
                                                                                from current levels if it is to reach
                                                                                the WHO global recommended
                                                                                target of 2.28 trained health
                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                workers per 1,000 by 2035.
                                                                                Indonesia has demonstrably
                                                                                increased the number of health
                                                                                workers over time (see next
                                                                                paragraph), but these efforts
                                                                                need to be accelerated even
                                                                                further.
                                                                                Government documents
                                                                                (Government of Indonesia 2011)
                                                                                and World Bank reports found
                                                                                that lndonesia had considerably
                                                                                smaller physicians to population
                                                                                ratios than other East Asian
                                                                                neighbors such as Philippines
                                                                                               13
                                                                                and Malaysia, or even lower-
                                                                                income countries such as
                                                                                Vietnam and Cambodia (Rokx et
al. 2009). This is also confirmed by latest estimates from WHO (see table 1.2 in the preceding chapter).
Nevertheless, Wofrld Bank reports also noted that lndonesia has increased its capacity to produce health
workers during the last two decades. The latest information from the Directorate General of Higher Education,
MoEC, is that there are 72 schools of medicine; 27 dentistry schools; 728 midwifery schools (three-year
course); and 733 nursing schools (of which 368 schools provide a vocational nurse training, and 385 provide
                                                                                      14
professional nurse training). This represents a large increase over previous years. Furthermore, the number
of private health providers grew dramatically in lndonesia since the legalization of dual practice, liberalization
of hospital ownership, the introduction of a zero-growth policy on civil service numbers, and the passing of
decentralization legislation in 1999.


2.5. Indonesia has been capable of regularly, and reliably, producing new physicians from both
private and public medical schools. This came to a peak in the period 2008–10 when production was
                                15
approximately 9,000 physicians.    The sourcing mix has changed noticeably over that period with private


11 The term “availability” refers to the stock of health workers or the number of health workers employed.
12. This compares to an increase of 221 percent for Ghana, 33 percent for Peru, and 19 percent for Vietnam, the other
countries grouped with Indonesia in this particular study.
13. 21 physicians per 100,000 in Indonesia compared with 58 in the Philippines and 70 in Malaysia.
14. Rokx et al. (2009) note that in the 1990s there were 183 Sekolah Perawat Kesehatan (SPK) and 76 diploma nursing
schools. By 2008 there were some 682 nursing schools in total, producing some 34,000 nurses each year. There were
also 52 medical schools producing an average of 5,000 new medical doctors each year, and 465 midwifery schools
producing 10,000 midwives.
15. The apparent spike in the number of private medical students in 2009 is not easy to explain, nor the return in 2010 to
more normal levels. Investigation suggests it might simply be the result of chance: more schools that happen to upload


                                                             8
medical schools providing an average of 63 percent of the graduating physicians in the last three years. This is
clear from figure 2.1 above.

2.6. Most of the increase in health workers is a result of the expansion in the number of private
medical schools. There has long been a shortage of medical schools in Indonesia, which created a
bottleneck in terms of producing new health workers. For example, in 2003–04 medical schools received more
than 80,000 applications, though they only had capacity to accept 4,700 new students (World Bank 2010).
However as seen in figure 2.2, the number of medical schools has increased from 40 schools in 2001 to 72
schools in2011: an increase of 80 percent during the last 10 years. Of those 72 schools, about 60 percent are
private medical schools. The number of midwifery and nursing schools has also increased. Establishment of
private medical schools relieves pressure on government budgets, particularly in terms of investing in new
schools in urban areas, thereby freeing up public resources that can be used to expand services in poorer and
more remote areas. On the other hand, the growth of private schools also has the potential to offer higher
salaries to senior and experienced lecturers, attracting them away from the public sector schools or forcing
salaries there to increase. It should also be noted that, with the passing of the new Medical Education Law
(Law no. 20/2013), higher and more rigorous standards apply for establishing a new medical school. This may
                                                                           have the effect of slowing the
     Figure 2.2 Number of Medical Schools in Indonesia 2001–11             growth of medical schools —
                                                                           particularly the smaller ones — as
                 Number of medical schools in Indonesia                    a higher level of inputs is now
                                  2000-2011                                required to establish each school.
                                            100




                                                                                       80
                                                                           It is intended that the new law will
      Shared public/private medical school (%)




                                                                           also help raise the quality of all
                                                                 73
                                                                           medical schools. How the rapid
                                     80




                           Private school                   71
                                                      70
                                                                           increase in the number of medical
                                                                                                        70
                                                 67
                                                                                       # medical schools
                                                                           schools might affect quality and
                             60




                                                                           standards      more     broadly  is
                                                                           discussed in paragraphs 2.33 to
                                                                                              60



                                                                           2.34.
                    40




                                                            52   52   52
                                                                                       50




                                                       48                     2.7. Despite increases in the
            20




                                                                       Public school
                                                  45                          supply of physicians, there are
                   43
                                                                              still substantial staffing gaps
          40
                                                                              today. Table 2.1 below shows the
                                                                                       40
     0




         2001            2003            2005         2007    2009 2011       progress Indonesia has made in
                                                 Year                         increasing     the    number       of
          Source : Higher Education - HPEQ, 2013                              physicians. The data sources for
                                                                              the number of physicians are
    PODES (the Village Potential Statistics) and KKI (Indonesian Medical Council). PODES data represent the
    number of physicians living in the village as reported by the village head, while KKI data represent the
                                                           16
    number of physicians registered at the KKI. According to PODES, the number of physicians increased by
    5,643, or 14 percent, between 2005 and 2011, or a marginal increase of physicians from 0.184 to 0.190 in
    1,000 population in 2011. KKI data provide higher numbers; an increase of physicians by 41,253 or 57
    percent during the 2007–13 period, or an increase of physicians from 0.32 to 0.46 in 1,000 population. In
    any case, the increase has barely kept pace with population growth; policies to date have increased the
    absolute numbers of physicians, but not sufficiently improved the relative position of physicians compared
    to the total needs of the population. There is a large gap to fill if Indonesia is to reach the target of 0.96
    (general practitioners) GPs per 1,000 population by 2019, and 1.12 per 1,000 by 2025, as set by the Board
    of Human Resources for Health Empowerment and Development (BPPSDM), MoH.

data for that year. If so, there would be value in reviewing and further cleansing the Higher Education Data Base, now and
in the future, as evidence-based policy requires sound data.
16. PODES data may be an underestimate because of inadequate quality of village level-data, but it does show trends by
village, while KKI (Indonesian Medical Council) data may be an overestimate because not all registered physicians are
actively working as physicians.



                                                                                   9
                                                                2.8. Estimating health worker needs based on
Box 2.1 Health Labor Market Approach for Addressing             health worker-to-population ratio is often done,
Health Worker Deployment and Performance                        but may not reflect the need to provide access
Challenges                                                      to health workers in rural and remote areas
                                                                where health workers are mostly needed.
Rural deployment and retention of human resources for           Scaling up the number of health workers may
health (HRH) remains a critical challenge for Indonesia.        not be enough to solve HRH availability and
However, to date, the approaches used by the government         distribution problems. In reality, health workers
to plan for HRH production and recruitment remain               respond to health labor market changes
largely norm-based, such as estimation of shortfalls based      influencing health worker demand and supply.
on standard HRH-population ratios. For a variety of             A labor market analysis may help policy
reasons, norm-based analyses of HRH challenges are not          makers in developing appropriate strategies to
                                                                address HRH availability and distribution
ideal as the policy implications derived from such
                                                                problems (see box 2.1). It would be important,
assessments suggest that increased production of workers
                                                                for example, to analyze the supply and demand
may be all it takes to remove any HRH shortfalls. In this       of medical education to understand actual
regard, labor market approaches provide a far richer and        capacity to scale up production, and also to
deeper perspective to addressing HRH challenges than            know exactly where graduating doctors are
norm-based assessments. For example, taking a labor             being employed.
market perspective to HRH challenges implies an
assessment of whether health worker shortages are due to
insufficient production capacity alone or are a result of
unattractive wages, inadequate financing of facilities, lack
of nonpecuniary benefits, or other factors including
potential labor market–clearing rigidities. It is important
to combine current norm-based planning tools with
analyses of labor market dynamics to better understand
the interaction between the supply and demand of health
workers. The health labor market influences wages and
other benefits and can also help policy makers better
understand geographic movements of health workers and
choices related to place of employment (hospital versus
puskesmas, public versus private providers). For example,
physicians often prefer to be specialists rather than general
practitioners, to engage in dual practice, and to seek urban
locations that have higher numbers of private health
facilities. Analyses of health labor markets also influences
the production of health workers through supply
considerations (for example, cost of providing training,
admission slots, and type of specialization that can be
offered) and the demand for training (number of
applicants, tuition charges, and expected wages) (WHO
2012). It should be noted that market failures can often fail
to produce the optimal number and placement of health
workers, and that policies to improve labor market
outcomes should take the interaction of demand and
supply into consideration and not focus solely on norm-
based assessments (World Bank 2013 [[2013a, b, c, or d?]]).




                                                         10
Table 2.1 Total Number and Ratio of Physicians per 1,000 Population (2007–13)

   Source                     Total Physicians                           Ratio per 1,000 Population
                     2008           2011            2013            2008              2011          2013
   PODES            44,367         45,291                                             0.192
                                                                    0.184
     KKI            72,249                        113,502            0.32                           0.46
                    (2007)                                         (2007)
Source: PODES 2008 and 2011; KKI 2007 and 2013.

2.9. Greater progress has been made with respect to increasing the relative targets for midwives, but rapid
increases are still needed to meet government targets. Table 2.2 shows that the total number of midwives has
increased by more than 37,000 from around 80,000 to almost 116,000 or a 45 percent increase. This increase
has been faster than the increase in the total population. As a result, the ratio of midwives to the population
has improved noticeably from 0.37 in 2005 to 0.49 in 2011. However, this requires still faster increases if
Indonesia is to achieve the BPPSDM target of 0.75 midwives per 1,000 population in 2014 and beyond. As
discussed in the previous paragraph, the government may benefit from a labor market analysis to guide
midwife recruitment and deployment strategies.

Table 2.2 Changes in Numbers and Ratio to Population of Midwives in Indonesia


                           2005                             2008                         2011
               Number          Ratio/1,000          Number       Ratio/1,000     Number      Ratio/1,000
Population   216,122,506                          231,484,133                  238,618,143
Midwives       79,661             0.369             97,976         0.423         115,948       0.486
Source: PODES 2005, 2008, 2011.

2.10.     MOH estimates that an additional 118,788 health workers were needed at hospitals in 2012.
The shortage is calculated based on unfilled positions. As figure 2.3 below shows, the largest shortfall was
nurses: 87,874 additional nurses, or 74 percent of the total shortfall, were needed at hospital level. The
second-largest cohort gap to be filled at hospitals was midwives: 15,311, or 12 percent of the total shortfall,
were needed in 2012 before minimum staffing levels could be met across Indonesia. As noted previously the
absolute number of physicians and midwives has increased since 2005. However, in the case of physicians,
this has barely kept pace with the population growth to date. There have been modest gains in the number of
midwives compared to population growth. Modeling projections about the total number of health workers that
might be needed in future, taking into account population growth and the changing burden of disease, are
discussed in paragraph 2.14 and 2.15 below.




                                                       11
             Figure 2.3 Shortage of Health Workers at Hospital Level in 2012
                               (based on unfilled posts)
                                             Shortage of health workers at hospital level in 2012

                         Nurse                                                                      8787

                        Midwife                     15311

                            GP           3309

                    Pharmacist           2621

                   Pediatriciant       1382

                       Surgeon         1357

                       Internist       1295

                        Ob-gyn         1287

                    Radiologist        1261

                        Dentist        1144

              Dentist specialist       874

           Anesthesia specialist       624

                Physiotherapist        449



                                   0               20,000    40,000           60,000       80,000
                                                          Number of shortage HRH
                                   Source : BPPSDM-MoH, 2013



2.11.      Significant gaps also exist in key health worker positions at the puskesmas level. More
specifically, there are an estimated 45,350 health worker positions that need to be filled in 2012 at puskesmas
level. Similar to the situation in hospitals, the largest shortfall occurs among nurses, as shown in figure 2.4. An
estimated 10,146 extra nurses are needed at primary health care level, or 22 percent of the total shortfall. This
is important because achieving UHC involves promotive and preventive services, and not just curative care.
Promotive and preventive care, including antenatal care and immunization programs, is often best done in
primary health care settings. Indonesia is potentially well placed to capitalize on its 150 schools of public
health and wide public health care network to encourage promotive and preventive care as an integral part of
UHC. It should be noted that the shortage calculation is based on the need to meet MoH HRH standard for
each facility level and type regardless of local conditions or needs. An important point for policy makers is to
improve future needs assessment by considering important priorities such as improving access in needy
areas.




                                                                      12
      Figure 2.4 Shortage of Health Workers at Puskesmas Level in
                     2012 (based on unfilled posts)
                                     Shortage of health workers at puskesmas level in 2012

                       Nurse                                                          10146


          Health care analyst                                             5353


                     Midwife                                       4485


        Pharmacist assistant                                       4370


                      Dentist                                      4349


                Dental nurse                                3514


                   Sanitarian                         2939


                  Nutrisionist                        2934


     Bachelor of public health                       2813


         General practitioner                  2269


                  Pharmacist                  2177



                                 0             3,000         6,000            9,000           12,000
                                                       Number of shortage HRH
                                 Source : BPPSDM-MoH, 2013




2.12.     The shortage of nurses — despite large numbers of graduates — at hospitals and puskesmas
is particularly noticeable and deserves more detailed analysis. The MoH standard is six nurses for each
regular puskesmas, and ten nurses for each puskesmas with beds. For types A and B hospitals the standard
                                                                                                 17
is one nurse for every bed, and for types C and D hospitals, two nurses for every three beds . The 733
nursing schools produce more than enough graduates per year to fulfil this need. For example, according to
BPPSDM, the number of nurses needed in 2014 is 134,623, while production is around 474,000. Yet figures
2.3 and 2.4 demonstrate a large gap. Unfortunately, due to the lack of specific analysis, there is no clear,
rigorous evidence-based answer to this question of why graduating nurses are not being employed in practice.
The likely explanation is that low government expenditure for health prevents the government from spending
enough to recruit nurses for the puskesmas and public hospitals. It is not clear what is happening in private
hospitals; perhaps they are reducing the number of nurses to save costs. Perhaps some work in private
outpatient clinics, or choose not to work in nursing upon graduation. There is anecdotal evidence that, due to
weak enforcement of regulations, nurses also open individual private practices, particularly in rural areas
where there are not enough physicians. Nurses emigrating to work overseas — a common phenomenon in the
neighboring Philippines — is not a major factor in Indonesia due to a range of factors including language. A
study on labor market demand may be able to shed light on why, despite the high production level, there are
workforce shortages in the hospitals and puskesmas.

2.13.      Looking to the future, the current annual increase in the number of physicians is unlikely to
be enough to meet government’s 2019 targets. The government’s target is to achieve 1 physician per 1,000
nationally by 2019, as recommended by WHO (BPPSDM 2011), the year Indonesia hopes to attain UHC (see
table 2.3 below). If production were to reach 10,000 physicians per year in 2014, the year Indonesia launches

17
  Type A provides, at a minimum, four basic specialist services (internal medicine, pediatrics, surgery, obstetrics-
gynecology), five medical support specialist services (four medical diagnostics and anesthesia), twelve other specialist
services, and thirteen subspecialist services; Type B provides, at a minimum, four basic specialist services, four medical
support specialist services, eight other specialist services, and two subspecialist services; Type C provides, at a minimum,
four basic specialist services, and four medical support specialist services; Type D provides, at a minimum, two basic
specialist services.




                                                                                 13
the UHC program, MoH would likely meet the 2014 target of 0.5 physicians per 1,000. Obviously, there will not
be enough physicians produced by 2019 to meet the target of 1 physician per 1,000. The estimated gap
between the requirements and the production of graduates is shown in table 2.3. Before investing in
improving production capacity, it is important to examine and address factors causing leakages and
inefficiencies related to health labor market dynamics such as attrition due to health workers taking up
nonhealth posts, migrating overseas, and retirement; difficulties in deploying staff to rural or remote areas; or
health worker performance related, for example, to absenteeism due to dual practice.

Table 2.3 Estimated Projection of Physicians Required
                                                     2014                        2019                 2025
  Target (per 1,000)                                 0.48                        0.96                 1.12
  Required number of physicians                    117,511                     248,100              306,005
  Gap                                               43,162                     182,173              230,813
  Production18 capacity                             21,915                      36,525               43,830
 Source: BPPSDM 2011.

2.14.      Workforce numbers will need to adapt to changes in the size, age, and disease profile of Indonesian
society; the movement to UHC; and changes in the economy over time. A recent modeling exercise estimated
the possible gap between health care demand and the supply of physicians in Indonesia between 2009 and
2020 (Qureshy 2011). The model assumed six different drivers of demand for health care over that period:
growth in population; changes in the population structure due to ageing; changes in epidemiology; increased
demand for health care due to the rollout of universal health coverage; increased demand due to economic
growth; and changes in technology. The estimates are summarized in table 2.4 below. In essence, the model
estimated that the number of outpatient visits and inpatient days would grow by a minimum of 13 percent over
the period 2009–20 simply as a result of population growth, with no other changes. A combination of
population growth, demographic transition (including ageing of the population), and insurance increases the
number of outpatient visits by 30 percent to over 848 million by 2020, and the number of inpatient days by 50
percent to over 48 million. The model estimates an even steeper rise in demand for health care with the
combination of population growth, demographic and epidemiological transitions, health insurance, and
economic growth. With that combination there could be more than one billion outpatient visits by 2020, and 46
million inpatient days, an increase of 73 percent and 113 percent, respectively, since 2009.




18. The BPPSDM estimate assumes the same production capacity based on year 2008 physician production, and
recognizes the need to increase production capacity.



                                                       14
                                                             19
Table 2.4 Estimated Increase in Health Care Demand
Scenario                                                                        Number of             Increase
                                                                              outpatient visits,    2009–20 (%)
                                                                               and inpatient
                                                                              days by 2020 (in
                                                                                  millions)
Population growth only
Number of outpatient visits                                                         736.6                 13
Number of inpatient days                                                            36.9                  13
Population growth and demographic transition
Number of outpatient visits                                                         774.1                 19
Number of inpatient days                                                            38.7                  20
Population growth, demographic transition, and health insurance
Number of outpatient visits                                                         848.5                 30
Number of inpatient days                                                            48.2                  50
Population growth, demographic transition, health insurance, and
epidemiological transition
Number of outpatient visits                                                          859                  32
Number of inpatient days                                                              46                  44
Population growth, demographic transition, health insurance,
epidemiological transition and economic growth
Number of outpatient visits                                                         1,130                 73
Number of inpatient days                                                            68.3                 113
Population growth, demographic transition, health insurance,
epidemiological transition, economic growth and technological
progress
Number of outpatient visits                                                         1,243                 91
Number of inpatient days                                                            75.2                 134
Source: Qureshy 2011.



2.15.      The modeling by Qureshy cited above estimates that if the physician-to-population ratio stayed static
at the 2009 estimate of 0.3/1,000, then, under a range of assumptions, there could be a shortage of around
37,000 full-time equivalent (FTE) physicians or 37 percent of the total demand once all the drivers are taken
              20
into account. It is important to realize that changes in the age profile, disease burden, and access to health
care will affect not just the total number of health workers needed, but the skill mix as well. An increasing
burden of noncommunicable diseases, including diabetes, stroke, cancers, and dementia will require more
long-term and specialized care. Increasing the number of physicians will also have second-round effects on
other health workers. Additional physicians opening up practices in hitherto underserved areas will inevitably
increase the level of diagnostic tests and drug prescriptions, thereby increasing the demand for X-ray and
laboratory technicians, as well as for pharmacists.

2.16.    The changing disease profile in Indonesia has important implications for the skill mix of the
health workforce, as well as for other complementary investments if UHC is to be effective. The latest
burden of disease estimates highlight the changing disease profile in Indonesia (IHME 2013). More


19. In estimating future health care demand, the drivers are population growth, ageing, insurance, epidemiology, economic
growth, and technology. Total health care demand is the total of outpatient and inpatient demand using utilization by age
group and by wealth quintiles from SUSENAS (2009). SUSENAS data are also used to estimate the increase of utilization
due to insurance. Increased utilization due to technology is assumed to be the same as for the case of insurance. The
proportion of communicable and noncommunicable diseases and injuries is derived from Riskesdas (2007). The number of
sick people per disease group is calculated using disability-adjusted life year (DALY) ratios based on WHO DALY
projections. Treatment rates are obtained from focus group discussion of experts, adjusted with SUSENAS data.
20. The modeling did not extend to the numbers of nurses, midwives, and other health workers that may be required.



                                                           15
specifically, in 2010 stroke displaced lower respiratory infections as the leading cause of premature death in
Indonesia, a 76 percent increase in years of life lost since 1990. Ischemic heart disease, diabetes mellitus, and
lower back pain are now among the top 10 leading causes of death and disability in Indonesia; whereas none
were in the top 10 in 1990 (Ibid.). The training and skill mix of health professionals will need to anticipate and
evolve rapidly to respond to these changes. Other complementary investments in diagnostic equipment, drugs,
and other requirements are needed if UHC is to be effective. At present, only 27 percent of public hospitals
provide cardiovascular services; only one-third of puskesmas in the country reported being able to conduct
blood glucose and urine tests; and only one-third of puskesmas were able to screen for cholesterol (Tandon
2013).

                                      FINDINGS ABOUT DISTRIBUTION

2.17.      Maldistribution of health workers is a challenge in virtually all developing countries, including
Indonesia. A very recent study of scaling up UHC in 11 developing countries, including Indonesia, confirmed
that all countries face the challenge of deploying and retaining health workers in rural and remote areas (World
Bank 2013a). Geographical maldistribution of health workers has long been a particular challenge in Indonesia
given the wide geographical spread of the country, including numerous isolated islands (Government of
Indonesia 2013; Chomitz et al. 1998). Recent reports note that while the physicians to population ratio has
improved over time, inequities in the distribution between provinces, between urban and rural regions, and
between more and less affluent areas have not (World Bank 2009). Other reports have noted that only 20
percent of physicians are based in rural areas, where the majority of the population lives. The gap between
urban and rural areas remains very large, at eight times greater than in urban areas despite some significant
proportional improvements since 1996 when the difference was even larger (World Bank 2010).




2.18.      Approximately 60 percent of graduating physicians are female, but women may be facing
particular barriers to deployment in rural and remote areas. In many countries, women comprise over
three-quarters of the health workforce, but are concentrated in lower-skilled, lower-paid, lower-status positions
with limited decision making authority (WHO 2008; Zurn et al. 2002). The total number, and relative share of


                                                       16
60 percent female graduating physicians in Indonesia is therefore an important — and positive —
characteristic of the health system. However, if UHC is to be truly universal, the key challenge is to create a
policy and programming environment whereby graduating female physicians and other health workers are
willing and able to be deployed in rural postings. There is some anecdotal evidence to suggest that female
physicians may face particular difficulties in remote and rural posts, particularly if there are limited schooling
opportunities for their children or security concerns.

2.19.      Among Indonesia’s 33 provinces, 29 do not have the WHO recommended ratio of 1 physician
per 1,000 population. Figure 2.5 above shows that only Daerah Khusus Ibukota (DKI) Jakarta and
Yogyakarta provinces meet the WHO recommended ratio. Bali and Sulawesi Utara (North Sulawesi) provinces
are almost at this target (0.921 and 0.978, respectively). The other 29 provinces are well below the standard,
including all other provinces in the Java area: Banten, West, Central, and East Java. The Indonesian Medical
Association (IMA) says physicians are discouraged from working in rural and remote areas for a number of
reasons. For example, physicians report long delays — sometimes up to three months — in receiving
salaries, partly as a result of slow release of funds under decentralization. The IMA also notes that insurance
companies were often slow in accepting and reimbursing claims to physicians. Physicians also received lower
salaries and allowances than they had expected.

2.20.     According to PODES 2011, virtually all villages in Java have a physician, as shown by the dark
green color in figure 2.6 below. But the situation is quite different in other islands, with many villages in
Kalimantan, NTT, Maluku, and Papua having less than 28 physicians per district (shown by the light gray and
light green color) in the figure below.


                               Figure 2.6 Physicians per Village at District Level




 Source: PODES 2011




                                                       17
2.21.     However the situation is different — and often even reversed — when physicians are mapped
per 100,000 population rather than per village. As shown in figure 2.7, even Java and northern Sumatra
now have a noticeable number of districts where the density of physicians per 100,000 is low. This is because
while each village may have a physician, the villages themselves have large and densely settled populations
that require a greater number of physicians. On the other hand, provinces such as Papua and Kalimantan now
appear to have better ratios of physicians per 100,000, reflecting the fact that those provinces have less
densely populated villages and catchment areas. UGM analysis finds that the same patterns are repeated for
nurses and midwives.


                                   Figure 2.7 Physicians per 100,000 Population




 Source: PODES 2011




                                                     18
2.22.     The number and           Figure 2.8 Number and Location of Internal Medicine Specialists in
location of hospitals is a                                                                 2013
“pull factor” influencing the
distribution of specialist
physicians, that favors Java.                                    Number and location of internists by province in 2013
Figure     2.8     shows       the          Central Java                                                                        549
                                               East Java                                                                      534
concentration      of     internal           DKI Jakarta                                                                  505
                                              West Java                                                               447
medicine specialists in large,           North Sumatera                                            282
                                         South Sulawesi                               155
urban hospitals, particularly in                      Bali
                                           DI Yogyakarta
                                                                                      155
                                                                                    146
Java compared to more                    South Sumatera
                                                  Banten
                                                                                  130
                                                                                121
remote Maluku, Papua, and                        DI Aceh
                                         West Sumatera
                                                                              108
                                                                            100
Sulawesi        Barat       (West                    Riau                  93
                                          North Sulawesi                63
Sulawesi). Similarly, figure 2.9               Lampung               49
                                    West Nusa Tenggara               48
                                    East Nusa Tenggara               48
shows that while all public             East Kalimantan             44
                                        West Kalimantan             42
hospitals in Jakarta have an                       Jambi           39
                                        Central Sulawesi           36
anesthesia      specialist,    the     South Kalimantan
                                              Riau Island
                                                                 30
                                                                22
national mean is less than half                Gorontalo
                                               Bengkulu
                                                               20
                                                               18
(48.8 percent). In Kalimantan         Central Kalimantan
                                            West Papua
                                                              17
                                                              16
Tengah (Central Kalimantan),         Southeast  Sulawesi      16
                                                  Maluku      15
Maluku Utara (North Maluku),               North Maluku       14
                                        Bangka Belitung       14
                                                  Papua 10
Bengkulu, and Papua Barat                 West Sulawesi 3
(West Papua) less than 20
percent of public hospitals                                0                              200                     400               600
                                                                                              Number of internists
have an anesthesia specialist.
                                                            Source : Hospital Online, 2012
No hospital in Papua Barat
has an anesthesia specialist. The lack of anesthesists at hospitals is and will continue to be a critical
constraint in reducing maternal mortality and — more generally — in achieving universal health coverage.


2.23. Geographical location of medical schools can reinforce the urban bias and maldistribution of
health        workers.      More
specifically,         government   Figure 2.9 Percentage of Public Hospitals with an Anesthesia
reports noted that 85 percent                                    Specialist
of the 72 medical schools were
                                             Percentage of public hospitals with at least one anesthetist
located in the provincial capital                                   by province
city in 2011. Very few schools
                                   100
had special programs for
recruiting students from rural
or underserved areas (Health        80
Professional Education Quality
                                             Percentage




Project [HPEQ], Directorate         60
General of Higher Education).                                                     Indonesia : 48.8%

Surveys by UGM of graduating
                                    40
students suggest the majority
of health workers wish to work
in a provincial capital rather      20

than a more remote or rural
area. Earlier studies noted that     0
                                                                              gy nta si
                                                                       tra iau an bi




                                                                     or L la ua




                                                                 en ut B al a




                                                                                         ua
                                                                              S law n


                                                                               en nt u
                                                                               tra nt li


                                                                                   t va
                                                                   Ea East Ja a




                                                                                     w i
                                                                            l S Is tan



                                                                      us t S I A rta




                                                                         a im ia i



                                                                       l K u litu u
                                                                       C B B ta




                                                                     D G ula and




                                                                    So en ate h




                                                                                           a
                                                                      or S an si
                                                                           W l en



                                                                                           a




                                                                              Su ap a
                                                                  t N es D aka lo


                                                                                   g ra




                                                                      N ali mat ng
                                                               So e est umpun i




                                                                        W Benalu n
                                                                            es g ku
                                                                             th an ra
                                                                 ut st Su at g




                                                                                    g an




                                                                                     ap lu




physicians coming from the
                                                                     W th Sam wes




                                                                st th ula es
                                                                      us al R es
                                                                          en a a

                                                                                          v




                                                                                         a




                                                               C So gka M gar
                                                                    tra h S e uk
                                                                         a u m ce




                                                                    he Ka la er
                                                                           h P gar
                                                                         Ka JJav




                                                                                 M ta
                                                                                        e




                                                                    N ast lim we
                                                                    en R lim am




                                                                                t P ku
                                                                                         r




                                                                         or m e
                                                                               es Ja




                                                                                        t
                                                                                     ka




                                                                       IY o w
                                                                                      l




                                                                                    a
                                                                                   o
                                                                                 Ja




outer islands are far more
                                                                                 r




                                                                                u
                                                          KI




                                                                             T
                                                                             T
                                                                            o




                                                                          h

                                                                    N K
                                                          D




                                                                       ut




                                                                         t




willing to serve in remote areas
                                                                      st




                                                                      n
                                                               es W




                                                                   Ba
                                                              EaSou
                                                                   N

                                                                 W
                                                                  C




of     Indonesia     than    their
                                                              W




counterparts       from     Java,      Source : Rifaskes, 2011
suggesting substantial gains to
increasing representation of
medical students from the


                                                                   19
outer islands (Chomitz et al. 1998).


2.24. Workforce distribution does not appear to be well aligned to the current national health
challenges, such as the high maternal mortality ratio (MMR). Estimating maternal deaths is a difficult
exercise, and many different types of health workers are involved in preventing a maternal death. However,
even with those caveats in place,
questions arise about health             Figure 2.10 Maternal Mortality Ratio and Obstetricians per
worker distribution in relation to                                      100,000 Population
MoH maternal death data. Figure
2.10 shows that MMR based on                                           MMR vs Obgyn ratio by provinces




                                                                                    1000
absolute numbers from service



                                               Maternal death per 100.000 live births
                                                           West Papua
statistics vary      widely   within
Indonesia, even when access to


                                                                            800
obstetric services, measured by                   East Nusa Tenggara
                                                       Central Sulawesi
the ratio of obstetricians per
                                                                    600
                                                 Maluku
100,000, population, is around 2.
The reason for the high level of
                                                            400

maternal deaths in West Papua is
perhaps understandable given the
remoteness,       geography     and
                                                    200




                                                                South Sumatera        Bali
socioeconomic conditions of that                                   North Sumatera
province. However, the explanation                          East Java
                                                                                                             DKI Jakarta
for such a large difference in
                                              0




maternal deaths for roughly similar
ratios of obstetricians per 100,000           0                       2                  4                 6             8
                                                                        Obgyn ratio per 100.000 population
in the rest of the country is less            Source:
apparent.                                     Obgyn : KKI, 2013
                                              Maternal death : BGKIA-MoH, 2010




2.25.       There is also a wide dispersion in the MMR for a similar availability of midwives. Figure 2.11
suggests a wide pattern of maternal health outcomes even when the midwife-to-population ratio is the same at
around 50 per 100,000. What explains such variation? Is it measurement error, bearing in mind the well-known
difficulties in accurately estimating maternal deaths in any lower-middle-income country? Is it a problem with
the referral system? Is it a problem
with quality of care? Are there issues    Figure 2.11 Maternal Mortality Ratio and Midwives per 100,000 Population in 2010
outside the formal health sector such
                                                                 MMR vs Midwives ratio by provinces
as undernutrition,        poverty,   or
                                                                                                        1000




remoteness        that   explain    the
                                                                   Maternal death per 100.000 live births




                                                                                                 West Papua
variation? There is insufficient
                                                                                                800




evidence at this stage to answer
these questions.                                                   East Nusa Tenggara Central Sulawesi
                                                                                       600




                                                                                                                                                              Maluku


2.26.     Strengthening           the
                                                                               400




evidence base to answer such
questions will help Indonesia plan
its expansion of UHC in a rational
                                                                       200




                                                                                                                                                     South Sumatera
and efficient way. Examination of                                                                                                          Bali
                                                                                                                                                                   North Sumatera
the outliers is also likely to yield                                                                                                  East Java
powerful    policy    and    program                                                                                    DKI Jakarta
                                                                 0




insights. Why, for example, are there
                                                                                                               0                          50                      100               150
almost five times as many maternal                                                                                                    Midwives ratio per 100.000 population
deaths in West Papua than in North                                                                             Source:
                                                                                                               Midwives : PODES, 2011
Sumatra with roughly the same ratio                                                                            Maternal death : BGKIA-MoH, 2010




                                                                                                                      20
                                 Figure 2.12 Neonatal Mortality Rate and Midwives per                                of midwives per population? Is it to do
                                                       100,000                                                       with remoteness and longer distances
                                                                                                                     to essential care in West Papua, or are
                                                     Neonatal mortality vs Midwives ratio by provinces
                                                                West Nusa Tenggara
                                                                                                                     other factors influencing this? Similarly,
                                       80



                                                                                                                     as shown in figure 2.12 there are some
   Neonatal death per 1.000 live births




                                                                          West Sulawesi
                                                                                 East Nusa Tenggara
                                                                                                                     intriguing outliers when neonatal
                                                                                                                     mortality rate (NMR) is plotted against
                                                                                                                                                 21
                                                                                   Central Sulawesi                  the ratio of midwives.         Why, for
                         60




                                                                         South Kalimantan
                                                                                                                     example, does West Nusa Tenggara
                                                                                                                     have such a high rate of neonatal
                                                                                                                     mortality    when     other    provinces,
                                                                                                                     including East Kalimantan, have much
            40




                                                                                                                     lower rates with roughly equal ratios of
                                                                                                                     midwives to population?
                                                   East Kalimantan                                         DI Aceh
                                                     Central Java
                                      DKI Jakarta                         2.27.     The wealth and fiscal
                       20




                                             DI Yogyakarta
                                                                          capacity of a province is not a good
         0                           50                     100       150 predictor      of   availability    of
                                Midwives ratio per 100.000 population
         Source:
                                                                          physicians.     In principle, although
         Midwives : PODES, 2011
         Neonatal death : BGKIA-MOH, 2010
                                                                          decentralization does not give much
                                                                          authority to the local government in
                                                                          workforce management, it does give
resource-rich provinces like West Papua and East Kalimantan, an increased financial capacity to fund health
services and attract physicians. However in practice this is not occurring. As shown in figure 2.13 below,
deployment of specialist physicians is quite low in provinces with higher fiscal capacity, some of which have
particularly high health needs such as West Papua with the highest MMR in Indonesia. We can thus conclude
that resource-rich provinces with correspondingly higher provincial fiscal capacity will not necessarily attract
specialist physicians. That is because fiscal capacity only measures the potential for fiscal space; whereas
actual implementation capacity is of more importance. The capacity to pay additional — and sometimes
significant — hardship and remoteness allowances is also not sufficient to attract physicians if they will not
also have the complementary infrastructure and services to practice. A study on labor market demand to better
understand the factors discussed in this paragraph may help decision makers to develop distribution policies
for Eastern Indonesia.




21. WHO and UNICEF statistics show that most newborns die within the first 24 to 48 hours of life, so there is an important
role for midwives in reducing newborn death.



                                                                                                      21
      Figure 2.13 Number of Specialist Physicians Compared to                                                                           2.28.      Private health providers
                 Fiscal Capacity Index of a Province                                                                                    create both opportunities and risks
                                                                                                                                        for health outcomes and the
                                                                                                                                        expansion of UHC. Indonesia is
                                                      Number of specialist doctors vs fiscal capacity index by province                 characterized by a dual practice health
                                         3000
   Number of specialist doctors (5 specialist)




                                                                                                                                        system that allows medical staff to
                                                                                                                           DKI Jakart
                                                        East Java                                                                       practice in both the public and the
                                                        West Java
                                                      Central Java
                                                                                                                                        private sectors, often on the same day.
                                                                                                                                        Recent analysis finds that the number
                            2000




                                                                                                                                        of    physicians     working     privately
                                                                                                                                        increased by almost 10,000 over the
                                                         North Sumatera
                                                                                                                                        decade from almost 20,000 to almost
              1000




                                                                                                                                        30,000 in 2006, representing around
                                                                 Bali                                                                   38 percent increase in physicians per
                                                                                                                                        100,000 population. The growth in the
                                                     South Kalimantan                  East Kalimantan                                  number of physicians providing private
                                                     West Papua                                                                         services has been greatest in urban
   0




                                                                        Riau Island

                                                 0                        2                  4                 6                8       areas, where opportunities for
                                                                        Fiscal capacity index (0=lowest, 8=highest)                     attracting paying patients is higher than
                                                 Source:
                                                 Specialist doctors : Hospital On-line, (MoH-2013)                                      in more sparsely populated and poorer
                                                 5 specialist : Obgyn, internist, anesthetist, pediatriciant,??
                                                 Fiscal capacity index, (MoF-2012)
                                                                                                                                        rural areas. However rural areas also
                                                                                                                                        experienced an increase of 21 percent,
                                                                                                                                        with four physicians providing private
                                                                                                                                        services for every 100,000 people in
                                                                                                                                        2006 (World Bank 2010).

2.29.    Private practice may have improved health utilization by the poor. World Bank analysis of the
Indonesia Family Life Surveys (IFLS) found the following:

                                                 Growth in the number of private physician practices in communities is associated with
                                                 increased utilization of health services by poorer members of the community. The poor are
                                                 more likely to use the puskesmas as the private sector grows. This suggests that the increase
                                                 in supply of health service providers reduces congestion in the puskesmas, while also sorting
                                                 more affluent members of the community to private practices (World Bank 2010).

2.30.      On the other hand, a UGM study on medical fees found that dual practice also presents policy and
practical challenges, especially when the dual practice system remains largely unregulated and unsupervised.
That study found the following:

                                                 Despite regulations limiting practice locations to three, most specialists studied in a provincial
                                                 capital city were working in more than three locations, with some working in up to seven
                                                 locations, and spending only a few hours per week, sometimes as few as two hours, in their
                                                 government hospital practice. Our study demonstrates that the current regulatory policies and
                                                 financial incentives have not been effective in addressing the maldistribution of specialist
                                                 doctors in a context of a growing private sector and predominance of doctors’ income from
                                                 private sources. A broader and more integrated policy approach, including more innovative
                                                 service delivery strategies for rural and remote areas, is recommended (Meliala et al. 2013).




                                                                                                                      22
                                                             Figure 2.14 Specialist Physicians and Private Hospitals
Box 2.2 Measuring Diagnostic and                                                                    Specialist doctors and private hospitals by province




                                                                        1500
Treatment Ability Using IFLS Vignettes                                                                                                   East Java


The ability of health providers to diagnose
                                                                                                                                                  DKI Jakarta




                                                         Number of specialist doctors
illness correctly is measured using
                                                                                                                                                                      Central Java
community and health vignette questions                                                                                                       West Java




                                                                           1000
from the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS,
http://www.rand.org/labor/FLS/IFLS/)       1997
and 2007. The interviewer presents the
health vignette or case to the health worker




                                                            500
and asks how the worker would proceed.                                                                                       North Sumatera
Three vignettes are conducted related to
diagnosis and treatment of conditions
common in prenatal, child, and adult care,




                                                                        0
respectively. For example, one vignette has a
mother bringing in a child suffering from                                                0            20               40         60           80               100            120
                                                                                                                        Number of private hospital
diarrhea for more than two days. Among the                                              Source:
items that the interviewer records is an                                                Hospital On-line, (MoH-2013)

indication of whether the health provider
takes the temperature of the patient, and
asks about frequency of diarrhea and about               2.31.      Furthermore, the same UGM study also shows
the nature of the stool. The interviewer then            that specialist physicians tend to be associated with
assigns a score of one for a correct answer              private hospitals. This is shown in figure 2.14 above.
or zero for an incorrect or missing answer to            There are several reasons medical specialists are attracted
a prepared list of items based on standards              to private hospitals. Private hospitals tend to be located in
for diagnosis and treatment. Two types of                major cities, where there are more patients willing to pay for
quality scores are constructed for each                  extra services. Private hospitals can therefore offer higher
health case: the raw score, which is the                 payment and better facilities than found in most public
share of correct responses multiplied by 100,            hospitals. Private hospitals generally tend to provide an
and the normalized raw score, or z-score,                opportunity for dual or even triple practice for specialist
which shows the difference from the mean in              physicians. UGM also found anecdotal evidence that
the category divided by the standard                     private hospitals tended to be more responsive to issues
deviation.       For the public sector, only             regarding specialists’ needs.
puskesmas and auxiliary puskesmas (pustu)
are included, whereas private practitioner
ratings were obtained for nurses, midwives,
and physicians. At public health facilities, the                                        FINDINGS ABOUT QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE
vignettes were conducted with the highest-
level health worker present when the                     2.32.     Indonesia does not have enough health
enumerator arrived to conduct the facility               workers so it needs to ensure it is getting maximum
survey, and responses are used as the                    benefit from those that it does have. With relatively few
puskesmas or pustu score. In cases where                 health workers, and generally low expenditure on health,
no physician was present, the person                     Indonesia needs to maximize the allocative efficiency
questioned could have been a midwife,                    (“doing the right things”) and technical efficiency (“doing
paramedic, or nurse, which is considered                 things right”) of its scarce resources. Quality of care,
representative of the quality of care provided           including patients’ perceptions about health system
                                                                         22
at that facility at that time (World Bank 2010).         responsiveness      and quality, is an important factor
                                                         influencing access and utilization of services. A recent
                                                         World Bank report found that the quality of diagnosis and
                                                         treatment varied a lot between public and private providers,



22. Responsiveness included perceptions about outpatient and inpatient waiting time, hospitality, information availability,
involvement in decision making, private consultation, freedom of choice, and cleanliness; ease of family visits is unique to
inpatient settings.


                                                                                  23
     and between physicians and nurses (World Bank 2010, see Box 2.2). Key findings from the report include
     the following:

        Increasing the number of private sector physicians per 100,000 population is associated with
        improvement in the average diagnostic ability of all facilities. The changes in prenatal care,
        child curative care, and adult curative care scores from diagnostic and treatment vignettes are
        all positively correlated with changes in the number of private physician practices in the
        community. These relationships are statistically significant for prenatal and child curative care.

        The diagnostic as well as the treatment practices of doctors for prenatal care are rated less
        highly than those of midwives, based on analysis of detailed vignette scores. Only 28 percent
        of doctors checked a patient’s blood pressure and fewer than 6 percent checked for protein in
        urine during a prenatal visit.

        Much of the training of the past decade has been focused on improving midwives.
        Nevertheless, ongoing quality concerns exist regarding midwives’ ability to provide care and
        accurate diagnoses. Given that the use of midwifery services has increased more than use of
        any other service, particularly among the poor, further quality improvements at this provider
        level are still necessary, despite their performance advantage over doctors and nurses.

        When one analyzes the more detailed standards of the prenatal care vignettes, stark
        differences appear between the abilities of puskesmas health workers and midwives, on the
        one hand, and private physicians on the other. Where only 28 percent of private physicians
        responded that they would measure blood pressure during a prenatal care visit, 89 percent of
        puskesmas health workers and private midwives would do so. Only 18 percent of private
        physicians responded that they would measure uterine height, as opposed to 66 percent of
        puskesmas health workers and private midwives.

        Prenatal care provided by private nurses shows very low quality scores. Pregnant women in
        Indonesia have high levels of anemia, and provision of iron-folate is part of the required
        minimum service standards for all pregnant women, regardless of their anemia status.
        Although 72 percent of puskesmas health workers and 55 percent of midwives reported
        assessing hemoglobin level, only 42 percent of puskesmas health workers and 35 percent of
        midwives provide iron-folate. Private physicians compare more favorably to puskesmas health
        workers on a number of diagnostic and treatment practices in child curative care, although at
        the same time overall scores are on the low side (World Bank 2010).

2.33.      Government policy to allow public sector health workers to also work in private facilities or have a
private practice may have affected health worker distribution and performance. Until the early 1990s public
sector employment for fresh medical graduates was mandatory, and the policy helped to improve access to
health services at the puskesmas throughout the country. During that period, the government allowed medical
staff to also have private practice or to work in private facilities to compensate for the low government salary.
The policy to allow dual practice remains to date. A high percentage of public sector physicians and midwives
engage in dual practice (World Bank 2010). The government regulates dual practice by allowing medical staff
to practice at maximum at three sites to control time spent at public facilities. However, oversight and
enforcement of the regulation is rather limited. Moreover, allowing dual practice has very likely affected the
ability to fill rural positions, as physicians tend to seek employment in urban areas where they can earn
lucrative income from the private practice. Future studies on dual practice are important to better understand
the impact of the policy on health worker distribution and performance.

2.34.     The rapid growth of schools raises questions about standardizing the schools’ quality
through accreditation. While attention tends to focus on the rapid growth of private medical schools, newly
established public medical schools — especially those initiated through local government initiatives — face
similar challenges of achieving and maintaining standards and quality. In 2010, one-third (23 of 69) of
undergraduate medical schools in the public and the private sectors were not accredited, and only one-quarter



                                                       24
(17 out of 69) received the highest accreditation level (Indonesia, Directorate General of Higher Education ,
MOEC 2010). The situation is more or less the same for the other health disciplines.

2.35.      The Ministry of Education and Culture (MoEC) has sought to improve the quality assurance system
of the health professional schools. The government’s 2010–2014 medium-term development plan states
accreditation of health professional schools and certification of their graduates as a priority. The design of the
accreditation and examination systems is meant to adopt international practices, and tailored to the specific
requirements and characteristics of each health discipline. Beginning in 2012, the national competency
examination for medicine applied computer-based testing and other supporting technologies. An objective
structured clinical examination for medicine (OSCE) was first introduced in 2013. The first national
competency examination for nurses and midwives took place in late 2013. In 2013, MoEC also declared the
national examination a mandatory exit examination for medical and dentistry schools. These are all steps in
the right direction and it is of strategic importance that their implementation is accelerated.

2.36.      The UGM study at the four medical schools found that there is a low level of training in medical
schools about implementation of UHC, and about the implications of UHC for health workers. All health
workers, especially frontline health workers dealing directly with patients and the general public, need to know
how UHC is meant to work if they are to help achieve government policy goals. UGM conducted a survey of
                    23
four representative medical schools. The survey found that specific training about UHC ranged from just 2 to
16 hours within a three-year program of lectures. Specific training on primary health care, and communicating
with patients — important components in making UHC accessible at the primary care level — were generally
limited to around eight hours over the three years. Interviews with the deans of colleges further revealed that
they were reluctant, or unable, to increase teaching of UHC or package it into their curriculum in the absence
of national guidelines about UHC operations.

2.37.      There is a reasonably comprehensive system for setting and maintaining the quality assurance of
existing physicians, but it would be useful to independently test this as part of the scale-up of UHC. The
Medical Practice Act no. 29/2004 includes articles to ensure the quality of physicians. The act also mandated
the establishment of the KKI (Indonesian Medical Council) . The KKI is responsible for registering physicians,
validating the standards of education for medicine, and supervising medical practice. Registration with the KKI
is a prerequisite for obtaining a license to practice from the local government. To register with the KKI, the
physician must present the certificate of graduation from a medical school, and medical students must pass
the national standardized examination to graduate. KKI registration is valid for five years, after which each
practicing physician has to reregister. According to KKI regulation, the physician has to present a certificate of
competency for reregistration. The certificate of competency is given by the IMA, based on scoring in five
areas: continuing education, professional performance (for example, seeing patients), community service,
scientific publication, and research and development. There could be merit in assessing the effectiveness,
quality, and efficiency of this approach as part of the scaling-up of UHC.

2.38.      Internships have the potential to enhance quality of services, while also improving the
geographical location of health workers. Indonesia has a system of internships whereby newly graduating
physicians are supervised for one year as physicians at the primary and secondary levels of the health system
prior to their formal registration as physicians. In principle, the system of internships has two clear potential
advantages: good supervision can enhance quality, while simultaneously facilitating the supply of physicians at
the primary and secondary levels, including rural areas. In practice, the internship system has both strengths
and weaknesses (see Box 2.3, below). Better collaboration between central and local government, and the
medical schools, would help to maximize the positive impacts of the internship scheme.




23. One older (before 1997) public university (UGM); one new public university (Universitas Tanjung Pura Kalimantan
Barat); one older private college (Universitas Maranatha Bandung); and one new private college (Universitas
Muhammadiyah Yogyakarta).



                                                        25
              Box 2.3 Do Internships Increase Availability and Quality of Services?

              Government of Indonesia instituted an internship program in 2010 for newly graduated doctors prior to their
              registration. A mixed methods survey (MoH 2013) evaluated the program.

              There were several positive findings. Interns believed they benefitted: 73 percent of interns surveyed
              believed they could not be good primary health care doctors without the program; overall skills in seven
              competency areas improved (from 75 percent to 95 percent). Institutions also benefitted: the number of
              physicians increased in rural area, completing the staffing configuration. This, in turn, helped reduce waiting
              times at hospitals, and improved patient satisfaction. Procedures have also improved. Practice guidelines
              were developed based on graduates’ latest knowledge acquired at the medical schools.

              However, the survey revealed remaining challenges. Supervision of — and especially feedback to — the
              interns was weak. Management and administration of the program was poor: advice about deployment was
              not timely, and provision of salaries was not regular. Only a sustenance allowance, rather than a salary, could
              be paid, sometimes around half of a registered physician’s salary. There was a lack of clarity about the roles
              and accountability of the interns’ license.




                     Figure 2.15 Coverage of DPT and GP, Midwife, and Nurse Density

                          Coverage of DPT and GP, Midwife, Nurse density by province
                                               GP                                                              Midwife
 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                      20 40 60 80 100
  DPT coverage (%)




                                                                       DPT coverage (%)




                                                    BaliDIY                                         DIY Bali
                              CJ
                          WNT SE-Sul                                                                    CJ
                                                                                                       WNT          SE-Sul


                                 Maluku
                            Banten           Aceh                                                   Banten               Maluku       Aceh
                                   NS                                                                                    NS

                                Papua                                                                           Papua



                     10       20       30       40      50       60                       0             50            100           150
                             GP ratio per 100.000 populations                                 Midwife ratio per 100.000 populations


                                             Nurse
 20 40 60 80 100
  DPT coverage (%)




                                       Bali
                                      DIY
                                      CJ WNT            SE-Sul


                                                          Aceh
                                                      Maluku
                             Banten     NS

                                                    Papua



                      0         50        100       150        200
                            Nurse ratio per 100.000 populations

Source:
DPT (Susenas, 2010); GP, Midwife and Nurse ratio (Podes 2011)




                                                                                                       26
2.39.      The      UGM      study     analyzed        Table 2.5 Sources and Proportion of Income for
immunization patterns as an indicator for                          General Practitioners in 2012
assessing health workforce performance.
UNICEF and WHO recommend that routine
                                                    Source of Income for GP                  Percent of
immunization should reach 90 percent of
                                                                                            total income
children under one year of age nationally, and
achieve at least 80 percent coverage in every       Private incentive (private hospital)              29.0
district by 2020 (UNICEF 2013). Immunization        Private practice                                  19.5
coverage of DPT is often taken as a proxy for       Fixed salary as civil servant                     19.4
the overall effectiveness of a country’s primary    Private salary (private  hospital)                 9.0
care health system because three separate           Incentive  (public hospital)                       7.2
rounds of immunization are required. Figure         Health insurance                                   4.2
                                               24
2.15 shows a wide variation of DPT coverage         Lecturing fee                                      2.2
in Indonesia. The coverage is positively            Incentive from pharmaceutical                      1.3
correlated with physician density but negatively    industry, lab, etc
correlated with midwife and nurse density per       Others                                             8.3
100,000 population, although midwives and           Source: Meliala et al. 2013.
nurses are the primary immunization providers
in puskesmas.        Again, the outliers provide
interesting insights. What has the province with 100 percent DPT coverage with a relatively lean ratio of 1
nurse to 300,000 population done that others have not been able to do? Analysis for the other antigens shows
the same correlation patterns. This would suggest the need to strengthen workers who do strategic planning to
ensure scarce resources are allocated where they will meet the greatest need; strengthen frontline and
supporting health workers who provide the immunizations; and strengthen health workers responsible for
supervision, monitoring, evaluation, and accountability. Moreover, existing measures to enhance performance
and quality focus primarily on ensuring skills and competencies or what health workers can do; it is equally
important to build evidence through research about health worker efforts or what they will do.

2.40.     The UGM study about medical fees conducted for the KKI found that the sources of income for
physicians and other health providers are fragmented; that insurance was the smallest component of income;
and that financing streams will need to be consolidated and made more coherent for UHC to be effective.
                                                                25
More specifically, researchers found that there were nine separate sources of income for general
practitioners as shown in table 2.5 (Meliala et al. 2013). Income from private sources was always the largest
component (57.5 percent). Importantly in the context of the movement toward UHC, income from insurance
organizations was small, providing just 4.2 percent of a GP’s income. It should be noted that Jamkesmas fees
for puskesmas physicians (GPs) was based on local government regulation, and the amount is very small. The
same is true for specialist physicians’ income. Income from private sources ranged from 65.6 percent for
surgeons to 81.2 percent for obstetricians. Income from health insurance was just 1.1 percent of a surgeon’s
income, 0.9 percent of a pediatrician’s income, 0.4 percent of an OB/GYN’s income.




24. The data do not currently allow identification of whether this is the first, second, or third dose.
25. The nine were fixed salary as a civil servant; allowances in a public hospital; private salary in a private hospital;
allowances in a private hospital; private practice; incentives from pharmaceutical industry; lecturing fees; health insurance
(Jamkesmas, Askes, and Jamsostek), and “other.”



                                                                27
                  POLICIES, REGULATIONS, AND INCENTIVES IN THE LEAD-UP TO UHC

2.41.     The government of Indonesia, at both central and local levels, has trialed a range of policies and
programs to improve the impact and distribution of health workers, including the Health Act, the Medical Act,
and the Hospital Act (figure 2.16). The Health Act 32, article 26 confirms that the government must be
responsible for the national distribution of health workers. This is understandable, given the need to distribute
health staff across the country in a way that is effective, efficient, equitable, and affordable. However the policy
intent of that article is constrained because, to date, there is no technical regulation in place to guide the
execution of that article. The Health Act also sets out a framework of national standards in terms of inputs,
processes, and expected outputs to achieve better health outcomes. The desire to have national standards
applied uniformly across the country is understandable, but faces a challenge when the underlying
circumstances are so different across Indonesia. Indonesia’s Hospital Act also requires standardization of
hospital inputs, including human resources and equipment. In practice, however, those hospitals with
additional facilities and medical equipment — usually in Java and Bali — become the first preference for health
workers seeking employment. The Medical Act regulates the practice of physicians. A key policy instrument
allows medical practitioners to practice at a maximum of three sites. The intent is to facilitate a fair — but
appropriate — distribution of medical staff without compromising quality. In practice, however, physicians seek
out those hospitals, cities, and regions that offer a mix of good public and private hospitals so that they can
maximize their professional practical experience as well as their income. A summary of the overall approach is
shown in figure 2.16 below, and the evolution of the staff deployment policy over time is summarized in figure
2.17.

               Figure 2.16 Overview of Approach to Improve Distribution of Health Workers




                         Source: University of Gadjah Mada 2013




                                                        28
2.42.     The picture that emerges is that government policy on deployment of staff has been evolving over
time as summarized in the World Bank (2010) report below:

       In response to the fiscal crisis of the late 1980s, the government in the early 1990s introduced
       an overall policy of zero growth of the civil service, as a measure to control public spending.
       Unlike other countries that introduced such measures, Indonesia provided no exception for
       medical doctors. This policy had a strong impact, reducing the number of health workers in the
       public sector, especially physicians, as it eliminated the main incentive for deployment to
       remote areas.

       To mitigate the effect of this change, the Ministry of Health initiated the Pegawai Tidak Tetap
       (PTT), or health worker contract scheme, which hired recent medical school graduates as
       contractors, not as civil servants, and required a period of service in underserved areas. After
       their first three years, PTT doctors had the opportunity to continue their education, go into the
       private sector, or become civil servants by taking the national civil service examination. Those
       PTT doctors who had served in remote or very remote areas through the PTT scheme would
       generally receive priority in the subsequent civil service recruitment process. At the same
       time, changes were made to the village midwife program, which also started recruiting
       midwives under PTT contract schemes, with the expectation that the midwives would establish
       themselves as private providers after a number of years as contractors.

       The PTT policy changed over time, and in early 2000 the number of graduates directly
       recruited into the civil service began to fall. If one assumes that about 5,000 medical students
       graduate each year (World Bank 2009b), the public sector only absorbed about 40 percent
       through the PTT program. Medical graduates were growing more dissatisfied with the program
       policy and mandatory service. As a result, in 2007, compulsory PTT contracts were abolished.

       The government remained concerned about providing medical care in remote and rural areas,
       however. A new policy was established offering a six-month period of service in remote areas
       for new graduates and an attractive salary package. In addition to the base salary, the new
       graduates received a monthly bonus amounting to as much as two-and-a-half times the base
       for very remote postings. This incentive package (generous remuneration and a short term of
       service), combined with a growing number of medical graduates entering the labor market
       after an expansion in the number of medical schools, has increased the interest of graduates
       in rural and remote postings. In addition, service as a PTT contract doctor in a remote area
       still contributes to positive evaluation for recruitment into the civil service.




                                                      29
                                             Figure 2.17 Summary of the Evolution of the PTT Policy


        1992 – 2001                  2002 – 04                        2005                       2006                            2007


Regulation                    Regulation                     Regulation                Regulation                        1. Voluntary-based
       1. KEPPRES                  1. Law     no.            1. UU no. 23/1992             1. KEPMENKES                     contract
          37/1991                     23/1992                2. KEPPRES 37/1991               132/2006                   2. Priority      for
       2 KEPMENKES                 2 KEPPRES                 3. KEPMENKES 1540/2002        2. KEPMENKES                     deprived area
                                                                                                                    3. For normal area: civil servant
                                                                                                                        option and prolonged
 1.     Zero-growth                                                                                                     contract
                                   1. Contract:                  1. All provinces
        policy as       a             optional                                              1. Time-based           4. Hardship allowance
        background                                                  were                       contract in
                              2. 3 options : Postponing,        opened                                              5. Shortening contrac period
 2. Contract :                   termin, other model                                           2 types of              For deprived area according
      Compulsory                                             2. Performance-based
                              3. Closed & open province as                                     deprived                to KEPMENKES 508/2007
 3. Promotion based on
                                                                recruitment
                                 options                                                       area                 6. District-based recruiitment
      registration                                           3. Placement by PHO
                              4. First come, first serve                               2. Incentives to work in
 4. Three times in a year     5. Period of 3 times a year                                 deprived area
 5. Placement by
                                                                                                                          2011
                              6. Placement by PHO                                         (hardship allowance)
      Province Health         7. Web-based listing                                     3. Placement by MoH
                                                                                                                       SHORTENING CONTRACT
                                                                                                                        PERIOD UP TO 1 YEAR



CHALLENGES                     CHALLENGES                     CHALLENGES                CHALLENGES                        2013
1. Long queue in               Lack of local capacity to      Province health office    Criterion of placement
   attractive areas            recruit suffcient number of    had no accurate data      did not fit with the real       FIXED CONTRACT PERIOD
                               health cadres                  to place cadres;          context                              UP TO 2 YEARS
2. Human right issues
3. Delayed salary                                             placement mostly in
                                                              very remote area




 Source: University of Gadjah Mada 2013.




                                                                         37
              PART 3: CONCLUSION AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
                                              CONCLUSION

3.1. The central policy priority is to achieve UHC under a single-payer umbrella covering all citizens by
2014 and to achieve full UHC coverage by 2019. Health insurance coverage has increased significantly in
Indonesia, from 15 percent in 1995 to 40 percent in 2011, particularly targeted at the poor. A key priority
is to further expand coverage in ways that deliver good health outcomes and financial protection to the
rest of the population — many of whom are in the informal sector — in ways that are financially
sustainable to government. Other priorities as part of the national scale-up to UHC include the need to
integrate the current health insurance program for the poor and near-poor — Jamkesmas — with all other
social insurance programs.

3.2. The overarching challenge is to achieve rapid scale-up of services, improved health outcomes, and
increased financial protection in ways that are effective, efficient, equitable, and sustainable in a country
as large and as diverse as Indonesia. Indonesia is a lower-middle-income country with a population of
over 242 million spread over thousands of islands. The country has achieved rapid, substantial, and
sustained improvements in reducing poverty and improving health outcomes. However, like others, the
country is now facing the challenge of rapidly rising incidence of often preventable, chronic, and
expensive-to-treat noncommunicable diseases such as stroke and other cardiovascular diseases at the
same time that it has an unfinished agenda of communicable diseases, especially tuberculosis and
undernutrition. Like others, Indonesia also has many development needs; increasing government
expenditure on health therefore needs to achieve value for money and be financially sustainable.

3.3. Despite rapid increases in the supply of health workers, there are still substantial staffing gaps in
addressing current needs. The number of physicians has increased annually but has barely kept up with
population growth: the ratio of physicians to 1,000 population has increased only marginally from 0.32 in
2007 to 0.46 in 2013. Greater progress has been made with respect to increasing the relative targets for
nurses and midwives. MoH estimates that an additional 118,788 health workers were needed at hospitals
in 2012. There are also significant gaps in key health worker positions at the primary care (puskesmas)
level. The shortage of nurses — despite large numbers of graduates — at hospitals and puskesmas is
particularly noticeable.

3.4. The government uses several programs to increase the availability of medical staff in rural
and remote areas. These programs include higher financial incentives and shorter contract periods for
rural and remote postings; recruitment based on ethnicity and location; and an internship program.
Distribution of health workers to remote and rural areas has been improving. However efforts need to be
maintained: at this stage 30 of 33 provinces in Indonesia still do not have the WHO recommended ratio of
1 physician per 1,000 population. The location of hospitals — many of which are concentrated in densely
populated Jakarta, and East, West, and Central Java — acts as a “pull” factor attracting health workers,
especially specialist physicians, who need the medical infrastructure that hospitals offer to practice their
skills. The geographical location of medical schools can also reinforce the urban bias and maldistribution
of health workers. Only a few schools had special programs for recruiting students from rural or
underserved areas.

3.5. Improving the regulatory environment, overall quality of health workers, and responsiveness of the
health system to changing needs is a challenge. Policies and programs for accreditation of medical
schools and for renewing certification for existing staff are being scaled up. However at this stage the new
accreditation system is not ready for implementation. The dual practice (public/private) system provides
flexibility for health workers and a source of income that is external to the government’s budget.
Nevertheless, there is an ongoing need to strengthen the regulatory system; many specialists in
provincial capital cities spend more time in private practice — and less time in public hospitals — than is
envisaged under the scheme. Medical schools do provide some initial training on UHC to prepare


                                                     38
graduating health workers, but more intensive and nationally standardized training will be required in
future as the country expands UHC coverage. There is also a need to continually adjust the standards of
competencies and the curriculum in response to the changes in disease burden.

3.6. Financing streams will need to be consolidated and made more coherent to make UHC
effective. Government expenditure on health has been expanding in absolute and relative terms.
However current levels of total — and public — health expenditure are still low relative to other
comparable countries. Sources of income for physicians and other health providers are fragmented:
there were ten separate sources of income for specialist physicians. Importantly, in the context of the
movement toward UHC, income from insurance organizations was always the smallest contribution to
overall income, providing less than 5 percent of total income.

                                          POLICY IMPLICATIONS

3.7. Indonesia needs to consider moving from norm-based approaches to a labor market strategy to
address HRH issues and broaden the scope of health workforce deployment approaches responding to
Indonesia’s differing circumstances in the lead-up to UHC. The evolution of the PTT policy indicates that
Indonesia has not been entirely satisfied with the contract arrangements; as changes have been made
quite frequently. The changes and evolution of policy demonstrate Indonesia’s determination to make
improvements and achieve better, fairer results for its people. Decision making to solve complex HRH
issues would benefit from an understanding of health labor market dynamics influencing health worker
supply and demand. Most policy implications illustrated in the paragraphs below are pieces relevant for a
labor market analysis. Moreover, the various stages and changes to the PTT policy have not been
systematically, independently, or rigorously evaluated, so it is not possible to say with confidence what
has worked, in what circumstances, at what cost, or what has not worked.

3.8. There is a need to better understand factors affecting the willingness and ability to move to
underserved areas. The central government allocates approximately Rp 1.7 trillion (US$1.7 million)
under MoH Regulation 7/2013 as incentive payments for health workers. Physicians may receive an
additional US$485 per month for working in remote areas, and an additional US$715 for working in very
remote areas — which is significantly larger than the US$205 their civil servant colleagues in urban areas
earn. Local governments may also pay additional incentive stipends from its own budget, up to US$1,000
extra per month for a physician in Morotai, North Maluku. However, feedback from the Indonesian
Medical Association is that financial incentive payments may not be the only — or even the main — factor
influencing health workers’ willingness to transfer to a remote location. Nonmonetary factors include lack
of ongoing training opportunities for themselves; lack of education opportunities for their children; inability
to continue practicing specialized skills; fear of being overlooked for promotion; unhealthy environment in
remote provinces, which might affect their families; and lack of security. Earlier studies found that for
some physicians in Java, the offer of specialist training — without any accompanying offer of a civil
service appointment — was sufficient incentive to serve in remote areas, although there were problems of
cost and potential inefficiency in such schemes (Chomitz et al. 1998). In sum, there may be other — and
less expensive — ways of encouraging health workers to stay in remote areas other than offering large
financial incentives. Increasing the number of well-conducted trials would provide an evidence base on
which government could better tailor incentive packages to the real needs of health workers considering
postings to remote locations.

3.9. Indonesia may benefit more from diverse deployment policies than monolithic or “one size
fits all” approaches. Indonesia has enormous variety within its borders ranging from densely populated
urban cities in the island of Java to sparsely populated rural and remote islands of NTT and Maluku.
Having UHC implies a degree of equity and equality for all its citizens, but this does not necessarily mean
a single or small choice of instruments to expand insurance coverage, as tends to occur with the single
contract regulation strategy (PTT) applied across all of Indonesia.




                                                      39
3.10.      On the one hand, Indonesia should not introduce further fragmentation of the health system, but
on the other, there is an argument for Indonesia to trial different approaches to incentivize health
providers. This would include different ways of paying — and supporting — health professionals that are
better tailored to the particular social, health, and economic characteristics of differing districts and
regions within Indonesia. There is room — and need — to trial other staff deployment approaches.

3.11.     Indonesia could, and should, experiment with different mixes of physicians, nurses, midwives,
and community health workers to find a combination that generates best health outcomes for the lowest
cost. This might be done through task shifting, for example, allowing nurses and midwives to prescribe
certain essential drugs if no physician is available, or through other mechanisms. It would also be useful
to systematically assess the cost-effectiveness of expanding UHC to remote and marginalized
communities. In some cases, policy makers might find that expanding public services to remote areas is
more cost-effective than expanding services in urban areas. That is because, while the costs of reaching
more remote communities may be higher, the actual disease burden in remote areas might be much
worse than in urban areas. In such circumstances, allocating resources to remote and rural areas would
cost more, but would have a bigger impact than allocating resources to urban areas, where private sector
services are already dominant. Much depends upon the actual situation and context. Good quality
research can help policy makers allocate scarce resources to their best use.

3.12.      There is a need to better understand the overlaps, gaps, and potential inconsistencies between
the various health workforce regulations of different agencies. There are many institutional stakeholders
issuing regulations about how and where health workers ultimately perform their duties. At the national
level these institutions include the Ministry of Education and Culture (responsible for producing the
medical staff), the Ministry of Home Affairs (responsible for hiring policy), the Ministry of Finance
(responsible for payment policy), and the Ministry of Health (responsible for using health workers). Local
governments must also work within the strong powers and regulations affecting the hiring and placement
of health workers, as well as financial flows to hospitals and health centers. Each of the professional
associations has its own policies and regulations that affect its members, including those for physicians,
nurses, and midwives. The end result is that policies and regulations are complex, lack coherence, and
blur lines of accountability and responsibility. There would be advantages in rationalizing, simplifying, and
unifying the regulations, while at the same time providing scope for regulations to adapt to local needs
and circumstances.

3.13.     More systematic monitoring and impact evaluation is essential for future policy development if
Indonesia is to receive the best return from its health expenditure in the lead up to UHC. The central
message of the latest World Health Report is that achieving UHC requires applied research and a good
evidence base. Given scarce health resources, proper, well-designed, systematic monitoring and impact
evaluation should be undertaken to generate the evidence base for future investments into alternative
approaches. Importantly, well-conducted impact evaluations that generate insights and new learnings
could quickly become “global public goods,” read and used to influence policy around the world.
Indonesia could become a major opinion maker and global “thought leader” in how to scale up UHC in a
decentralized setting if it were to invest more in basic applied research.

3.14.     Indonesia may benefit from other countries’ experience in implementing various health
worker distribution strategies. A recent study of scaling-up UHC in 11 countries, including Indonesia,
noted various policies aimed at improving distribution of health workers, including to remote and rural
areas (World Bank 2013a). Strategies included “recruiting students from underserved areas, encouraging
their enrollment through scholarships, setting quotas in schools, ensuring that curricula include rural
service components, and offering monetary and nonmonetary support for career development.
Compulsory service through bonding is another common policy for deployment in underserved areas.
Another important strategic approach is to invest in primary care workers, both because investments in
the hospital sector tend to skew the health workforce distribution toward urban areas and because
investments in these health workers have additive benefits for health outcomes” (World Bank 2013a).


                                                     40
3.15.        The following principles could be useful in setting priorities and making choices:

        • Do no harm. Change to policy and programs can cause unintended consequences that can
          actually be harmful to public health, or to the financial security of individuals (or government).

        • Continue to focus on critical barriers to UHC in the demand and supply side of health care.
          In a country as vast and varied as Indonesia, these critical barriers will be different from province
          to province, and from time to time. Trying to do everything or adopting a “one size fits all”
          approach could be counterproductive. There should be several service delivery models taking
          into account the diverse characteristics. Lowering direct and indirect financial barriers to health
          care, including travel costs, is likely to be important on the demand side in certain remote and
          rural provinces. On the supply side, health workforce planning should also produce different
          deployment models to produce the required skills mix, realistically taking into account the difficulty
          in attracting physicians to rural and remote areas.

        • “Readiness for UHC” among health workers is not “just” about numbers, important as that
          is in Indonesia. As this report shows, the actual number of health workers being produced —
          and employed — is a particularly important policy issue for Indonesia. However, having the right
          number of health workers, although necessary, is not sufficient for achieving UHC. Also important
          is the availability of health workers, including hours worked in the designated facilities, and
          numbers working in remote locations. “Readiness” also implies that all health workers have the
          appropriate skills level and quality of services relevant to current and changing disease burden in
          Indonesia at the primary and secondary/tertiary level of the health system. “Readiness” for UHC
          also means that all health workers have the necessary drugs, equipment, and facilities to do their
          job. “Readiness” for UHC means that the mix of physicians, nurses, and midwives is technically
          efficient and financially affordable.

        • “Readiness” also requires improved quality of service delivery among the health
          workforce. The service delivery strategy for UHC developed by the MoH should include the
          standards of services for the various levels of service to guide the competency standards of the
          health workforce. The professional associations and Ministry of Education and Culture have
          important roles to play as well.

        • The country will benefit from regular assessment of the quality of the stock of health
          workers providing services. The Indonesia Family Life Survey, for example, includes vignettes
          to measure quality. Collaboration with the professional associations to implement a good
          recertification or continuing education program should be encouraged and strengthened.

        •    Implementation of the new quality assurance system for health professional education is
            urgently needed. Accreditation of health professional study programs and the standardization of
            graduate certification will help standardize the quality of health workforce entering the market.

        • It is critical to actively and independently monitor and evaluate the inputs, outputs,
          outcomes, and impact of the movement to UHC. Are inputs and outputs achieving value for
          money? Why are graduating nurses not being employed as much as is needed? What are the
          trends in the quality of the health workforce? Are outputs appropriate to changing needs? Are
          outcomes disproportionately benefiting the poor or the rich? Are impacts sustainable? There is
          merit in carefully piloting and evaluating alternative models before undertaking wider
          implementation.




                                                        41
                                          REFERENCES

Adair, L. S., C. H. Fall, C. Osmond, A. D. Stein, R. Martorell, M. Ramirez-Zea, H. S. Sachdev, D. L. Dahly,
         I. Bas, S. A. Norris, L. Micklesfield, P. Hallal, and C. G. Victora. 2013. "Associations of Linear
         Growth and Relative Weight Gain during Early Life with Adult Health and Human Capital in
         Countries of Low and Middle Income: Findings from Five Birth Cohort Studies." The Lancet 382
         (9891): 525–34.
Bamberger, M., J. Rugh, and L. Mabry. 2012. Real World Evaluation: Working under Budget, Time, Data,
      and Political Constraints, 2nd ed. Sage Publications, California.
Barker, D. 1990. "The Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease: The Womb May Be More Important Than
        the Home." British Medical Journal 301.
Baumol, W. 2012. The Cost Disease: Why Computers Get Cheaper and Health Care Doesn't. New
       Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Beaglehole, R., and M. Dal Poz. 2003. "Public Health Workforce: Challenges and Policy Issues." Human
       Resources for Health 1 (4).
Bhushan, I., S. Keller, and B. Schwartz. 2002. "Achieving the Twin Objectives of Effectiveness and
      Equity: Contracting Health Services in Cambodia." ERD Policy Brief Series 6. Manila, the
      Philippines: Asian Development Bank.
Bhutta, Z. A. 2013. "Early Nutrition and Adult Outcomes: Pieces of the Puzzle." The Lancet 382 (9891).
Bloom, D., and J. Williamson. 1998. "Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles In Emerging Asia."
       World Bank Economic Review.
BPPSDM (Badan Pengembangan dan Perencanaan Sumber Daya Manusia, Board of Human Resources
for Health Empowerment and Development). 2011. Human Resources For Health Development Plan.
Jakarta: BPPSDM.
Center for Global Development. 2006. When Will We Ever Learn? Improving Lives through Impact
        Evaluation. Report of the Evaluation Gap Working Group. Washington, DC: Center for Global
        Development.
Chen, L., T. Evans, S. Anand, J. I. Boufford, H. Brown, M. Chowdhury, M. Cueto, L. Dare, G. Dussault, G.
       Elzinga, E. Fee, D. Habte, P. Hanvoravongchai, M. Jacobs, C. Kurowski, S. Michael, A. Pablos-
       Mendez, N. Sewankambo, G. Solimano, B. Stilwell, A. de Waal, and S. Wibulpolprasert. 2004.
       "Human Resources for Health: Overcoming the Crisis." The Lancet 364: 1984–90.
Chomitz, K., G. Setiadi, A. Azwar, N. Ismail, and P. Widiyarti. 1998. "What Do Doctors Want? Developing
       Incentives for Doctors to Serve in Indonesia's Rural and Remote Areas. Policy Research Working
       Paper 1888, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Clements, B., D. Coady, and S. Gupta, eds. 2012. The Economics of Public Health Care Reform in
      Advanced and Emerging Economies. Washington, DC: International Monetary FundDirectorate
       General of Higher Education, Ministry of Education and Culture. 2010. Potret Ketersediaan dan
       Kebutuhan Tenaga Dokter. Available at:
       http://hpeq.dikti.go.id/v2/images/Produk/Potret_Ketersediaan_Dan_Kebutuhan_Tenaga_Dokter.p
       df
Dodd, R., and A. Cassels. 2006. "Health Development and the Millennium Development Goals." Annals of
       Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 100 (5): 379–87.
Duflo, E. 2004. "Scaling Up and Evaluation." Annual World Bank Conference on Development
        Economics, Washington, DC.
———. 2006. "Field Experiments in Development Economics." Prepared for the World Congress of the
     Econometric Society. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


                                                    42
Duflo, E., and Michael Kremer. 2003. "Use of Randomization in the Evaluation of Development
        Effectiveness." Paper prepared for the World Bank Conference on Evaluation and Development
        Effectiveness, Washington, DC, July 15–16.
Dussault, G., and M. Franceschini. 2006. "Not Enough There, Too Many Here: Understanding
       Geographical Imbalances in the Distribution of the Health Workforce." Human Resources for
       Health 4 (12).
Fritzen, S. 2007. "Strategic Management of the Health Workforce in Developing Countries: What Have
         We Learned?" Human Resources for Health 5.
Gertler, P., S. Martinez, P. Premand, L. Rawlings, and J. Vermeersch. 2011. Impact Evaluation in
         Practice. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Government of Indonesia. 2011. Indonesian Health Profile [Online]. Available at
      http://www.depkes.go.id/downloads/PROFIL_DATA_KESEHATAN_INDONESIA_TAHUN_2011.p
      df.
———. 2013. Profil Data Kesehatan Indonesia [Online]. Available at
     http://www.depkes.go.id/downloads/PROFIL_DATA_KESEHATAN_INDONESIA_TAHUN_2011.p
     df. Accessed on September 17, 2013.
Government of the United Kingdom, DFID (Department for International Development). 2012.
      "Broadening the Range of Designs and Methods for Impact Evaluations." Report of a study
      commissioned by DFID. Working Paper 38, London.
Hartwig, J. 2008. "What Drives Health Care Expenditures? Baumol's Model of 'Unbalanced Growth'
Revisited." Journal of Health Economics 27: 603–23; http://dx.doi.org/10.3929/ethza-005187505.
Heller, P. 2005. "Understanding Fiscal Space." International Monetary Fund Policy Discussion Paper,
         Washington, DC.
IDHS (Indonesia Demographic and Health Survey). 2012. Central Bureau of Statistics, Indonesia,
        National Population and Family Planning Board, Indonesia, Ministry of Health, Indonesia, and ICF
        International.
IHME (Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation). 2013. Global Burden of Disease Profile: Indonesia
       [Online]. Available at http://www.healthmetricsandevaluation.org/sites/default/files/country-
       profiles/GBD%20Country%20Report%20-%20Indonesia.pdf.
Kanchanachitra,, C., M. Lindelow, T. Johnston, P. Hanvoravongchai, F. M. Lorenzo, N. L. Huong, S. A.
      Wilopo, and J. F. dela Rosa. 2011. "Human Resources for Health in Southeast Asia: Shortages,
      Distributional Challenges, and International Trade in Health Services." The Lancet 377: 769–81.
List J. 2011. "Why Economists Should Conduct Field Experiments and 14 Tips for Pulling One Off."
         Journal of Economic Perspectives (25) 3–16.
Meliala A., K. Hort, and L. Trisnantoro. 2013. "Addressing the Unequal Geographic Distribution of
        Specialist Doctors in Indonesia: The Role of the Private Sector and Effectiveness of Current
        Regulations." Social Science and Medicine 82: 30–34.
PODES (Potensi Desa, [Survey of Village Potential]). 2005. Central Bureau of Statistics, Indonesia.
———.2008. Central Bureau of Statistics, Indonesia.
———.2011. Central Bureau of Statistics, Indonesia.
Qureshy, L. F. 2011. "Forecasting the Demand and Supply of Health in Indonesia." (unpublished report).
       World Bank, Jakarta.
Ramalingam, B. 2011. "Learning How to Learn: Eight Lessons for Impact Evaluations That Make a
       Difference. Overseas Development Institute background paper, London.
Riskesdas (Riset Kesehatan Dasar,[Basic Health Research]. 2007. National Institute for Health Research
       and Development, Ministry of Health, Indonesia.

                                                   43
Rokx C, E. Satriawan, P. Marzoeki, and P. Harimurti. 2009. Indonesia's Doctors, Midwives and Nurses:
       Current Stock, Increasing Needs, Future Challenges and Options. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Rowe, A. K., D. De Savigny, C. F. Lanata, and C. G. Victora. 2005. "How Can We Achieve and Maintain
       High-Quality Performance of Health Workers in Low-Resource Settings?" The Lancet 366: 1026–
       35.
RS Online. 2012. Data Ruma Sakit Online [Online]. Available at
       http://202.70.136.52/rsonline/manual_rs/Manual_RS_Online.htm.
Spence, M., and M. Lewis, eds. 2009. "Health and Growth." Commission on Growth and Development.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
SUSENAS (Survey Sosial Ekonomi Nasional, [National Socioeconomic Survey]). 2012. Central Bureau of
     Statistics, Indonesia.
Tandon, A., and C. Cashin. 2010. Assessing Public Expenditure on Health from a Fiscal Space
       Perspective. HNP Discussion Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Tandon, A., P. Harimurti, E. Pambudi, and R. Li. 2013. "(In)effective Coverage? Assessing Indonesia's
       Reform Plans for Attaining Universal Health Coverage." Presentation to the Ninth World
       Congress of the International Health Economics Association, World Bank, Washington, DC.
UNICEF. 2013. Expanding Immunisation Coverage [Online]. Available at
      http://www.unicef.org/immunization/index_coverage.html. Accessed August 29, 2013.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2006. World Health Report: Working Together for Health. Geneva.
———. 2008. "Gender and Health Workforce Statistics." Spotlight on Statistics 2.
———. 2010. Key Components of a Well Functioning Health System [Online]. Geneva. Available at
     http://www.who.int/healthsystems/EN_HSSkeycomponents.pdf.
———. 2011. Noncommunicable Diseases Country Profiles.
———. 2012. "The Labor Market for Human Resources for Health in Low and Middle-Income Countries."
     Human Resources for Health Observer 11
———. 2013a. Indonesia Health Profile [Online]. Available at http://www.who.int/gho/countries/idn.pdf.
———. 2013b. What Is Universal Coverage? [Online]. Available at
     http://www.who.int/health_financing/universal_coverage_definition/en/. Accessed August 27,
     2013.
———. 2013c. World Health Report 2013: Research for Universal Health Coverage. Geneva.
———. 2013d. World Health Statistics. Geneva.
———. Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. 2001. Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in
     Health for Economic Development. Geneva.
Willis-Shattuck, M., P. Bidwell, S. Thomas, L. Wyness, D. Blaauw, and P. Ditlopo. 2008. "Motivation and
        Retention of Health Workers in Developing Countries: A Systematic Review." BMC Health
        Services Research 8 (247).
World Bank. 2009. "Health Financing in Indonesia: A Reform Road Map." Directions in Development,
       Washington, DC.
———. 2009b. Indonesia's Doctors, Midwives, and Nurses:Current Stock, Increasing Needs, Future
     Challenges, and Options, Jakarta.
———. 2010. "New Insights into the Provision of Health Services in Indonesia: A Health Worforce Study."
     Directions in Development, Washington, DC.
———. 2013a. Global Conference on Universal Health Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth:
     Lessons from 11 Country Case Studies a Global Synthesis, Washington, DC.


                                                   44
———. 2013b. "The Nuts and Bolts of Jamkesmas: Indonesia's Government Financed Health Coverage
     Program." Washington, DC.
———. 2013c. World Development Indicators DataBank.
———. 2013d. "Health Labor Markets in Low- and Middle-Income Countries." A Policy Brief, Washington,
     DC.
Xu, K., D. B. Evans, K. Kawabata, R. Zeramdini, J. Klavus, and C. J. Murray. 2003. "Household
        Catastrophic Health Expenditure: A Multicountry Analysis." The Lancet 362 (9378): 111–17.
Yates, R. 2009. "Universal Health Care and the Removal of User Fees." The Lancet 373: 2078–81.
Zurn, P., M. Dal Poz, B. Stilwell, and O. Adams. 2002. "Imbalances in the Health Workforce." Human
        Resources for Health, World Health Organization, Geneva.




                                                  45
Indonesia’s national health insurance program — Jaminan Kesehatan National (JKN) —aims to achieve
universal health coverage (UHC) by 2019. Achieving UHC means not only increasing the number of people
covered but also expanding the benefits package and ensuring financial protection. Although the JKN benefits
package is comprehensive, a key challenge related to the capacity to deliver the promised services is ensuring
the availability, distribution, and quality of human resources for health (HRH). Of Indonesia’s 33 provinces, 29 do
not have the WHO recommended ratio of 1 physician per 1,000 population, although Indonesia regularly
produces 6,000 to 7,000 new physicians annually. The shortage of nurses in hospitals and health centers
(puskesmas) is noticeable despite the large number of graduates. Physician maldistribution has been particularly
affected by the number and concentration of hospitals in urban areas, as well as by government’s policy of
allowing dual practice. The latest data from the 2007 Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS) vignettes, which
measured diagnostic and treatment ability, showed low average scores for physicians, nurses, and midwives.
Indonesia is addressing the quality issue by improving the quality assurance system of health professional
education through school accreditation and graduate certification and by strengthening health professional
registration and recertification systems. With these issues in mind, if Indonesia is to attain UHC by 2019,
significant and concerted effort to improve the availability, distribution, and quality of human resources for health
is required.
.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and
the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies
of papers in this series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries
about the series and submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@
worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                              1818 H Street, NW
                                                                              Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                              Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                              Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                              Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                              E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
