                                                                                                                                         Report No. 91343-GLB


       Intergovernmental Fiscal Management in
            Natural Resource–Rich Settings

                                                                          Lorena Viñuela, Kai Kaiser, and Monali Chowdhurie-Aziz




Table of Contents

I.      Special Features of Non-Renewable Resources and Policy Issues .................................................................... 2
II.     Revenue Sharing Instruments .................................................................................................................................. 5
III.        Fiscal Principles on Natural Resource Management ....................................................................................... 7
IV.         International Experience .................................................................................................................................... 10
V.      Determinants of Revenue Sharing ........................................................................................................................ 14
VI.         Macro-economic Considerations ...................................................................................................................... 17
VII.        Conclusion............................................................................................................................................................ 22
References .......................................................................................................................................................................... 35
Intergovernmental Fiscal Management in Natural Resource –Rich
Settings 1


1.        In resource-dependent countries, natural resources constitute one of the main assets
available for financing local governments because the economy is not greatly diversified. The
goal of this note is to highlight different critical dimensions of intergovernmental fiscal relations
in these settings, present a survey of the range of arrangements used for managing resource rents
across multiple levels of government, and synthesize basic principles or considerations in the
implementation of revenue-sharing systems across different contexts.

2.        The design and implementation of measures to improve intergovernmental management of
the oil, gas, and mining sector must consider the core policy objectives, fiscal context, and
overall political structure. Paying attention to the constraints and political economy drivers that
shape intergovernmental relations is critical to identify the feasible reforms and alternatives to
improve performance that are available in a given country.


     I.    Special Features of Non-Renewable Resources and Policy Issues

3.        The inherently complex design of intergovernmental fiscal systems becomes even more
challenging in the extractive sector owing to the distinctive technical and economic
characteristics of oil, gas, and mining, and the interactions between these and institutional and
political factors. The first characteristic is exhaustibility. There is a finite amount of these
resources in the ground since they are formed by extended geological processes and cannot be
easily replenished. The extraction of a resource in the present time reduces the amount of the ore
body or field available in the future and as a result there is an associated cost, known as user
cost. This exhaustibility introduces issues of inter-generational equity and optimality of the
extraction profile as well.

4.        At the same time, extractive industries demand long term planning for both government
and companies. Exploiting mineral resources requires high frontloading of investments, which

1
    This paper is co-authored by Lorena Viñuela, Monali Chowdhurie-Aziz, and Kai Kaiser
are irreversible and highly specific to the industry. Significant exploration expenditures and risks
precede startup, exploration expenses occur long before taxable income is available or even
before a decision to mine or extract oil is made. It is also characterized by high economic and
technological complexity and economic and geological risks for investors and governments that
cannot be fully foreseen during the time contracts are being negotiated.

5.    Notably, commodity prices often highly volatile. Producers are price takers and reach to
changes in international prices. The more progressive a country’s fiscal regime is, the more
vulnerable it is to price changes. On the other hand, progressivity allows the government to
capture windfalls profits during boom periods. It is not uncommon that high prices trigger
revisions of fiscal terms if they are regressive, which undermines the country’s credibility and
the long term prospects for the sector. Depending on the overall soundness of macro-economic
management (and whether spending is smoothed or not) and the design of the intergovernmental
fiscal system this volatility could be directly to subnational governments with significant
implications for their ability to plan and finance service delivery.

6.    At the same time, there is a large diversity of mineral types (oil, sand, coal, base metals,
gold, and diamonds) with diverse scales of operations and potential value added.
Intergovernmental fiscal systems have to grapple with a multitude of revenue sources and
variation in their volume and location.

7.    Important differences exist between the mining and petroleum sectors. The life cycle of a
mining project is considerably longer than projects in the petroleum sector. On the other hand,
oil production generally generates higher greater rents than mining. Extraction costs per barrel
may vary significant, however, depending on the prevailing geology and transport costs to
market. Oil production tends to be more enclaved than mining. The footprint of mineral
extraction in local communities is much more visible as mining tends to generate more
environmental and social externalities, but it also has more positive spillovers in the local
economy (Otto 2001).

8.    Mineral and oil resources are generally concentrated in a small number of subnational
units. In many countries producing regions are sparsely populated. For example, the autonomous
okrugs of Yamal-Nenets and Khanty-Mansi account for 90 percent of the gas production and 65
of oil production in the Russia Federation, but have less than 2 percent of the national population
(see Figure 1). Similar instances can be found in numerous countries. In other cases, most of the
production takes place off-shore, but on the coast of few states or municipalities, such as in the
case of Brazil.



Figure 1: Major Oil and Gas Producing Regions in Russian Federation (2007)
                                                                  percentage
                                      0   10    20        30     40        50          60   70       80      90
  Yamal-Nenets Autonomous Okrug
  Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug
                  Orenburg Oblast
             Republic of Tatarstan
                      Tomsk Oblast
                  Astrakhan oblast
                  Republic of Komi
         Republic of Bashkortostan
                     Samara Oblast
                       Perm Oblast
                Udmurtia Republic
        Nenets Autonomous Okrug
                    Sakhalin Oblast
                  Continental Shelf

                   National population         Proved reserves        Oil production        Gas production

Source: Kurlyandskayai et al. 2012.

9.         Such asymmetric distribution introduces concerns around horizontal equity and economic
efficiency, in particular whether to earmark resource revenues and expenditures to the areas of
production and what are the potential distortions introduced by such rules. In countries where a
portion of royalties are earmarked to the producing regions, these tend to be concentrated in a
small number of localities. In Colombia, until a recent reform, 48 percent of the royalties went
to the producing departments and 13 to producing municipalities. In practice, this rule meant that
two thirds of royalty revenues went to 5 (out of 32) departments (see Figure 2). To date, there
has been practically no correlation between the amount of royalties received and departmental
performance in reducing poverty or providing public services, despite the fact that some
departments received several times the national average of transfers (World Bank 2011).

10.        New finds and increases in production or prices can also exacerbate horizontal
imbalances, unless there are considered within the overall intergovernmental transfer system and
combined with other tools to equalize transfers. In Peru, where 20 percent of mining taxes are
distributed to producing regions and 30 percent to local governments, the increase in prices in the
second part of the 2000s coupled with rising production volumes meant that producing localities
received significant windfalls, in many cases well beyond their absorptive capacity. In Brazil,
new discoveries off of the coast of Rio de Janeiro has meant that state went from receiving half
of royalties in 1997 to over 75 percent a decade later (see Figure 3). During the same period, the
amount that was distributed to states and municipalities increased from 150 US$ million to 7
US$ billion, which meant that Rio de Janeiro’s share grew from 75 US$ million to 5.6 US$
billion. In Colombia, royalty payments almost triple (going from 1.8 COP trillion in 2000 to 5.2
COP trillion in 2009).



Figure 2: Distribution of royalties by                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 3: Distribution of oil revenues by
department in Colombia (percent), 2008.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  region in Brazil (percent), 1997 and 2008.

                  25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          70
                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
     percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             percentage



                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                  10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                  0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAN ANDRES
                                                                                                                  SUCRE




                                                                                                                                                                          NARIÑO
                                                                                                                 BOYACA
                                                                          CESAR
                                                                                   CORDOBA
                                                                                  ANTIOQUIA
                        CASANARE




                                                                                                                                                 N. DE SANTANDER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GUANIA



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AMAZONAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VICHADA
                                   META
                                             ARAUCA
                                          LA GUAJIRA


                                                              SANTANDER




                                                                                                       BOLIVAR




                                                                                                                                                                                                   CALDAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            VALLE DEL CAUCA
                                                       HULA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ATLANTICO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RISARALDA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VAUPES
                                                                                                                          PUTUMAYO



                                                                                                                                                                   CUNDINAMARCA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GUAVARE
                                                                                              TOLIMA




                                                                                                                                                                                   CAUCA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CAQUETA
                                                                                                                                     MAGDALENA




                                                                                                                                                                                           CHOCO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rio Grande do Sul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pernambuco




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rondônia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Acre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Roraima
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pará



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tocantins




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Distrito Federal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         São Paulo



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ceará




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mato Grosso do Sul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Amazonas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Paraíba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Minas Gerais
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Espírito Santo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Alagoas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Santa Catarina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Maranhão
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bahia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Paraná




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Goiás
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Piauí
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rio Grande do Norte




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mato Grosso




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Amapá
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sergipe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rio de Janeiro




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1997                                                       2008

Source: World Bank 2011.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Source: ANP, Gobetti et al. 2012.

11.                    These features of natural resource revenues need to be considered when assessing the
potential benefits and costs of the various intergovernmental fiscal arrangements.


    II.                Revenue Sharing Instruments

12.                    Countries generally use a mix fiscal and nonfiscal instruments to mobilize revenues from
extractive industries, each with its own benefits and disadvantages along economic,
administrative, and revenue-enhancing dimensions.2 Nonfiscal alternatives include auctioning

2
    For a more extensive discussion see Barma et al. 2012 (chapter 4) and Le and Viñuela 2012.
exploration and extraction rights, production sharing, and equity participation. Fiscal instruments
comprise royalty (specific and ad valorem), corporate income tax, presumptive income tax,
resource rent tax, and property tax, as well as other taxes such as value added tax, and import and
export duties (Otto and Andrews 2006, Sunley et al. 2003).

13.      In turn, petroleum and mineral revenues can be shared vertically across levels of
government using a variety of arrangements, which are summarized in Table 1. Nonfiscal
options imply sharing part of the resources and revenues received as part of production sharing
agreements or equity participation. They can also include in-kind revenue such as capital assets
received as part of resource-for-infrastructure deals (Foster 2009). Fiscal arrangements range
from separation of tax bases to intergovernmental transfers (Broscio 2006).

Table 1: Instruments for sharing rents from natural resources
Method             Separation of Tax   Concurrence of      Sharing of   Sharing of         Intergovernmental
                   Bases (own-source   Taxes (sharing of   Revenue      Revenue In-Kind    Transfers out of
                   taxes)              tax bases)                                          Revenue from
                                                                                           Natural Resources
Determination      Subnational         National            National     Mostly National    National
of the tax base
Determination      Subnational         Subnational         National     Mostly national    National
of the tax rates                       (within limits)
Administration     Subnational         Mostly national     National     By the producing   Mostly national
                                                                        firm
Criterion for      Origin              Origin              Origin       Origin             Need, equity, or
beneficiary                                                                                other
jurisdiction

Source: Brosio 2006, p. 441.

14.      Whereas most alternatives allocate revenues according to the principle of origin, each of
these distributes authority over the tax base, rate, and administration in a different manner. In
the case of the separated tax base system, national and subnational governments are entitled to
levy separate taxes on mineral production using different instruments (e.g. the national
government collecting income tax and state government collecting royalties). The national and
subnational governments separately administer their own instruments. In a tax-base-sharing
arrangement, two or more levels of governments could tax the same base using the same
instrument with the same or different rates (e.g. each level collecting different royalties). Tax
revenue sharing normally implies that tax bases, rates and the percentage accrued to producing
regions are determined by the central government.

15.    The complexity and administrative costs associated with the various tax instruments limit
the options available for subnational governments in the cases where the tax base is shared.
Resource rent taxes, which are more progressive, impose considerable administrative costs and
require greater technical capacity (Brosio 2006). As a result, state and provincial governments
generally prefer to directly levy royalties (Otto 2001) because that system not only is simpler but
also reduces delays and variability in revenues (McLure 2003). Levying royalties at both levels
of governments, however, potentially can lead to vertical externalities by increasing the overall
burden of the tax.

16.    Intergovernmental transfers, which are a grant from the central government that raised the
funds to lower tiers of government, can vertically channel resources on the basis of origin or
using other criteria such as equity. In most cases, transfers systems combine grants which have
equalizing objectives with those that separately compensate producing regions. For example,
Nigeria distributes the funds in the Federation Account (which is almost entirely financed by oil
receipts) dividing 40 percent equally among all states, and the rest according to population, land
mass and terrain, social needs, and internal revenue efforts. However, oil producing states
receive an additional 13 percent of oil revenues generated in their territory.


III.   Fiscal Principles on Natural Resource Management

17.    The general literature on intergovernmental fiscal relations and decentralization
recommends that a function is assigned to the level of government that would be able to conduct
it with the greatest possible efficiency. If the functions require adapting to different needs, local
governments would be in a better position to elicit information from citizens and deliver the mix
of policies that better adapt to their preferences and economic conditions (Oates 1972).
Conversely, functions and policy areas in which there are clear economies of scale or spillovers
would be better served by the central government. Yet even in the areas where responsibilities
have been devolved to lower tiers of governments, central governments retain significant roles in
setting standards, regulation, and financing.
18.   This normative literature is largely concerned with the potential efficiency and equity
gains of decentralization. If properly implemented, devolution should allow local governments to
choose different tax-expenditure mixes that best accommodate to heterogeneous local
preferences and circumstances (Brennan and Buchanan 1965) and it should lead to gains in
efficiency through local informational advantages, increased accountability, and competition and
experimentation among local governments (Oates 1972).

19.   Students of decentralization are also preoccupied with addressing vertical and horizontal
fiscal imbalances arising from the gap between the distribution of functions and revenues
(Schroeder 2001, Shah 2007). Central governments are generally more efficient at collecting
taxes than subnational governments. As a result, the more decentralized functions are in a given
country the greater the fiscal gap would be. If some revenue collection responsibilities are
transferred to the lower levels, the gap could be smaller. But the gap ultimately depends on how
effective tax administration is at the subnational level and the size of the revenue base that exist
at that level. Whatever the case may be, transfers are likely to be an important part of subnational
revenues in all countries.

20.   Transfers and revenue sharing systems could be designed to solve these gaps and
counteract some of the negative incentives associated with transfer. At the same time, transfers
to subnational governments can be used to compensate for differences in needs and fiscal
capacity by redistributing resources across jurisdictions.

21.   Following this logic, literature on the assignment of revenue from natural resources
recommends that subsoil natural resources are managed at the national level. Federal or central
governments are better placed to collect revenues from extractive industries, which are complex
and difficult to implement. Assigning tax collection to a single level of government has the
additional benefit of preventing vertical externalities and overtaxation of the sector (Brosio
2006). A central system of natural resource rent collection also introduces efficiency by reducing
administration and compliance costs and by allowing ring-fencing of projects across jurisdictions
(McLure 2003; Mieszkowski 1983).

22.   Revenue sharing or transfers are preferred over the assignment of own-source taxes to
subnational governments and sharing tax bases (Boadway and Shah 1994; McLure 1983). As a
result of the uneven geographic distribution of natural resources and population, assigning rents
exclusively to the state or regional level could lead to considerable horizontal imbalances, and
even have political and economic destabilizing effects. In addition, there is uncertainty over the
amount and location of resources and where future resources may be found, so it is in the
interests of subnational governments to allow for some redistribution.

23.   A key concern is not just the amount but the predictability of fiscal transfers that
subnational governments receive. It is likely that subnational governments are less well placed
than national governments to cope with significant revenue volatility. Resource revenues are
subject to volatility arising from these sources, including variable rates of extraction over time,
payments from producing companies, and prices. Subnational governments need some degree of
medium-term revenue predictability in support of sound budgeting and execution. If subnationals
depend on central transfers, they likely will be quite vulnerable to adjustments by the central
government. Even if transfers are based on rules-based criteria, transfers based on resource
revenues can be subject to significant volatility (for example, due to price fluctuations, a fixed
royalty share for subnationals may vary significantly).

24.   The theory of federalism offers economic arguments to guide decisions on the amount of
resources to be distributed to subnational governments and how they should be allocated across
localities. First, subnational governments should be refunded for the additional costs and
investments on local infrastructure that exploiting nonrenewables require before the rents are
distributed (Bahl and Tumennasan 2004). Because resources tend to be concentrated in few
subnational jurisdictions, such excess cost is imposed unevenly and would be frontloaded to a
large extent.

25.   Second, negative environmental externalities associated with the exploration and
exploitation of mineral resources should be internalized in taxes and fees and be used to
compensate the producing subnational units that bear these (Ahmad and Mottu 2002, Brosio
2006). Similarly, there may be compelling grounds to compensate regions with extractive
industries for additional costs incurred to provide additional services for in-migrants associated
with the industry, in the absence of the ability to raise these revenues directly (Bahl and
Tumennasan 2004; McLure 1983). This requires some measure of what these costs are, and if
resource revenues are earmarked for these purposes.

26.    However, there are other arguments made in favor giving additional revenue allocations to
the originating regions on the basis of heritage. If a country’s constitution has given regions
ownership rights to subnational governments, these should be compensated for the user cost.
Ideally the funds collected from the extraction of a mineral would be reinvested in capital goods
that can replace the depleted natural wealth (Hartwick 1977) or preserved for future generations.
The underlying rationality is that nonrenewable are part of a country’s assets, and thus,
consumption of revenues resulting from sales should more accurately be classified as
consumption of capital instead of consumption of income (Dabán and Hélis 2009; Humphreys,
Sachs, and Stiglitz 2007).

27.    Nevertheless, if all or a large portion of resource rents are earmarked to region of origin,
the central government and nonproducing localities might not have adequate revenues to fulfill
their functions, while producing regions are able to provide more public services and investment
than the rest of the country. In this case, there will not only be vertical and horizontal disparities,
but also inefficiencies given that the social return rate of investment would likely be lower in
resource-rich but sparsely populated regions than in other jurisdictions (McLure 2003).


IV.    International Experience

28.    In practice, the degree and nature of the participation of subnational governments in the
management of subsoil resources depends on how ownership, regulation and expenditure
responsibilities have been distributed across levels of governments. This distribution of
functions is the result of a complex process of institutional development and political bargains
that do not necessarily focus on equity or efficiency of public expenditures.

29.    There is a significant diversity in how countries have addressed the extractive sector in
their intergovernmental fiscal system. Table 2 provides a stylized overview of intergovernmental
management across resource-dependent settings. Countries are classified by the extent of vertical
claims over subsoil assets (rows) as well as if ownership is vested in the national or
provincial/state government (columns). It is important to note that countries could be further
classified along a number of other dimensions.

Table 2: Tax Assignment Instruments and Ownership of Sub-soil Resources
                                                                           Ownership
      Tax Assignment                        National Ownership                                        Subnational
                                                                                                      Ownership
National budget/full           Angola                     Norway
centralization                 Algeria                    Oman
                               Azerbaijan                 Qatar
                               Bahrain                    Saudi Arabia
                               Chile                      Timor-Leste
                               Iran, Islamic Rep. of      United Kingdom
                               Kuwait                     Yemen, Rep. of
                               Libya
                                                                                                  b
Downward revenue               Ecuador                    Peru                      Argentina
                                                                                              c
sharing                        Ghana                      Brazil                    Australia
                                                                                          d
                               Indonesia                  Colombia                  India
                               Kazakhstan                 Iraq
                               Mexico                     Nigeria
                               Malaysia                   Venezuela, R. B. de
                               Papua New Guinea
                                                   a                                        e
Concurrence of taxes           Russian Federation                                   Canada
                                                                                                 f
(sharing of tax bases)                                                              United States

Upward Revenue-sharing                                                              United Arab Emirates
Arrangement

Source: Author.
Note: a. Joint ownership of onshore resources between the Russian Federation and subnational entities. The continental shelf is
owned exclusively by the Russian Federation.
b. Provinces own subsoil resources and control exploration licenses and exploitation concessions.
c. States have ownership and control of resources onshore and the federal rules apply to coastal waters and territorial sea.
d. States own resources onshore, but the federal government regulates and controls exploration licenses and exploitation
concessions.
e. Provinces own and manage onshore resources. The federal government owns offshore resources and shares control and
revenues with coastal provinces.
f. States own and regulate subsoil resource management, except in federal land and offshore.

30.      In the majority of countries ownership of natural resources and related revenues are vested
in the central government. Yet in a number of federal settings—including Argentina, Australia,
Canada, India, the United States and the United Arab Emirates—state or provincial governments
have rights over subsoil assets. In most cases, the federal government retains rights over off-
shore assets and those found in federal land. There is also a larger set of countries where
subnational governments receive a share of revenues and royalties from extractive activities
carried out within their geographical area.
31.   A wide range of disparity exists in the extent to which revenues are spread across levels
and in the overall degree fiscal and administrative decentralization. There is no strict
correspondence between the form of government, either federal or unitary, and the more or less
decentralizing character of revenue-sharing systems. However, only in federal countries do
subnational units have ownership of nonrenewable resources.

32.   Numerous countries use derivation-based revenue sharing with producing subnational
units. For example, in Brazil a formula determines the amount of transfers according to
population size and per capita income, while states and municipalities receive additional shares
of royalties according to the level of onshore or offshore production. Table 4 provides a more
detailed synthesis of derivation-based natural resource fiscal transfers in a selected number of
more decentralized settings, including Indonesia, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Sudan, and
Venezuela.

33.   Moreover, some countries have implemented asymmetric or mixed models relative to
resource extraction subnational entities. In addition to basic revenue derivation-based sharing,
Indonesia granted additional allocations to its special autonomy regions of Aceh and Papua.
Historically, these regions had been associated with significant secessionist tendencies and poor
developmental outcomes. In an analogous manner, the Malaysian oil-producing provinces have a
degree of special autonomy in addition to derivation-based revenue sharing in the context of a
highly centralized federation.

34.   A comparable variation is observed based on which level of government is responsible for
setting tax bases and rates and carrying on the collection of rents from nonrenewable resources.
In the vast majority of countries, taxes are set and administered by the national government and
then are shared with the lower tiers. In several cases, however, federal and second-tier
governments impose their own taxes on a shared basis as in Canada and the United States. The
United Arab Emirates is the only country in which rents are collected solely by subnational
governments and then shared with the central government in cash and in-kind. The emirates have
full ownership over subsoil resources and collect royalties, company profit transfers, and income
tax receipts. The transfers are negotiated yearly to smooth the budget (Ahmad and Mottu 2002).
35.    Intergovernmental systems also distribute petroleum and mineral revenues that are raised
through nontax mechanisms like production sharing and equity participation. Subnational
governments also received revenues from production sharing in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sudan
and from equity participation in Papua New Guinea.

36.    The degree to which countries have been able to implement predictable and rules-based
transfer systems varies significantly. Although many countries have relatively transparent rules,
in practice transfers are often subject to manipulation and delays. Transfers need to be
transparent and predictable, based on need and fiscal capacity, and need to provide sufficient
resources to undertake the devolved functions to yield results (Bahl and Linn 1994; Bird 2001;
Ma 1997; Shah 2004). In the case of resource rent, transparency and predictability have
additional implications given that uncertainty about the division of resource rents has been cited
repeatedly as a central contributor to conflict and political volatility in resource-dependent
countries (Herbst 2001). Given conceptions of ownership, subnationals may have a valid claim
to receive a significant part of rents from a nonrenewable resource based on heritage arguments.



Figure 4: Decentralization and Resource                Figure 5: Decentralization and Revenue
Rents (percent), 2008.                                 Dependence (percent), 2008.




Source: World Bank Decentralization Indicators 2012,   Source: World Bank Decentralization Indicators 2012,
Wealth of Nations Database 2010.                       Barma et al. 2012.

37.    Overall, there is no apparent relationship between the types of intergovernmental
distribution of functions and resources and the form of government or degree of decentralization.
As well, resource abundance is not, positively or negatively, associated with the overall degree
of decentralization, measured as the share of public expenditures carried out by subnational
governments (see Figure 4). If only resource dependent countries are considered, or those that
derive more than 25 percent of GDP or public revenues from extractive industries, it appears
decentralization is negatively correlated with resource dependence for this set of countries.
However, this association should be considered with caution as this is a truncated sample.


 V.    Determinants of Revenue Sharing

38.   The features of intergovernmental systems are largely dependent on how governments
prioritize often-competing aims of national cohesion and conflict avoidance, local service
delivery and effective macro-management. Whether more centralized or decentralized
arrangements for managing oil and mining resource and their rents are more or less appropriate
to a particular circumstance depends both on these objectives and the underlying political
economy underpinnings of intergovernmental relations.

39.   In opposition to the recommendations of the normative literature on fiscal federalism,
most countries share revenues with subnational governments and have earmarking arrangements
for producing regions. Such arrangements are the result of political bargains and historical
legacies that are generally difficult to change. A recent stream of positive literature on
federalism offers a more useful insight on why this may is the case. Recognition is growing that
performance of federal and decentralized governments depend on their design, representative
institutions, and parties (Eaton 2004), which in turn emerge as a response to underlying social,
cultural, or demographic factors (Rodden 2007).

40.   The so-called second generation literature has emphasized that fiscal federalism is
frequently introduced as a means to protect the wealth of rich regions against threats of
expropriation by other regions. Asset specificity and capital mobility, as well as horizontal
inequality among regions shape the locus of tax power and expenditure responsibilities (Boix
2003). In settings with unevenly distributed endowments and pronounced income differences
between regions, the redistribution preferences of the median voter in poorer regions can create
pressures for tax centralization, which rich provinces will oppose. Without a strong center that is
capable of redistributing rents across regions, federations risk dismembering. In the long run, if
federal institutions are maintained, they contribute to shaping interregional inequality
(Beramendi 2007).

41.   The allocation of rents from natural resources is frequently a vexing political question in
developing countries where rents from natural resources account for a large share of total
government revenues. The uneven distribution of natural resource rents creates additional strains
on national unity and contestation of central-local government relations as it generally entails
that small resource-rich (and often sparsely populated) regions share rents with larger areas.

42.   Particularly in low income countries strong subnational claims on natural resources or
historical neglect can be a source of conflict. If the people residing in the resource-rich regions
are dissatisfied with the returns (mostly the resulting increased incomes) from the presence of
natural resources because it does not meet their expectations, this may lead to political and social
unrest (Ross 2007). Thus, citizens residing in a peripheral region may favor independence due to
the appeal that ownership rights of the natural resource holds (Collier and Hoeffler 2002; Ross
2007). The recent attention to the impact of extractive industries on local communities and
rights of indigenous people over such resources has generated calls for greater sharing (Otto
2001). Such claims, however, often are intertwined with a sense that central authorities have
historically neglected resource-rich regions, and hence these regions need resources to provide
these services.

43.   In this context, federalism is often viewed as a means to balance centripetal and
centrifugal forces in large and ethnically or culturally diverse societies (Filippov, Ordeshook, and
Shvetsova 2004; Treisman 1999). By increasing development at the local level (Bakke and
Wibbels 2006), reducing discretion and ambiguity of natural resource rents (Bird and Ebel 2006;
Herbst 2001), and providing citizens with opportunities to shape policies (Brancati 2009),
revenue-sharing mechanisms have the potential to solidify national unity and diffuse separatist
sentiments. In addition, decentralization can enhance local autonomy and offers a setting in
which minorities can enjoy self-rule at the regional level (Jeong 2002). Alternative regional
arenas favor intragroup competition, which in turn reduces power struggles at the national level
(Horowitz 2002).
44.   In contrast, others warn about the potential negative incentives that sharing resource
revenues can generate. When ethnic or linguistic minorities with historical grievances are
concentrated in the same jurisdictions in which natural wealth is found, sharing revenues can
strengthen their position to contest national unity. Thus, overlapping ethnic cleavages and
distribution of resources can encourage disintegration (McLure 1994). Decentralization can
increase ethnic conflict and secessionism indirectly by reinforcing ethnic and regional identities
and promoting growth of regional parties (Brancati 2009). In the absence of political competition
and adequate downward accountability mechanisms at the subnational level, decentralization can
lead to elite capture, corruption, and weak government performance that reinforce regional
inequalities (Jeong 2002). In addition, if no national consensus is reached and subnational actors
view revenue-sharing arrangements as inequitable, conflict is likely to persist. What is equitable
is largely going to be defined by the particular political context in which allocations across
different regions are made and also is subject to changes over time (Herbst 1989, 2001).

45.   Ultimately, the prospective outcome and options depend on governance thresholds and on
overall characteristics of the political system, especially the degree of nationalization of parties
and the availability of political and judicial channels to solve disputes over resources (Collier and
Venables 2009). Bakke and Wibbels (2006) test for the determinants of intranational conflict in
22 federal settings. Their results suggest that “peace preserving merits of federalism depend not
only on the design of institutions, but how these respond to the characteristics they govern.?
Regional inequality and ethnic diversity are two key variables to consider in this regard.
Copartisanship between the center and the regions averts conflict and holds the state together
only when the national governments are inclusive to ethnic minority and majority regions.

46.   There is no blueprint for intergovernmental institutions in these settings, but the nature of
regional disparities (including natural resources), as well as party representation and political
power should be taken into consideration. Care must be taken that intergovernmental design does
not become too narrowly focused on distributional issues, but rather includes the range of
complementary institutions that allow for credible and sustainable multilevel government and
governance. These include the presence of checks and balances mechanisms (for example,
through judicial institutions and inter- or intra-political party bargaining). In the absence of such
institutional mechanisms, intergovernmental fiscal design could degenerate to short-term
contestation. Given significant price volatility associated with natural resource revenues, the
combination of weak complementary institutions (including revenue management) and shifting
demands can make for a precarious mix.

47.   An important aspect of addressing these issues is to see this debate as being about
significantly more than simply granting more resources. Subnational regions may be concerned
about a number of other issues, rather than maximizing transfers in the short run. These issues
may be about greater autonomy in certain areas. Such concerns, for example, can be addressed
with asymmetric approaches to different regions, including those richly endowed with natural
resources (Bird and Ebel 2007). Above all, when spending capacity of subnational governments
are weak, alternative spending mechanisms to provide benefits to the population of resource-rich
regions could be pursued. These could include unconditional or conditional cash transfer
programs, linked to the existing resource wealth. Particular measures could be taken to
encourage performance on the part of resource-rich regions.


VI.    Macro-economic Considerations

48.   A central issue is how to balance in the design of intergovernmental fiscal systems
macroeconomic sustainability objectives and political pressures. Resource-dependent countries
that were best able to weather the commodity price shocks of 2008/09, whether decentralized or
not, had put in place effective medium-term revenue management measures. Numerous countries
have formal saving or stabilization funds. Yet the rate that is saved during high commodity price
and production periods varies considerably, as does the success of ensuring medium-term
stability in government revenues during downturns (see Table 5). On the other hand, some
countries like Bolivia and Iraq saved substantial amounts of resources because of their low
budget execution, whereas others have built up foreign reserves, as in Russia and Kazakhstan.
Although accumulated savings have been significant in the recent commodity boom period, they
quickly can become vulnerable to rapid annual drawdowns outside of some established
institutional criteria and mechanisms.

49.   How windfall revenues are used and allocated across levels of government during
commodity booms determines how much fiscal space countries had during the price bust to
smooth spending. If windfalls are used to finance current expenditures and wages and expand
nonoil deficits, the social adjustment cost likely would be higher than if spending is delinked
from commodity revenues. All political systems face intense pressures to spend during boom
times, especially those in developing democracies where social and infrastructure needs are
great. At the same time, investing or hedging oil savings implies high political risk if oil prices
continue to increase and savings are lost. Recent experiences in Chile, Indonesia, Mexico, and
Nigeria show that policy lessons from previous commodity cycles have motivated national
authorities to follow prudent fiscal policies and avoid procyclical spending and excessive
borrowing, both at the national and subnational levels.


Box 1: Mexico’s Windfall Sharing and Hedging Experience


Mexico’s federal government remains relatively dependent on o il revenues. Mexico is the seventh-largest oil
producer in the world. The sector generates approximately 16 percent of export earnings but more than 35 percent of
total government revenues. Although oil revenue in Mexico represents a significant share of revenue for the federal
budget, state and local governments have been shielded from price volatility through several mechanisms. First,
transfers are made after deducting energy subsidies. Second, only a limited part of petroleum rents are redistributed;
20 percent of ordinary extraction rights are incorporated into a general fund and distributed to the states based on a
formula taking into account their characteristics. Producing municipalities received an extra 3.17 percent to
compensate for the environmental damage that resulted from oil extraction. After the reference price (US$70 per
barrel) is surpassed, however, states receive an additional share of the windfalls, which diffuses pressures for
redistribution during boom times. Third, a stabilization fund receives 10 percent crude oil production when the price
is more than US$32 per barrel and is on a sliding scale that starts at 1 percent when the price is below US$22 per
barrel. Part of the saved revenues have been use to diversify risk. Both in 1990 –91 and in 2007–08, Mexico sold oil
futures and used oil swaps to hedge price risks with highly successful results. These measures have made shared
revenues more stable and have allowed for countercyclical public spending at the national and subnational levels.

Revenue-sharing rules are highly transparent and predictable and are accompanied with a high degree of consensus
over the need for fiscal discipline. In 2009, the distribution formula was changed to encourage local governments to
mobilize additional resources. States are guaranteed a threshold equivalent to the transfers received in 2007, but they
will get additional transfers according to the relative weight of their own tax collection. Mexico has successfully
diversified its economy. Nevertheless, it faces major challenges to diversify the sources of fiscal revenues and to
increase the competitiveness of its oil industry. The monopoly held by the state-owned Petroleos Mexicanos
(PEMEX), which suffers from chronic underinvestment and has made little exploration efforts in the past two
decades, is likely to lead to a decrease in the levels of production in the near future that can compromise fiscal
stability. In 2008, the Mexican Congress passed a law reforming the internal governance and accountability of the
company to reverse the situation.
Macrofiscal Management: Aligning Incentives across the Intergovernmental System

50.   High fiscal dependence on extractive sector creates vulnerability to price cycle and can
lead to fiscal volatility. However, volatility can be addressed by smoothing oil revenues, most
commonly achieved via saving funds and hedging of oil revenues that prevent the transmission
of oil price volatility to the budget (Davis, Ossowski, and Fedelino 2003). Nevertheless, given
various spending pressures, uncertainty about oil price, and political risk, stabilization
institutions are difficult to implement credibly. Revenue diversification by broadening the overall
tax base is another key strategy.

51.   The theory of federalism explains that central governments are in a better financial and
political position to smooth spending across boom cycles and offset the volatility associated with
natural resources, which tend to be significantly higher than other sources of fiscal revenues.
National governments have larger budgets and access to nonresource revenues and financial
markets (McLure 1994). Optimally, when governments face price fluctuations, they would
impose stabilizing rules to the intergovernmental transfers to protect subnational governments
from the boom-bust cycle and smoothing will be done before the division of rents across levels
of government. During boom periods, these rules would prevent current expenditures from being
increased beyond a sustainable point, whereas in downturns, the central or federal governments
would be able to use the saved funds to finance subnational deficits and resort to financial
markets if necessary to secure additional resources (Gonzalez, Rosenblatt, and Webb 2002).

52.   On the other hand, diversifying subnational sources of revenues could reduce vulnerability
to price shocks of second- and third-tier governments. Local governments can raise a number of
taxes without introducing major distortions on the extractive sector that discourage investment,
such as property taxes and user fees (Otto 2001). These taxes are not linked to profitability and
price fluctuations and are applied throughout the project life cycle, thus providing a more stable
source of revenue. In addition, improving the overall capacity of subnational governments to tax
nonextractive activities should be pursued concurrently.

53.   Ideally, intergovernmental fiscal arrangements in resource-dependent settings will be
consistent with overall revenue management and stabilization, and with the criteria by which
revenues are assigned to subnational governments. Intergovernmental fiscal systems might
distribute the burden of stabilization across levels of governments in a different way and central
governments might need to resort to bargaining or to other incentives to have discipline at the
subnational level. Indonesia offers an example of a system that has combined overall revenue
management strategies with a significant degree of fiscal decentralization (Box 2).

54.     A key policy challenge in the presence of significant subnational assignments of resource
revenues is to design some type of credible coordination device that encompasses both national
and central levels of governments. The criterion of subnational revenue predictability suggests
that particular emphasis should be placed on ensuring that subnational governments have some
degree of medium-term predictability. Simple fiscal rules with conservative resource prices are
typical strategies. Subnational governments may feel that national governments could use
conservative pricing to withhold resource revenues from them. As a result of poorly designed
sharing schemes, subnationals could begin to lobby for overly optimistic prices. A more
promising strategy would be to ensure that subnationals see that it is in their interest to adhere to
common fiscal rules. This could be achieved, for example, by providing them with access to
stabilization mechanisms if prices in the future are less buoyant.


Box 2: Indonesia: Revenue Sharing, Equalization, and Special Autonomy


Indonesia’s 2001 “Big Bang? decentralization saw the introduction of significant derivation -based natural-resource
revenue sharing. The overall decentralization and the introduction of resource revenue sharing were driven largely
by the desire to keep the country together, particularly after a history of decades of highly centralized authoritarian
rules. Resource-rich provinces, in particular, had a sense that they did not adequately benefit from their resource
wealth (Bahl and Tumennasan 2004). Before the far-reaching decentralization reform, all petroleum and mining
revenues accrued to the central government and were not subject to any revenue-sharing arrangement with
provincial and district-level governments. Since 2001, the central government distributes at least 25 percent of
central government revenue to lower level governments through a general transfer mechanism through an
equalization grant pool. In addition, producing districts and provinces were granted 15 percent of onshore oil
revenue and 30 percent of onshore gas, whereas 64 percent of mineral royalties went to the regions and 16 to the
provincial governments. Concurrently, to reduce centrifugal pressures, Aceh was granted 55 percent of oil revenues
and 40 percent of rents from gas, and Papua was granted 70 percent of both.

Derivation-based sharing of oil revenues has not been without its challenges. Derivation-based sharing was
associated with significant revenue disparities. In many cases, beneficiaries were not able to spend the windfall, and
instead built up significant cash reserves. The aggregate buildup of reserves fueled the perceptions that provinces
and districts were receiving too many transfers relative to their expenditure responsibilities (Lewis 2005). The
allocation of natural resource was to some extent offset by the introduction of a formula-based equalization grant
(the DAU), which now accounts for more than 25 percent of total national revenues (net of shared revenues). The
formula incorporates measures for fiscal capacity, which mean that regions benefiting for resource revenues receive
fewer equalizing transfers (Hofman et al. 2006).

The government has addressed the issue of fuel subsidies. In the past decade, Indonesia has been a borderline net
energy exporter and importer. The fact that energy prices were pegged below international prices resulted in the
rapid growth of fiscal liabilities in this area. During the oil boom, nearly one-third of central government
expenditures were claimed by fuel subsidies, while derivation-based transfer liabilities were increasing. Although
the government was able to institute political unpopular price increases (in part through the introduction of a large
compensation package, including conditional transfer schemes to households), energy subsidies continue to be a
reality in Indonesia. Starting 2009, the government reduced the divisible DAU pool under a burden-sharing program
to account for energy subsidy liabilities. Fuel subsidies are deducted from the rents before sharing. Moreover, the
government has earmarked petroleum revenues, and in 2009, an additional 5 percent of oil and gas revenues were
transferred to regional governments for spending on primary education. This policy was pursued as part of a prudent
fiscal policy and countercyclical macroeconomic policies for stabilizing the external and internal balances.


Natural Resources and Subnational Governance: Linking Natural Resources to Outcomes

55.    Fiscal autonomy may create incentives for local government to expand the local tax base
by promoting economic growth and moderating tax rates. These incentives are weakened by the
presence of significant natural resource revenues. By reducing the need to mobilize resources
locally to finance public services, subnational governments have less need to take into account
the demands of taxpayers. In this manner, resource-rent dependence at the subnational level
poses accountability challenges that negatively affect the quality of service delivery in the
localities in which these revenues are concentrated. Historical evidence from the United States
points to poorer outcomes in the resource-dependent states, notably Texas and Louisiana
(Goldberg et al. 2008).

56.    Emerging evidence from developing countries shows that large transfers to producing
states and municipalities have not yielded the social and growth outcomes that were anticipated.
For example, in Brazil, 60 percent of royalties are paid by the national oil company Petrobras to
states and municipalities on whose territory the oil is extracted. Although per capita public
spending on education and health is higher in these communities, local populations have not
experienced improvements in the quality and quantity of public services (Caselli and Gennaioli
2007; Caselli and Michaels 2009). Most of the windfall revenues have been used to increase
government wages. At the same time, households have reported less welfare income than their
counterparts in nonproducing districts and no visible improvements on the quality of housing and
infrastructure have been achieved. Moreover, municipal gross domestic product growth in these
localities fell after the introduction of royalties in 1997 (Slaibe Postali 2009).
57.    Linking the intergovernmental transfers to performance and downward accountability
mechanisms is crucial to prevent shared rents from being captured by elites or being used to
enlarge subnational governments with no real impact on the quality and quantity of public
services. Efforts to build local capacity and mobilize stakeholders for good governance should be
an integral component of decentralization policies. Simultaneously, enhancing the ability of the
states to raise their own revenues can increase the accountability of subnational governments for
their fiscal performance (Boadway and Shah 2009).


VII.    Conclusion

58.    The design and implementation of measures to improve intergovernmental management of
the oil, gas, and mining sector must consider the core policy objectives, fiscal context, and
overall political structure. Paying attention to the political economy constraints and drivers that
shape intergovernmental relations is critical to identify the feasible reforms and alternatives to
improve performance that are available in a given country. Most of the attention in this area has
been focused on benefit sharing or distribution. Intergovernmental relations, however, are shaped
by the underlying distribution of political, economic, and demographic endowments and as such
are highly politicized. Policy makers need to address both the aggregate challenge of effective
management of natural resource extraction and managing its fiscal benefits across various policy
objectives. In many settings, this entails managing across time and across levels of government
and territory.

59.    Practitioners need to be able to draw on the normative literature and actual international
experiences to address the concerns of their specific country context. This survey of different
experiences highlights the importance of achieving a consensus simultaneously around
stabilization and intergovernmental fiscal rules. Choices and trade-offs need to be considered in
light of the particular historical political-economy circumstances of the country of interest.
Intergovernmental bargaining not only should not be centered on benefit sharing, but also should
consider the systemic effects that these rents have on fiscal sustainability. Although
constitutional design (for example, federal or unitary) can play a critical role in framing policy
options, de facto implementation ultimately will determine how successful resource-rich
countries with significant intergovernmental dynamics are in harnessing natural resources for
development.

60.   Decentralization in these settings should not expect inherently better or worse outcomes,
but rather understand that results will depend on the institutional context of each setting. These
findings echo the thrust of the recent literature on natural resources (Dunning 2008, Haber and
Menaldo 2011). Natural resources are not intrinsically good or bad for development, but
developmental impacts depend on how countries take advantage of them. In some cases,
intergovernmental dynamics can provide useful checks and balances (or spaces for subnational
innovation on central authorities), whereas in others, they can weaken effective
intergovernmental coordination. In the extreme, poor management and weak institutions may
undermine national cohesion or even increase the risk of conflict and civil war.

61.   Countries have resorted to different intergovernmental arrangements to achieve diverging
objectives. The cross-sectional survey reveals that intergovernmental fiscal design choices are
mostly determined by how governments prioritize the competing objectives of territorial
cohesion, economic stability, equalization of service delivery standards, and maximization of the
wealth derived from natural resources across space and time. Institutional alternatives, therefore,
should be evaluated in light of the core objectives that each country is pursuing and should
consider how well they are able to juggle these with the other goals. The underlying political
economy conditions will determine whether objectives are conflicting and how successful
countries will be in using intergovernmental systems to solve them.

62.   The variation is reflected in differences in the vertical share of natural rents allocated to
subnational entities, the criteria used to distribute them across second- and third-tier
governments, and the instruments through which the rents are shared. The size of the pool of
resources that are to be shared across cases ranges widely. Some central governments allocate
resources to producing and nonproducing localities; however, in other countries, resource-rich
states and provinces enjoy especial autonomy and receive a larger part of the rents. Rents are
divided by giving the different levels of government tax prerogatives over a shared base or
through vertical transfers. At the same time, transfers, which can be automatic or linked to
performance, are allocated through derivation, cost reimbursement, or on the basis of an
equalization formula, or are earmarked to a particular public service.

63.   The amount of rents being shared is as important as the transparency and credibility of the
intergovernmental sharing arrangements. To fulfill their functions effectively, subnational
governments need a stable and predictable institutional and fiscal environment. Transparency
and predictability will contribute to ease intergovernmental tensions and facilitate policy
dialogue around possible reforms. Smoothing resources available to subnational governments
across commodity price cycles is an important factor in this regard. Lastly, linking financing to
better sectoral and subnational priorities and improved performance is critical to avoid some of
the negative consequences that excessive dependence on natural resources may generate for
governance and accountability.

64.   The choice of intergovernmental systems not only is the result of different goals, but also
is influenced by the resource profile and the overall degree of diversification of the economy of a
country. Whether a country is a mineral or a petroleum producer, how much known reserves it
possesses, where they are located, and the level of fiscal dependence will determine the range of
intergovernmental arrangements that are fiscally and politically feasible. Countries that are
highly dependent on resource rents will be able to distribute a smaller share of total resource
rents, and their ability to compensate the producing regions for the extraction of nonrenewable
resources will be more limited than countries with a more developed and diversified economy. A
key concern will be whether prevailing legal and regulatory frameworks, policy-making
mechanisms, and most important, de facto implementation are immune (or flexible) to the
volatility in natural-resource prices and territorial production patterns. Policy makers need to
strategically assess the extent to which prevailing arrangements are consistent with the effective
management of the sector (for example, in terms of exploration and exploitation patterns),
national cohesion and stability, macrofiscal sustainability, and broad-based development. At the
same time, policy makers and international development partners need to remain continually
aware that feasible options will be conditioned by the political-economy setting.

65.   Yet in any context it would be critical to: (i) align incentives across the intergovernmental
systems, reducing moral hazard; (ii) achieve consistency of intergovernmental fiscal systems and
macroeconomic stability (iii) smooth revenue volatility before sharing the benefits; (iv) diversify
subnational revenues; (v) link natural resource finance transfers to outcomes (transparency in the
transfers and downward accountability mechanisms); (vi) secure national unity without
introducing large horizontal inequalities; and (vii) enhance predictability of transfers and clarity
on the rules (over quantity).
Table 3. Basic Characteristics of Resource Dependent Countries
        Country       Population           Area             GDP per Capita        EI Rents per     EI Share of Total   EI Revenue      Oil and Gas    Oil and Gas  Mining Share of Mining Revenue    National Oil/    Extractive        Stabilization      Subnational
                     (millions, 2010)   (1,000 sq km)                                Capita        Exports      (%, Share of Total    Share of Total Revenue Share   Total Exports  Share of Total     Mining          Industry             Fund         Expenditures as
                                                            (US$, 2010)                                              Public Revenues Exports      (%,               (%, 2007-2009)                    Company                                              % of Total
                                                                                                                     (%, 2007-2009)      2007-2009)                                                                                                          Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Expenditures


Algeria                          34.4             2,382                   4,460          2,111.5              98.5             68.6              98.5         68.6               .. ..                          Yes                No               No               n.a.
Angola                           18.0             1,247                   3,960          3,138.0              95.6             83.6              95.6         83.6              ¾               ¾               No                 No               No               n.a.
Azerbaijan                        8.7               87                    5,180          3,661.1              94.7             53.4              94.7         53.4               .. ..                          Yes         Compl.                  No              24.5
                                                                                        11,407.9                                                                                 ..                                                                 No
Bahrain                           0.8                   1             25,420                                  79.8             85.5              79.8         85.5                  ..                          No                 No                                 2.8
Bolivia                           9.7             1,099                   1,790            606.8              63.5             70.0              44.4         26.0            19.1            44.0              Yes                No               No              30.6
                                                                                           362.4                                                                              64.2                                                                  No
Botswana                          1.9              582                    6,890                               64.2             13.9 ..                           ..                           13.9              No                 No                                 4.8
Brunei Darussalam                 0.4                   6             31,180            23,436.0              97.2             60.0              97.2         60.0               .. ..                          No                 No               No               n.a.
Cameroon                         18.9              475                    1,160            152.9              33.3             38.2              33.3         38.2               .. ..                          Yes            Yes                  No               n.a.
                                                                                           392.3                                                                                 ..                                                                 No
Chad                             11.1             1,284                    600                                84.3             57.1              84.3         57.1                    ..                        Yes                No                                n.a.
Chile                            16.8              757                    9,940          2,150.8              55.7             22.7 ..                           ..           55.7            22.7              Yes                No              Yes              10.0
Colombia                         44.5             1,142                   5,510            695.3              23.9                ¾              23.9           ¾               ¾               ¾               Yes                No              Yes              27.7
                                                                                            13.9                                                                              69.6                                                                  No
Congo, Dem. Rep.                 64.2             2,345                    180                                94.6                ¾              25.0                                                           Yes            Yes                                   n.a.
Congo, Rep.                       3.6              342                    2,310          2,260.8              87.7             86.0              87.7         86.0               .. ..                          Yes            Yes                  No                1.9
Ecuador                          13.5              284                    4,510          1,268.3                ¾              49.0                           49.0               .. ..                          Yes                No              Yes               n.a.
Equatorial Guinea                 0.7               28                14,680            17,385.9              98.9             93.5              98.9         93.5               .. ..                          Yes            Yes                  No               n.a.
Gabon                             1.5              268                    7,760          4,727.1              77.3             65.7              77.3         65.7               .. ..                          No             Yes                  No               n.a.
Ghana                            23.4              239                    1,240             60.5              65.4                ¾                   ¾         ¾             65.4                              Yes         Compl.                  No               n.a.
Guinea                            9.8              246                     380              29.3              89.9             24.5              89.9         24.5               .. ..                          No             Yes                  No               n.a.
Indonesia                       228.3             1,905                   2,580            364.0              22.7             29.3              22.7         29.3               .. ..                          Yes                No               No                9.1
Iran, Islamic Rep.               72.0             1,745                   4,530          2,351.2              75.8             69.2              75.8         69.2               .. ..                          Yes                No              Yes                2.7
Iraq                             31.2              438                    2,320          2,468.2              97.5             81.0              97.5         81.0               .. ..                          Yes                No               No               n.a.
Kazakhstan                       15.7             2,725                   7,440          3,870.6              54.3             44.6              54.3         44.6               .. ..                          Yes            Yes                  No              31.3
Kuwait                            2.7               18                43,920            35,226.7              94.4             72.1              94.4         72.1               .. ..                          Yes                No              Yes               n.a.
Kyrgyz Republic                   5.3              200                     880              14.4              59.0                ¾ ..                           ..           59.0 ..                           No             Yes                  No              25.5
Lao PDR                           6.2              237                    1,000               ¾               50.4                ¾ ..                           ..           50.4 ..                           No                 No               No               n.a.
Libya                             6.3             1,760               12,020             9,232.4              97.5             89.7              97.5         89.7               .. ..                          No                 No               No               n.a.
Malaysia                         27.0              330                    7,900          1,593.1              47.0             13.0              47.0         13.0               .. ..                          Yes                No               No              11.2
Mauritania                        3.2             1,031                   1,060            451.0              34.7             11.0                           11.0            34.7 ..                           No             Yes                  No               n.a.
Mexico                          106.4             1,964                   9,330          1,068.3              15.8             35.6              15.8         35.6               .. ..                          Yes                                Yes              31.8
Mongolia                          2.6             1,567                   1,890            178.0              58.6             28.9 ..                           ..           58.6            28.9              No          Compl.                  No              31.7
                                                                                           135.9                                                                              58.8                                                                  No
Namibia                           2.1              824                    4,650                               58.8              6.3 ..                           ..                            6.3              No                 No                                n.a.
                                                                                                                                                                              91.5                                                                  No
Niger                            14.7             1,267                    360                ¾               91.5             42.0 ..                           ..                           42.0              Yes            Yes                                   n.a.
                                                                                           492.0                                                                                                                                                   Yes
Nigeria                         151.3              924                    1,180                               97.5             83.7              97.5         83.7              ¾               ¾               Yes            Yes                                   n.a.
Norway                            4.8              324                85,380            19,903.9              49.8             39.1              49.8         39.1              .. ..                           Yes            Yes                 Yes              28.3
        Country         Population            Area             GDP per Capita        EI Rents per     EI Share of Total   EI Revenue      Oil and Gas    Oil and Gas  Mining Share of Mining Revenue    National Oil/    Extractive        Stabilization      Subnational
                       (millions, 2010)    (1,000 sq km)                                Capita        Exports      (%, Share of Total    Share of Total Revenue Share  Total Exports   Share of Total     Mining          Industry             Fund         Expenditures as
                                                               (US$, 2010)                                              Public Revenues Exports      (%,               (%, 2007-2009)                    Company                                              % of Total
                                                                                                                       (%, 2007-2009)      2007-2009)                                                                                                           Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Expenditures

Oman                                2.8               310                17,890            11,121.9             81.0             86.3              81.0          86.3               .. ..                          No                 No              Yes               n.a.
                                                                                              431.0                                                                              80.6                                                                 Yes
Papua New Guinea                    6.5               463                    1,300                              80.6             34.3 ..                            ..                           34.3              No                 No                                n.a.
Peru                               28.8              1,285                   4,710            532.4             32.9             25.0 ..                            ..           32.9            25.0              Yes            Yes                  No               20.4
Qatar                               1.3                11                                  43,484.8             88.9             64.5              88.9          64.5               .. ..                          Yes                No               No               n.a.
Russian Federation                141.8             17,098                   9,910          3,825.9             65.8             32.8              65.8          32.8              ¾               ¾               Yes            Yes                 Yes               40.7
Sao Tome e Principe                                                          1,200               ¾                 ¾                ¾                   ¾          ¾               .. ..                           No                 No               No               n.a.
Saudi Arabia                       24.7              2,150               17,200            13,445.4             89.7             89.3              89.7          89.3              .. ..                           Yes                No               No               n.a.
Sierra Leone                        5.6                72                     340               3.0             90.3                ¾ ..                            ..           90.3                              No             Yes                  No               n.a.
South Africa                       48.7              1,219                   6,100            679.4              6.0              2.0 ..                            ..            6.0             2.0              Yes                No               No               37.9
                                                                                              371.3                                                                                 ..                                                                 No
Sudan                              41.4              2,506                   1,270                              90.2             55.7              90.2          55.7                  ..                          Yes                No                                n.a.
Syrian Arab Republic               21.2               185                    2,640            659.7             39.7             29.6              39.7          29.6               .. ..                          Yes                No               No               n.a.
                                                                                                                                                                                    ..                                                                Yes
Timor Leste                         1.1                15                    2,220               ¾              97.3             98.2              97.3          98.2                  ..                          No             Yes                                   n.a.
Trinidad and Tobago                 1.3                    5             15,380            11,484.1             87.0             57.8              87.0          57.8               .. ..                          Yes                No               No                4.6
                                                                                            5,555.5                                                                                 ..                                                                 No
Turkmenistan                        5.0               488                    3,700                              77.3                ¾              77.3            ¾                     ..                        No                 No                                n.a.
United Arab Emirates                4.5                84                                  21,716.8             43.3             70.2              43.3          70.2               .. ..                          Yes                No              Yes               n.a.
Uzbekistan                         27.3               447                    1,280            824.1             36.9             17.2              22.7            ¾             14.3            17.2              Yes                No               No               n.a.
Venezuela, RB                      27.9               912                11,590             3,470.8             81.2             46.3              81.2          46.3               .. ..                          Yes                No              Yes               n.a.
Vietnam                            86.2               329                    1,100            187.4             17.5             31.0              17.5          31.0               .. ..                          Yes                No               No               n.a.
                                                                                              375.0                                                                                 ..                                                                 No
Yemen, Rep.                        23.1               528                    1,060                              98.9             68.1              98.9          68.1                    ..                        No             Yes                                   n.a.
Zambia                             12.6               753                    1,070            221.8             66.7                ¾ ..                            ..           66.7              ¾               No             Yes                  No               n.a.

Total                         1,473.0     Average                       7,952.9           5,392.0               69.4             50.6              70.1         58.0            54.0            23.6                                                                   19.9



Source: Barma et al. 2012, World Bank Decentralization Indicators 2012.

Note:
Population, area, and GDP per capita from WDI and Government Finance Statistics database.
Subnational governments’ share of total government expenditures; that is, the percentage of total ex penditures accounted for by subnational governments, measured as the sum of
local and provincial total expenditures excluding current and capital transfers to other levels of government, divided by the sum of local, provincial, and national expenditures,
excluding intergovernmental transfers to lower tiers.
Table 4. Intergovernmental Transfer Design in Resource-Rich Settings
Country              Primary Goal                    Main Transfer Schemes                             Allocation Criteria/Formula
AFRICA (AFR)
Congo, Dem. Rep.     Equalization                    Derivation-based revenue sharing and              40 percent of revenue collected is to be transferred to the provinces and an
of                                                   equalization fund. Broad outlines set by          additional 10 percent is to finance an equalization fund for all the
                                                     2006 Constitution, and implementation,            provinces.a Distribution of mineral royalties: 40 percent of mining
                                                     pending further regulations, set out in           royalties, as well as 10 percent of surface rents should be conceded to the
                                                     annual budget laws.                               provinces, including 25 percent for the provincial administration and 15
                                                                                                       percent for the area where mining activities were conducted.
Nigeria              Equalization of service         Extensive revenue sharing.                        All oil revenues are received into the Federation Account. The revenue-
                     delivery capacity;              General and derivation-based sharing to           sharing formulas are set by an act of the National Assembly.
                     strong focus on rules-based     state and local governments.                      The central government distributes the pool according to a formula that
                     block transfers to states and   Automatic transfer combined with                  takes into account population and state size.
                     local government authorities    stabilization mechanism (oil-price-based          Nigeria shares 45 percent of federal revenues with states and
                     (LGAs)                          fiscal rule by transferring oil revenues to the   municipalities.
                                                     budget in accordance with a reference price,      For natural resource revenues, the constitution provides that oil-producing
                                                     together with a ceiling on the nonoil             states receive 13 percent up front of the net oil revenue as derivation grants;
                                                     deficit).                                         the federal government receives 52.7 percent, states 26.7 percent, and local
                                                     Production sharing.                               governments 20.6 percent.b
                                                     Direct mechanisms of partial revenue              New revenue-sharing rule adopted in 2007.c
                                                     redistribution to nonproducing regions.
Sudan                Stabilization objective:        Derivation-based revenue sharing with             The wealth-sharing protocol requires that a significant portion of the
(prior to 2011)      excess oil revenues are         South and producing provinces based on            additional oil revenue is automatically transferred to the states if not saved
                     transferred into a fund for     realizations. Main beneficiary South Sudan.       in the ORSA. At least 2 percent of oil revenue shall be allocated to the oil-
                     future generations              Production sharing.                               producing states and regions in proportion to output produced in such states
                                                     Excess oil revenues are saved in the Oil          and regions.
                                                     Revenue Stabilization Account (ORSA)              After the payment to the ORSA and to the oil-producing states and regions,
                                                     whenever the production reaches more than         50percent of net oil revenue derived from oil-producing wells in Southern
                                                     2 million barrels a day.                          Sudan shall be allocated to the Government of Southern Sudan (GOSS). d
                                                                                                       A Future Generation Fund shall be established once national oil production
                                                                                                       reaches 2 million barrels per day.
Eastern Europe/Central Asia (ECA)
Russian Federation  Equalization of fiscal           Provides both shared revenues and transfers       The government provides transfers based on a nonderivation formula basis,
                    capacity and expenditure         to states.                                        which benefits the poorer and non-natural-resource-endowed regions.
                                                     Tax revenue sharing.                              Intergovernmental Transfer Formula:
                                                     Natural resource taxes are collected mainly            (1) 40 percent to federation
                                                     by subnational governments as an important             (2) 30 percent to producing oblasts
                                                     source of own-source revenue in oil-                   (3) 30 percent to rayon and cities
                                                     producing regions.
East Asia/Pacific (EAP)
Indonesiae           Achieve the equal provision     Some derivation-based revenue sharing,            Producing provinces receive fixed proportions of revenues:
                     of minimum standards in         including from oil and gas.                       Aceh: 55 percent of oil revenues and 40 percent of gas revenues
                    services; equalizing block     Straight automatic transfer with no            Papua: 70 percent of oil revenues and 70 percent of gas revenues
                    grants for local governments   stabilization mechanism.                       In addition to own source, districts and provinces enjoy 15 percent of
                                                   Production sharing.                            onshore oil revenue and 30 percent of onshore gas revenue transferred to
                                                   Additional earmarked grants may be             the originating provinces as well as an equalization block grant (DAU). f
                                                   distributed for specific purposes based on a   The equalization grant pool is a fixed percentage (25 percent) of central
                                                   formula that takes into account both           resources after tax sharing with the regions: the central government
                                                   revenue capacity and expenditure needs.        distributes at least 25 percent of central government revenue to be
                                                   In 2009, an additional 5 percent of oil and    transferred to all lower level governments through a general transfer
                                                   gas revenues was be transferred to regional    mechanism.
                                                   governments earmarked for spending on          Distribution of mineral royalties: 80 percent of mineral royalties go to the
                                                   primary education.                             regions (64 percent to regencies and 16 percent to provincial government)
                                                   Direct mechanisms of partial revenue           and 20 percent to central government.
                                                   redistribution to nonproducing regions.
Malaysia            Fiscal equalization            Annual equalization grants to equalize the     Revenues from all oil and gas industries are “pooled? together.
                    objectives                     difference between fiscal capacities and       Derivation is used as the primary basis for revenue allocation. Most grants
                                                   fiscal needs of the local authority.           are based on objective criteria except for deficit grants that are granted
                                                   Production sharing (some direct sharing of     exceptionally.
                                                   oil revenues to states).                       Formula: population (50 percent), GDP per capita (50 percent).
                                                                                                  The government collects oil royalties of which 5 percent are passed to the
                                                                                                  states of Sabah, Sarawak, and Terengganu and the rest are retained by the
                                                                                                  federal government.
Papua New Guinea                                   By law,g revenues distributed at the           No formula-based redistribution according to specific characteristics.
                                                   subnational level cannot be greater than 20    Depends on the provincial government's share of the project. Derivation to
                                                   percent of the net total revenues.             the province owning equity in the mining or oil project: the 2 percent
                                                   Dividends from equity in mining and oil        mining royalty is shared between provincial government (80 percent) and
                                                   projects.h                                     landowners (20 percent).
                                                   Development levy (2 percent of value)          Different shares of royalties are transferred to provincial governments.
                                                   shared among local and provincial              These are set out in the Memorandum of Agreement for the project.
                                                   governments.                                   Derivation to the province in which the project is located.
                                                   Mining and oil royalties (2 percent of         Special support grant (1 percent royalty) is paid on a derivation basis to the
                                                   value).                                        provincial government (20 percent goes to the producing local
                                                   No redistribution mechanism to benefit         government).
                                                   nonproducing territories.
                                                   Revenues shared at the local level are
                                                   earmarked.
Middle East/North Africa (MENA)
Iraq                                               No explicit natural resource sharing.          Prevailing de facto arrangements: comanagement of hydrocarbon
                                                                                                  exploitation in endowed regions, and fair distribution based on population
                                                                                                  and historical damages.i
United Arab         Stabilization tool             Oil revenues are collected by a subnational    Upward sharing of revenues to federal account.j
Emirates                                           government and redistributed according to a    Cash contributions are negotiated each year between the federal
                                                   specific rule or formula.                      government and each of the seven emirates.
                                                   Emirates have full ownership and control
                                                   over their oil resources.
Latin America (LAC)
Bolivia             Fiscal equalization    High-level of derivation-based revenue          A Departmental Compensation Fund was created to mitigate the imbalance
                    objectives             sharing.                                        in the oil rents distribution: departments with per capita royalties below the
                                           Partial revenue redistribution from central     national average will receive a compensatory transfer by the TGN.
                                           pool (allocations from equalization funds)      No formula-based redistribution taking into account sociodemographic
                                           to nonproducing local jurisdictions (20         characteristics.
                                           percent of the revenues).                       Departmental royalties are directly transferred by YPFB to oil-producing
                                           Specific automatic transfer.                    departments (11 percent) and two departments as compensation (1
                                           Tax revenue sharing, no production sharing.     percent).k
                                           Revenues shared at the local level are
                                           earmarked.
Brazil               Fiscal equalization   Revenue derived from signature bonus            The states receive 21.5 percent of these tax revenues: 85 percent going to
                     objectives            accrues to the Petroleum Regulatory             the north, northeast, and center-west regions, and the remaining 15 percent
                                           Agency (ANP) to fund its activities.            to the south and southeast regions (which are economically better off).
                                           Equalization transfers represent a large        The formula for determining state shares is complex and based on
                                           allocation of resources.l                       population size and per capita income.
                                           The federal government transfers a              Royalties are shared according to formulas that varies if it is onshore m (52.5
                                           specified share of certain federal taxes to a   percent to producing states) or offshoren production.
                                           pool, and the council of states determines      0.5 to 1 percent of the value of total production from all land-based fields
                                           state shares using a formula.                   as special royalties should be paid to the landowners in Brazilian currency
                                           Offshore oil revenues are also shared.          on a monthly basis.o
                                                                                           Gross revenue on productionp is distributed according to the following
                                                                                           formula: 40 percent to producing states, 10 percent to producing
                                                                                           municipalities, 50 percent to federal ministries.
Colombiaq            Fiscal equalization   Tax revenue sharing.                            Royalties are distributed to indigenous communities.
                     objectives            Allocation of royalty shares.                   Transfers from the FAEP are shared among all subnational governments
                                           Transfers from the Oil Savings and              according to a formula taking into account population and tax revenue
                                           Stabilization Fund (FAEP).                      performance.
                                           Allocations from equalization funds to          Royalties are transferred to oil-producing departments (47.5percent),
                                           nonproducing local jurisdictions.               municipalities (12.5 percent), ports (8 percent), and National Royalties
                                           No production sharing.                          Fund (32 percent).
Ecuador              Stabilization tool    FEIREPr was created to reduce public debt       Minimal revenue sharing with regions.
                                           and to stabilize revenues (FAC), it was         Specific rents are distributed to indigenous communities.
                                           replaced by CEREPS.s                            80 percent of decentralized revenues go to ECORAEu that distributes the
                                           In April 2008, the CEREPS was eliminated        resources to provincial municipalities in the Amazon region and then
                                           and the net revenuest transferred to the        delivers the remainder to a regional fund.
                                           government to finance public investment.
Mexico               Stabilization tool    Limited revenue sharing.                        Formula-based redistribution:v
                                           Minimal derivation-based revenue.               20 percent of ordinary extraction rights (incorporated into a general fund
                                           No production sharing.                          and distributed to the states based on a formula taking into account their
                                           Resources are channeled through a general       characteristics.
                                           pool of shared resources and distributed        3.17 percent of the additional oil extraction rights (earmarked for
                                           according to a formula.                         municipalities in oil-producing regions to compensate for environmental
                                           Direct mechanisms of partial revenue            damage).
                                                        redistribution to nonproducing regions.
Peru                    Derivation-based sharing        Derivation-based revenue sharing (Canon        20 percent of mining activities taxes distributed to regional and 30 percent
                        mechanisms                      Minero Mechanism).                             to local governments.
                                                        Mining royalty.                                5 out of 24 regions receive a Canony.
                                                        Camisea Development Fund (FOCAM).w             Mining royalties are distributed to producing areas and are used to finance
                                                        Regional Compensation Fund (FONCOR).x          productive investment that promotes sustainable economic development. 5
                                                                                                       percent earmarked to research at universities.
                                                                                                       Formula-based redistribution of Canons to producing areas, used to finance
                                                                                                       investment projects with regional impacts: 20 percent are earmarked to
                                                                                                       universities and research and 20 percent to infrastructure maintenance.
                                                                                                       In 2001, the proportion of taxes to be redistributed to subnational
                                                                                                       government was increased from 20 percent to 50 percent.
                                                                                                       New formula for equalizing transfers taking into account the gap between
                                                                                                       regional unmet needs and other transfers that the region may receive
                                                                                                       (including Canons and royalties).
                                                                                                       Distribution from the FOCAM to areas crossed by the gas pipes and takes
                                                                                                       into account the pipe length, population, and unmet basic needs.
Venezuela, Rep.         Stabilization tool              Revenue-sharing agreements.                    20 to 25 percent of total central government revenues are distributed to
Bol. de                                                 Transfers.                                     regions.
                                                        No production sharing.                         In addition, subnational governments are entitled to 20 to 30 percent of oil
                                                                                                       royalties.
Source: Kaiser and Mehri 2009.
Note:
a. The 2006 Constitution provides for significant decentralization to provincial and local authorities and the Mining Code provides for the distribution of mineral royalties.
b. Article 162 (2) of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, May 1999.
c. The new sharing rule was adopted in 2007 by the Federation Accounts Allocation Committee (FAAC) to the effect that in any month when total revenue available for sharing
fell below the budgetary target, the shortfall was taken out from the ECA and is considered as revenue sharing and not drawdowns.
d. Constitution of Southern Sudan signed December 2005, Interim National Constitution ratified July 5, 2005.
e. Until 2000, all oil and gas revenues accrued to the central government and were not subject to any revenue-sharing arrangement with provincial and district-level governments.
f. Revenue-sharing arrangements are made according to the Indonesian Law on Fiscal Balance (Law 25/99).
g. Provision in the Oil and Gas Act 1998, which regulates the exploitation of natural resources and the allocation of revenues, forbids that the aggregate revenues distributed for
subnational levels be greater than 20 percent, so by law the central government receives 80 percent of oil and gas revenues.
h. Transfers made by the Minerals Resource Development Company, and by Ok Tedi Sustainable Development Program in the case of Western Province.
i. Article 109 of the Constitution of the Republic of Iraq, approved by Referendum on October 15, 2005. All oil revenues accrue to the New York –based foreign currency accounts
of the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) (under the 2006 arrangements).
j. The United Arab Emirates Constitution made permanent in 1996.
k. The four producing departments (Santa Cruz, Cochabamba, Tarija, and Chuquisaca) receive 11 percent, whereas Beni and Pando receive 1 percent of gross hydrocarbon
production as compensation.
l. Petroleum Law No. 9478 of 1997.
m. Onshore royalty sharing formula (royalties in excess of 5 percent of production): 52.5 percent to the state where the production takes place, 15 percent to the municipalities
where the production occurs, 7.5 percent to the municipalities affected by operations of landing or shipment of oil or natural gas, and 25 percent to the Ministry of Science and
Technology.
n. Offshore royalty-sharing formula (royalties in excess of 5 percent of production): 22.5 percent to the states fronting the production area, 22.5 percent to the municipalities
fronting the production area, 15 percent to the Ministry of Defense responsible for the Navy, 7.5 percent to the municipalities affected by operations of landing or shipment of oil
and gas, 7.5 percent to a special fund to be distributed to all states and municipalities in Brazil, and 25 percent to the Ministry of Science.
o. Article 52 of the Brazilian Petroleum Law specifically provides that the concessionaire must set aside this special royalty.
p. Minus investments, costs, taxes, and royalties.
q. Until 2001, the constitution specified compulsory intergovernmental transfers to subnational governments and these reached 47 percent of the central government’s revenues in
2002. A constitutional amendment in 2001 delinked subnational transfers from current revenues of the central government after seven subnational governments had to restructure
their debt.
r. FEIREP = Fund for Stabilization, Social and Productive Investments, and Public Debt Reduction.
s. CEREPS’ allocation of revenues: 35 percent for repurchase of public debt and productive projects, 20 percent (FAC) for contingencies and stabilization of revenues, 30 percent
for education and health, 5 percent for roads repairs, 5 percent for environmental repair, and 5 percent for research and development.
t. CEREPS net revenues reached US$613.2 as of December 31, 2006. No information is available for 2007.
u. ECORAE: The Institute for the Ecological Development of the Amazon Region is in charge of planning the sustainable development of the Amazon region in Ecuador.
v. Established by the law on fiscal coordination in which subnational governments have considerable expenditure responsibilities, and most of their revenues are in the form of
conditional transfers and revenue-sharing agreements totaling about 7 percent of GDP.
w. 25 percent of the gas royalties goes to the FOCAM and are distributed to areas crossed by the gas pipes.
x. The allocation of the Regional Compensation Fund (FONCOR) accounted for 31 percent of transfers to regional governments in 2006 and changed in 2008 to make it more
equalizing.
y. Canon: royalty share according to a percentage of the gross value of oil production in the region. It is on average equivalent to 44 percent of the royalty.
Table 5: Saving and Stabilization Institutions in Resource-Rich Settings, 2012

       Country                  Fund Name                    Assets    Inception            Origin    Linaburg-
                                                              US$                                      Maduell
                                                             billion                                 Transparency
                                                                                                        Index
Algeria             Revenue Regulation Fund              56.7          2000        Oil               1
Australia           Australian Future Fund               80            2006        Non-Commodity     10
Azerbaijan          State Oil Fund                       30.2          1999        Oil               10
Bahrain             Mumtalakat Holding Company           9.1           2006        Non-Commodity     9
Botswana            Pula Fund                            6.9           1994        Diamonds and      6
                                                                                   Minerals
Brazil              Sovereign Fund of Brazil             11.3          2008        Non-Commodity     9
Brunei              Brunei Investment Agency             30            1983        Oil               1
Canada              Alberta’s Heritage Fund              15.1          1976        Oil               9
Chile               Social and Economic Stabilization    15            2007        Copper            10
                    Fund
Chile               Pension Reserve Fund                 4.4           2006        Copper            10
East Timor          Timor-Leste Petroleum Fund           9.9           2005        Oil and Gas       6
Equatorial Guinea   Fund for Future Generations          0.08          2002        Oil               n.a.
Gabon               Gabon Sovereign Wealth Fund          0.4           1998        Oil               n.a.
Indonesia           Government Investment Unit           0.3           2006        Non-Commodity     n.a.
Iran                Oil Stabilisation Fund               23            1999        Oil               1
Ireland             National Pensions Reserve Fund       30            2001        Non-Commodity     10
Kazakhstan          Kazakhstan National Fund             58.2          2000        Oil               8
Kiribati            Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund    0.4           1956        Phosphates        1
Kuwait              Kuwait Investment Authority          296           1953        Oil               6
Libya               Libyan Investment Authority          65            2006        Oil               1
Malaysia            Khazanah Nasional                    36.8          1993        Non-Commodity     5
Mauritania          National Fund for Hydrocarbon        0.3           2006        Oil and Gas       1
                    Reserves
Mexico              Oil Revenues Stabilization Fund of   6.0           2000        Oil               n.a.
                    Mexico
Mongolia            Fiscal Stability Fund                n.a.          2011        Mining            n.a.
Nigeria             Nigerian Sovereign Investment        1             2011        Oil               n.a.
                    Authority
Norway              Government Pension Fund – Global     611           1990        Oil               10
Oman                State General Reserve Fund           8.2           1980        Oil and Gas       1
Oman                Oman Investment Fund                 n.a.          2006        Oil               n.a.
Papua New Guinea    Papua New Guinea Sovereign           n.a.          2011        Gas               n.a.
                    Wealth Fund
Qatar               Qatar Investment Authority           100           2005        Oil               5
Russia              National Welfare Fund                149.7         2008        Oil               5
Saudi Arabia        SAMA Foreign Holdings                532.8         n.a.        Oil               4
Saudi Arabia        Public Investment Fund               5.3           2008        Oil               4
Trinidad & Tobago   Heritage and Stabilization Fund      2.9           2000        Oil               8
UAE – Abu Dhabi      Abu Dhabi Investment Authority         627        1976         Oil             5
UAE – Abu Dhabi      International Petroleum Investment     65.3       1984         Oil             9
                     Company
UAE – Abu Dhabi      Mubadala Development Company           48.2       2002         Oil             10
UAE – Abu Dhabi      Abu Dhabi Investment Council           n.a.       2007         Oil             n.a.
UAE – Dubai          Investment Corporation of Dubai        70         2006         Oil             4
UAE – Federal        Emirates Investment Authority          n.a.       2007         Oil             2
UAE – Ras Al         RAK Investment Authority               1.2        2005         Oil             3
Khaimah
US – Alabama         Alabama Trust Fund                     2.5        1985         Oil and Gas     n.a.
US – Alaska          Alaska Permanent Fund                  40.3       1976         Oil             10
US – North Dakota    North Dakota Legacy Fund               0.1        2011         Oil and Gas     n.a.
US – Texas           Texas Permanent School Fund            24.4       1854         Oil and Other   n.a.
US – Wyoming         Permanent Wyoming Mineral Trust        4.7        1974         Minerals        9
                     Fund
Venezuela            FEM                                   0.8          1998        Oil             1
Source: The Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, www.swfinstitute.org/fund-rankings/.
Note: GDP = gross domestic product; GOSS = Government of Southern Sudan.
References
Aberbach, Joel D., Robert D. Putnam, and Bert A. Rockman. 1981. Bureaucrats and Politicians in Western Democracies.
          Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ahmad, Ehtisham, and Giorgio Brosio. 2008. "Political Economy of Multi-level Tax Assignments in Latin American Countries:
          Earmarked Revenue versus Tax Autonomy." International Monetary Fund, Fiscal Affairs Department, Washington,
          DC.
Ahmad, Ehtisham, and Eric Mottu. 2002. "Oil Revenue Assignments: Country Experiences and Issues." IMF Working Paper, 1-
          27, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bahl, Roy, and Johannes Linn. 1994. "Fiscal Decentralization and Intergovernmental Transfers in Less Developed Countries."
          Publius 24: 1–19.
Bahl, Roy, and Bayar Tumennasan. 2004. How Should Revenues from Natural Resources be Shared in Indonesia? Reforming
          Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations and the Rebuilding of Indonesia: The 'Big Bang' Program and Its Economic
          Consequences. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Bakke, Kristin M., and Erik Wibbels. 2006. "Diversity, Disparity, and Civil Conflict in Federal States." World Politics 1.
Beramendi, Pablo. 2007. "Federalism." In The Oxford Handbook of Comparative Politics, ed. Carles Boix and Susan Carol
          Stokes. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bird, Richard, and Roy Bahl. 2008a. "Subnational Taxes in Developing Countries: The Way Forward." IIB Paper No. 16,
          University of Toronto, Joseph L. Rotman School of Management, Toronto.
Bird, Richard, and Roy Bahl. 2008b. "Tax Policy in Developing Countries: Looking Back and Forward." IIB Paper No. 13,
          University of Toronto, Joseph L. Rotman School of Management, Toronto.
Bird, Richard, and Robert Ebel. 2006. "Fiscal Federalism and National Unity." In Handbook of Fiscal Federalism, ed. Ehtisham
          Ahmad and Giorgio Brosio. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
Bird, Richard, and Robert Ebel. 2007. Fiscal Fragmentation in Decentralized Countries: Subsidiarity, Solidarity and Asymmetry.
          Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
Bird, Richard M., Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, and James Alm. 2003. Public Finance in Developing and Transitional Countries:
          Essays in Honor of Richard Bird. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
Bird, Richard M., 2001. Public Finance in Developing and Transition Countries: A Conference in Honor of Richard Bird, April
          5–6, 2001, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia University, Evergree Hotel and Resort, Stone Mountain,
          Georgia. Georgia State University, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Atlanta, Georgia.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Andrei Shleifer. 2001. "Federalism With and Without Centralization: China Versus Russia." IMF Staff
          Working Paper, Vol. 48, Special Issue, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Boadway, Robin, and Anwar Shah. 2009. Fiscal Federalism: Principles and Practice of Multiorder Governance. New York:
          Cambridge University Press.
Boadway, Robin, and Anwar Shah. 1994. "Fiscal Federalism in Developing/Transition Economies: Some Lessons from
          Industrialized Countries." National Tax Association, Tax Institute of America, Columbus, Ohio.
Boadway, Robin W., and Anwar Shah. 2007. "Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers: Principles and Practices." World Bank,
          Washington, DC.
Boix, Carles. 2003. Democracy and Redistribution. Cambridge, UK and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bornhorst, Fabian, Sanjeev Gupta, and John Thornton. 2009. "Natural Resource Endowments and the Domestic Revenue Effort
          European Journal of Political Economy 25.
Brancati, Dawn 2009. Peace by Design Managing Intrastate Conflict through Decentralization. New York: Oxford University
          Press.
Brosio, Giorgio. 2006. "The Assignment of Revenue from Natural Resources." In Handbook of Fiscal Federalism, ed. Ehtisham
          Ahmad and Giorgio Brosio. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
Caselli, Francesco, and Nicola Gennaioli. 2007. "Economics and Politics of Alternative Institutional Reforms." NBER Working
          Paper Series, Working Paper No. 12833, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Caselli, Francesco, and Guy Michaels. 2009. "Do Oil Windfalls Improve Living Standards? Evidence from Brazil." NBER
          Working Paper Series, Working Paper No. 15550, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Collier, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 2009. "Natural Resources and State Fragility." OxCarre Research Paper, Oxford Centre
          for the Analysis of Resource Rich Economies, Oxford.
Davis, Jeffrey M., Rolando Ossowski, and Annalisa Fedelino. 2003. "Fiscal Policy Formulation and Implementation in Oil-
          Producing Countries." International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
De Figueiredo, Rui, and Barry Weingast. 2005. "Self-Enforcing Federalism." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization.
de Mello, Luiz, and Kiichiro Fukasaku. 1999. Decentralisation, Inter-governmental Fiscal Relations and Macroeconomic
          Governance. Paris: OECD.
De Silva, Migara, 2009. Intergovernmental Reforms in the Russian Federation: One Step Forward, Two Steps Back?
          Washington, DC: World Bank.
Eaton, Kent. 2004. Politics beyond the Capital: The Design of Subnational Institutions in South America. Stanford, CA: Stanford
          University Press.
Eaton, Kent, Kai Kaiser, and Paul Smoke. 2010. The Political-Economy of Decentralization Reforms: Implications for Aid
          Effectiveness. Washington, DC.
Filippov, Mikhail, Peter C. Ordeshook, and Olga Shvetsova. 2004. Designing Federalism: A Theory of Self-Sustainable Federal
          Institutions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gonzalez, Christian, David Rosenblatt, and Steven Benjamin Webb. 2002. "Stabilizing Intergovernmental Transfers in Latin
          America: A Complement to National/Subnational Fiscal Rules?" World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, World
          Bank, Washington, DC.
Haysom, Nicholas, and Sean Kane. 2010. "Negotiating Natural Resources for Peace: Ownership, Control, and Wealth-Sharing."
          Paper prepared for Henry Dunant Center for Humanitarian Dialogue, HD Briefing Paper, October, Geneva.
Herbst, Jeffrey. 1989. "Creation and Maintenance of National Boundaries in Africa." International Organization 43: 673–92.
Herbst, Jeffrey. 2001. "The Politics of Revenue Sharing in Resource-Dependent States." Mimeo.
Hofman, Bert, Kadjatmiko, Kai Kaiser, and Bambang Suharnoko Sjahrir. 2006. "Evaluating Fiscal Equalization in Indonesia."
          Policy Research Working Paper No. 3911, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Horowitz, David. 2002. Uncivil Wars: The Controversy over Reparations for Slavery. San Francisco: Encounter Books.
International Monetary Fund. 2009. "Macro Policy Lessons for a Sound Design of Fiscal Decentralization." Fiscal Affairs
          Department, IMF, Washington, DC.
Jeong, Ho-Won. 2002. Approaches to Peacebuilding. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kaiser, Kai, and Mira Merhi. 2009. "Revenue and Expenditure Management in Resource Rich Countries: Managing Post-
          Commodity Boom Volatility in Intergovernmental Settings." Policy Note, Washington, DC.
Lane, Philip R., and Aaron Tornell. 1999. "The Voracity Effect." American Economic Review 89: 22-46.
Lewis, Blane. 2005. "Indonesia Local Government Spending, Taxing and Saving: An Explanation of Pre- and Post-
          Decentralization Fiscal Outcomes." Asian Economic Journal 19: 291 –317.
Ma, Jun, 1997. "Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers in Nine Countries: Lessons for Developing Countries." Policy Research
          Working Paper.
Mclure, Charles E. 1983. "Tax Assignment in Federal Countries." Centre for Research on Federal Financial Relations, Canberra.
Mclure, Charles E. 1994. "Taxation of Natural Resources and the Future of the Russian Federation." National Tax Association,
          Tax Institute of America, Columbus, Ohio.
Mclure, Charles E. 2003. "The Assignment of Oil Tax Revenue." In Fiscal Policy Formulation and Implementation in Oil-
          Producing Countries, ed. Jeffrey David, Rolando Ossowski, and Analissa Fedelino. Washington, DC: International
          Monetary Fund.
Mieszkowski, Peter. 1983. "Energy Policy, Taxation of Natural Resources, and Fiscal Federalism." In Tax Assignment in
          Federal Countries, ed. C. E. McLure, Jr. Canberra: Centre for Research on Federal Financial Relations, Australian
          National University.
Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal Federalism. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Oates, Wallace E. 2005. "Toward a Second-Generation Theory of Fiscal Federalism." International Tax and Public Finance,
          349–74. Available at http://www.econ.umd.edu/research/papers/363 (accessed February 2010).
Otto, James. 2001. "Fiscal Decentralization and Mining Taxation." The World Bank Group Mining Department, Washington,
          DC.
Panizza, Ugo. 1999. "On the Determinants of Fiscal Centralization: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Public Economics 74: 97–
          139.
Quian, Yingyi, and Barry Weingast. 1997. "Federalism as a Commitment to Preserving Market Incentives." Journal of Economic
          Perspectives 11: 83–92.
Rodden, Johnathan. 2007. "Federalism." In The Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, ed. Barry R. Weingast and Donald A.
          Wittman. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rodden, Jonathan, Gunnar Eskeland, and Jennie Litvack. 2003. Decentralization and Hard Budget Constraints. Boston, MA: MIT
          Press.
Rodden, Jonathan, and Erik Wibbels. 2002. "Beyond the Fiction of Federalism: Macroeconomic Management in Multitiered
          Systems." World Politics 54 (4): 494–531.
Schneider, Aaron. 2006. Governance Reform and Institutional Change in Brazil: Fiscal Responsibility and Tax. Brighton, UK:
          Institute of Development Studies.
Shah, Anwar. 2004. "Fiscal Decentralization in Developing and Transition Economies: Progress, Problems, and the Promise."
          World Bank Institute, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Division, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Srinivasan, T. N., and Jessica Seddon Wallack. 2006. Federalism and Economic Reform: International Perspectives. New York:
          Cambridge University Press.
Treisman, Daniel. 1999. After the Deluge: Regional Crises and Political Consolidation in Russia. Ann Arbor: University of
          Michigan Press.
Treisman, Daniel. 2007. The Architecture of Government: Rethinking Political Decentralization. Cambridge and New York:
          Cambridge University Press.
Weingast, Barry. 1995. "The Economic Role of Political Institutions: Market-Preserving Federalism and Economic
          Development." Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 11: 1–31.
